page 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. JANUARY 1, 1902. No. 1. 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 

The Twentieth Century Church 3 

The Early Church 4 

Such As I Have, Give I Unto You 8 

Questions of General Interest 10 

Abraham's Wife— His Niece? 10 

Palestine as a Refuge 10 

Conventions are "Holy 
Convocations" 11 

The Father Draws Now, 

The Son Then 11 

Drinking at the Brook 12 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 

I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (I Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
hisjoint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of 
the next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 
hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the wilfully 
wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WATCH TOWER BINDERS, POST-PAID 40 CTS. 

These hold two years' issues, keep them clean, orderly 
and ready for reference. This is wholesale-cost price; for 
your benefit. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

We have these in good supply now; and the last lot 
is larger in size and of heavier paper than previous lots. 
Prices 25c per 100, $2 per 1,000, post or express, prepaid. 

HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 

The announcement of Motto Cards, etc., in our Dec'r 
1st issue opposite page 377 still holds good: A $2 lot for 
$1 plus 16c postage. We still have a good supply, and they 
are surely both beautiful and cheap and desirable. But 
we have in mind some of our readers who may not be able 
to invest even this modest sum in home-embellishments. 
What can we do for these? 

We can and will put up for these dear friends a cheaper 
packet, which will serve them well, and help to brighten 
their homes and to remind them also of the precious promises 
of our Father's Word. 

These will be 50 cents per packet, including postage. 

We will put up also a 25c post-paid packet— for those 
who cannot invest more. 



R2929 : page supplement 

WE EXTEND to our list of subscribers, and to 

all friends of our cause (all of whom we hope to 

have on our lists soon, as per suggestions in 

our December 15th issue), most hearty greetings, wishing 

you all A Very Happy and Spiritually Prosperous 

New Year- 1902. 

We trust that you were all greatly pleased with 
our report for last year. Its showing of a previous 
deficiency wiped out, and a snug sum on hand wherewith 
to begin this year's operations, are good cause 
for joy, and for thankfulness to God. 

The outlook for the present year, you will be glad 
to learn, seems to us very encouraging. We are expecting 
much, and believe the Lord's providences and 
his Word justify these expectations. We hope to 
prepare, shortly, an article dealing further with the 
Call of this Gospel Age: showing some of our reasons 
for surmising that the next four years should quite 
double the present numbers of the interested, and the 
present operations in the service of the "harvest" message. 
It will appear as soon as possible, and we believe 
will be convincing to all. We mention the matter 



now, in advance, because we think that some are 
slackening their efforts, through a mistaken supposition 
that little more is to be done. We hope to convince 
and revive them; that they may renew their 
efforts in the service, and thus increase their joy and 
their usefulness. 

We know not what is before us in the year, dear 
brethren,— nor do we need to know. If we have 
committed our all, for time and eternity, to the Lord's 
care, let us assure our hearts, afresh, of divine wisdom 
and power as well as love. Resting confidently in the 
everlasting arms, we may take whatever his providence 
may permit; not only willingly, but joyfully. If 
the year shall bring us blessings, prosperity and encouragement 
in spiritual matters, we can while rejoicing 
lay by a store of grace; for stormy times of 
trial later on. If the year brings us sorrows, physical 
or mental anguish, let us receive them with resignation: 
saying, with the Master, "The cup which my 
Father hath poured for me, shall I not drink it?" 

If, dear brethren, life's experiences are accepted 
with faith, in the manner indicated, we may rest assured 
that this will be not only a happy but a blessed 
year for us. It is with each to determine this for 
himself under the Lord's grace. Faithful is he who 
hath called us;— let us be faithful. 



R2929 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE TWENTIETH CENTURY CHURCH. 

-AN "ORTHODOX" VIEW.- 

THE REV. HAWEIS, of St. James Church, London, 
England, gives his views of this subject 
in the London Daily Chronicle, from which we extract 
the following interesting items:— 

"The only hope for the Church of the Twentieth 
Century is that it should make a clean sweep of 1900 
years of theology and get back to Christ. We now 
know what this theology can do for us. It has done 
a great deal, for its statements at different times have 
approved themselves to different ages, and been the 
vehicles of a certain amount of Christian truth; but as 
Dean Milman said in his wise History of Christianity, 
Theophilus of Antioch, who invented the doctrine 
of the Trinity— or, at all events, coined that theological 
word— did not thereby very greatly benefit 
the Church. The same may be said of every other 
Christian dogma. It isn't that we don't believe the 



very important spiritual truths underlying every 

Christian dogma, but a form of expression of truth 

which is a living and a satisfactory one to an age immediately 

becomes false and dangerous when a better 

and a more complete expression is devised. 

THE NEED FOR RE-STATEMENT. 

"The Twentieth Century Church will insist upon 
Re-Statement on a large scale. Present theological 
text books are obsolete. They practically teach men 
and women infidelity. The Cimmerian darkness of 
Sunday-school teaching must be abandoned; the conscientious 
agonies of devout Sunday-school teachers 
must be relieved. They don't believe in the old hell 
themselves, but they have to teach it; the children 
don't believe it, but they have to put their hands behind 
their backs and tell the teachers these naughty 
lies every Sunday. The teacher does not believe in 
the Bible in the way in which he is supposed to teach 
it. No one believes it unless he is a fool or a brainless 
idiot.... His creed, in the same way, as has 
been finely said, "merely stands sentinel over the 
heart to keep it empty." "I believe," he says, "in 
the resurrection of the body." He doesn't; nobody 
does; but he is not allowed to teach instead: "I believe 
in the survival of myself," which was practically 
all those of old meant by the phrase, "the survival of 
the self," being to them inconceivable apart from the 
resurrection of the body, and so on ad infinitum. 
Our mistake is in pretending to believe obsolete statements 
which once expressed truth, but which are now 
seen to be defective. We should discard them openly 
and plead for proper re-statements.... 

"People now despise the clergy on account of 
the old rubbish they are not ashamed to teach. The 
twentieth century will not tolerate them unless they 
mend their ways. The twentieth century will go solid 
for fact in the shape of re-statement. 'Dear me!' 
people say, 'the working man doesn't go to church. 
How odd!' Very much odder if he did. The twentieth 
century will insist upon a clear statement of 
what we may call exact knowledge of God or the 
moral nature of the Sovereign Will ruling the universe. 
...Then the twentieth century will have to 
entirely change its attitude to the religions of the 
world, and it will have to admit that God has always 
been revealing Himself, His will, His purpose, as fast 
as man could receive it, and that the different and imperfect 
faiths and creeds are the result of the obscured 
mediums of the intelligence and the undeveloped 
spiritual faculties of man. The sun that always 
shines is seen through many diverse and distorting 
media— smoked glass, clouds, or mere tiny 
cracks in a darkened room, or again the prism, sunset 
clouds, or through folded lids of closed eyes seen 



hardly at all, but still the sun is always there. The 
teachings of Buddha, Zoroaster, Confucius, Moses, 
by a certain moral and spiritual solidarity, show that 
all religions are of Divine origin, though Christianity 
is the religion which belongs to the fulness of 
time. 

MISSIONS AND THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. 

"Then all this will surely alter the twentieth century 
Church's ideas of missions! Just think for a moment. 
When missions were most active last century 

R2930 : page 4 

the universal belief was that all savages were doomed 

to everlasting fire. With the abatement of that fear 

there will be a certain diminution of enthusiasm to 

break up the privacy of their lives. We must distinguish 

between missions and missions. There is 

an enormous difference between attacking with the 

most inferior statements of Christianity, ancient civilizations 

and religious philosophies promulgated by 

some of the greatest and best men and deepest 

thinkers of antiquity, and simply interposing in case 

of savages in order to prevent cannibalism and 

slaughter. Anything which stops that is, on the 

face of it, more than respectable, although under the 

influence of clothes and the brandy bottle, which 

seem to follow disastrously in the wake of the Bible, 

what we call the lower races show a tendency to improve 

themselves off the face of the earth. 

"The whole missionary method must be altered 
in the coming century. 

"The Christian religion can only spread properly 
from the Christian life— the lives of Englishmen and 
Englishwomen, not merely from the Christian dogma, 
nor the Christian machinery, the Christian calico, 
or even the Christian bayonet. The only way for 
missions to be healthy is for the English people 
abroad so to improve their minds and intelligences 
as to make the natives come and implore them to reveal 
the secret of such marked superiority and goodness, 
which under their own faulty system they seem 
unable to attain. The real Christian influence should 
spread as Christ spread His religion, by enthusiasm 
for ameliorating the physical as well as the spiritual 
condition of the people. These things must spread 
not by way of proselytism— plucking the brand from 
the burning, which was the way of the Inquisition; 
true Christianity is the unconscious outflow from a 
positive life. 'Let your light so shine before men 
that they may see your good works.' At present 
what they mostly see is a whirl of Bibles, beer, 
brandy, mutual jealousies, shoddy stores, and bad 
lives. The twentieth century must change all that. 



"Don't I think the clergy want educating in their 
own theology? 

"Yes, but the more you educate them on the 
present lines the worse they will be. The proper education 
of the clergy would consist in teaching them 
to understand the real nature of the Bible, instead of 
only teaching them what various theologians in the 
past have thought about the Bible, which is a very 
different thing from what modern research has shown 
about its records and the value to be attached to 
them. It is unfortunate that the chief doctrines of 
Christianity, as understood by the clergy, should 
have been left out of the Sermon on the Mount, the 
most perfect expression as some suppose of the Christian 
religion. It is also unfortunate to note that no 
one can read the closing chapters of St. John without 
seeing that our Lord can hardly be accounted 
quite sound on the doctrine of the Trinity, as it is 
stated in the Athanasian Formula. The twentieth 
century will probably read the Sermon on the Mount 
again.... 

"Humanitarianism, or pulpit interest in Politics 
and Sociology, is a wholesome tendency as far 
as it goes, because it shows the irresistible pressure 
put upon the clergy to make their moral instruction 
bear directly on affairs of practical life; but it is dangerous 
as tending to confuse what is roughly called 
the secular with the spiritual. You can't insist too 
much on the fact that Culture is not religion; religion 
always means one and the same thing— the sense of 
a spiritual nature— and dependence upon a spiritual 
source external to ourselves. I hope the twentieth 
century will develop both. They run on parallel not 
antagonistic lines, though it would not be fair to say 
they will never meet, for there is moral and physical 
intercommunication between the two. The Church of 
the twentieth century will be deeply spiritual, even 
spiritualistic, I am sure, in a very wide sense of the 
word. Spiritualism, in all its many forms, however 
people may dislike it, does, nevertheless, stand as a 
stout protest on behalf of man's spiritual nature and 
his spiritual affinities, and the twentieth century 
Church will have to look very largely to the recognition 
and development and purification of these spiritual 
manifestations and beliefs." 



R2930 : page 4 

THE EARLY CHURCH. 
-ACTS 2:37-47.-JAN. 19.- 
"The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. 



THE MEAGER outlines of the preaching on 
the day of Pentecost, afforded us by the extracts 
from Peter's discourse, indicate simplicity, 
wisdom and courage, such as we should expect 
in those who were guided by the holy spirit. 
The Apostle first took advantage of the charge of 
some that the speakers were intoxicated. He 
showed the unreasonableness of the proposition on 
the surface and then explained the true meaning 
of the phenomena, referring his readers directly 
to Joel's prophecy, "And upon the servants and the 
handmaids in those days I will pour out my spirit." 
-Joel 2:29. 

It may be well to note in passing that Joel's 
prophecy is a double one, and that, probably for the 
very purpose of hiding the truth until due, it states 
matters in their reverse order; telling first about 
the general blessing of the Millennial age "afterward," 
and telling subsequently about the blessing 
of the Gospel age, which is confined exclusively to 
God's servants and handmaidens— "in those days" 
—during the Gospel age, prior to the general outpouring 
of the spirit which will follow the establishment 
of the Kingdom. 

Having gotten the attention of his hearers, many 
of whom were believers in the prophets— and 
"waiting for the consolation of Israel," which they 
promised— the Apostle proceeded to preach Christ 
unto them. He did not becloud his subject and 
confuse his hearers by saying: You have heard 
of great philosophers and great teachers amongst 
the Gentiles, and as Jews we have had some great 
prophets ourselves, one of whom was Jesus; but 
he came directly to the point he wished to impress, 

R2930 : page 5 

and declared to them that Jesus, the despised Nazarene, 
of whom, doubtless, the majority had heard 
something, probably derogatory, was indeed the 
Messiah; that though he had died he had arisen; and 
having arisen and ascended on high he had shed 
forth his power upon these speakers, who were now 
his representatives and mouthpieces in the world, 
to declare his mercy. Neither fear of rulers nor 
shame in confessing the crucified one to be his 
Master is the least apparent in the Apostle's language. 
He fully identified himself with the crucified 
one, and as plainly declared that the rulers had 
been wickedly and sinfully responsible for his death, 
in that they had incited the Roman governor to its 
accomplishment. He pointed out that this was no 
mischance, but God's foreknown and prearranged 
plan— that it was necessary that Messiah should 



die as the Redeemer of the people, before he could 
deliver them fully. He pointed out that although it 
was necessary for Christ to die nevertheless a heavy 
responsibility, a curse, hung over that nation which 
had thus, in its wickedness of heart, rejected and 
crucified God's Son. 

The word of truth, as always, was a savor of life 
unto life or death unto death. (2 Cor. 2:16.) To 
many the words were foolishness and had the death 
odor, and they passed on; but to those deeply interested 
ones who remained, the Apostle's explanation 
of matters was forceful,— especially as he backed 
this up by quotations from the prophets, showing 
that God had foreknown the death of Messiah, and 
had foretold his resurrection also, and this miraculous 
outpouring of his spirit, of which they all were 
witnesses. The record is that many of the hearers 
were pricked to the heart— conscience-smitten. 
They noted the aptness of the Apostle's quotations 
and their application, and the logic of his reasoning; 
and doubtless in all these things they remarked 
of the apostles what they had previously remarked 
of our Lord— that the teaching was not like that of 
the scribes and Pharisees, uncertain, indefinite, but 
with force, with authority, with distinctness, with 
conviction of its truth. 

And after this same sort is all the preaching of 
God's true servants, done under the influence of the 
holy spirit. It is illuminating and not confusing. 
Error is never clear; it is always confused and confusing. 
Clearness and simplicity, on the contrary, 
are marks of the truth. For various reasons the old, 
old story, which the Apostles here preached, is considerably 
neglected in our day by professed ministers 
of the Gospel of Christ. One reason is that 
those who attempt to teach realize their own confusion 
of thought, and need first to be taught of 
God through his Word, by his holy spirit, and 
through such channels as the holy spirit may use in 
granting illumination of mind and appreciation of 
the Word. Another reason is that the nominal 
churches have in great measure ceased to believe 
the old, old story, and have accepted instead an evolution 
theory. Only to a small minority of Christian 
people, therefore, is the true Gospel precious. The 
majority more and more have itching ears for something 
new— a new gospel of education, refinement 
and wealth.— 2 Tim. 4:3,4. 

R2931 : page 5 

As the Apostle clinched one feature after another 
of his argument, and showed how completely 
Jesus had fulfilled the declaration of the prophets 
in respect to his life, his teachings, his miracles, 
his death, his resurrection, and the holy spirit now 



poured out upon his followers, conviction of the 
truth was forced upon the minds of many of the 
hearers, and they cried out, "Men and brethren, 
what shall we do?"— is there any mercy for us, seeing 
we are members of this nation, whose rulers 
have thus despised God's grace, and crucified his 
Son? 

This was exactly the condition of heart which 
Peter desired to awaken. He wisely realized that 
people must see the provision for their forgiveness 
and rescue before they will lay hold upon salvation. 
He would not begin by tendering mercy, but 
by showing the right, the truth, and the wrong. But 
now that his hearers were in the right condition of 
heart the Apostle did not seek to terrify them, 
but promptly told them of God's mercy and love, 
assuring them that they were still his favored people, 
and that if they would come to the repentant 
condition of heart they would be accepted of the 
Lord, even as the other believers were already accepted; 
and that they, too, would have the blessing 
of the holy spirit and its gifts. There is a pattern 
in this preaching which all of the Lord's Royal 
Priesthood should take note of and practice as they 
have opportunity to dispense the good tidings. Instead 
of ranting, they should use logic, reason and 
Scriptural quotations;— and those convicted, and 
seeking to know the way, should not be terrorized, 
but should be promptly assisted and guided in the 
Lord's way, and assured of his mercy. 

The Apostle was fully justified in telling his 
hearers that the promises were still theirs as a people; 
for it was clearly declared by the Lord, through 
the prophet, that Christ should be cut off in the 
midst of the seventieth symbolical week of Israel's 
favor, leaving one-half of that seventieth week, viz., 
3-1/2 years, of special favor to Israelites individually, 
after their national favor had ceased.*— Dan. 9:25-27; 
Matt. 23:37,38. 

Specifically, Peter's answer was that his conscience-stricken 
hearers should individually repent 
and be baptized. He did not make the mistake that 
some are inclined to make, when they suppose that 
sorrow for a wrong is repentance. Peter perceived 
that they already were sorry, "perplexed in their 
hearts." Sorrow is not repentance, but, as the 
Apostle explains, "Godly sorrow leadeth to repentance." 
(2 Cor. 7:9,10.) Repentance would be the 
proper fruitage or result of a proper sorrow. Repentance 
would mean a full retraction of all share 
in the great national sin of Israel, the rejection and 
crucifixion of Messiah. It would mean, therefore, 
an acceptance of Jesus as the Messiah, and the 
confession of him as such. And this, in turn, would 
mean that confessing him to be the Son of God they 
would become fully submissive to his teachings, 



become his disciples. Repentance, therefore, rightly 

understood, meant a great deal, and it means no 

less today than then. Whoever today refuses to acknowledge 



*Millennial Dawn, Vol. II, p. 201. 

R2931 : page 6 

Christ as the Messiah, the sent of God 
—whoever refuses to obey his teachings, to follow 
him— is unrepentant; no matter how fully he may 
believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah, 
the sent of God, the Redeemer; and, even though he 
sorrow at the record of the sufferings of Christ, he 
has not come to the point of repentance until he 
has renounced the sins for which Christ suffered, 
and become a follower of his teachings. Only such 
as are thus repentant have part or lot in the household 
of faith. God's proposition is not to save people 
in their sins, but to save them from their sins; 
and during this Gospel age the first condition of 
acceptance, and even a reckoned salvation, is that 
the sinner shall renounce his sin and accept the 
Lord and the righteousness and harmony with God 
for which he stands as representative. "He that 
hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the 
Son of God hath not life."— I John 5:12. 

The persons whom the Apostle addressed 
were all Jews, and hence he said, "Be baptized 
for the remission of your sins." Baptism is not God's 
appointed channel for the remission of sins; for, as 
the Apostle declares, "Without the shedding of 
blood there is no remission." (Heb. 9:22.) However, 
the Jewish nation, under God's arrangement 
through Moses, was accepted of him as a whole, as 
a nation, and sin-offerings had been made for them 
all as a nation, and had been accepted, and a covenant 
had been made called the Law Covenant. 
Those whom the Apostles addressed, being under 
the Law Covenant, were under all these favorable 
conditions, under the blood of the typical sacrifices, 
typically justified and reconciled; and to them, consequently, 
God's promises pertained, as they did not 
pertain to the Gentiles, who had not come under 
such typical reconciliation through typical sacrifices. 
The sin which the Apostle wished his hearers 
to emblematically wash away in baptism was 
not, therefore, original sin, but was a sin against 
their Law Covenant,— including their national sin 
in the rejection of the Messiah. With these purged 
away, with the symbolical washing, they would be 
back to the standpoint of true Israelites, "Israelites 
indeed;" and as such they would have every right 
and privilege belonging to the Israelites, but belonging 



to members of no other nation. 

The Apostle Paul explains this relationship 
(Rom. 11), saying that the Israelites were the natural 
branches in the olive root of the Abrahamic 
promise. As branches already in that root they 
would not need to be grafted in, as do we who by 
nature are Gentiles. They were already in relationship 
to God, and all that they needed to do was to 
repent of their sins and figuratively wash them 
away, when they would be fully acceptable branches 
in the olive tree, which would not be broken off, 
but, on the contrary, would receive now a special 
share in the Pentecostal blessing. Subsequently, 
when exhorting Gentile converts to baptism, the 
Apostle Paul explained most clearly its difference 
from this baptism of Jews for the remission of sins. 
(Acts 19:1-6.) He shows that our baptism signifies 
or emblemizes our introduction into the body 
of Christ, as wild olive branches grafted into the 
approved stock, to be partakers of the richness of 
the promises through the root. (Rom. 6:3-5.) We 
should, however, remark that the Jew no longer 
holds this same peculiar relationship; so that if the 
Apostle were addressing Jews today we believe he 
would address them exactly as he would address 
Gentiles on this point of seeking union with Christ. 
Our reasons for so thinking are: That as the 
national favor to Israel ended with the death of 
Christ, in the midst of their "week" of favor, so the 
individual favor to the Jew above the Gentile ceased 
with the breaking off of the natural olive branches 
during the remaining thirty-three years of their 
"harvest," which ended with the destruction of their 
polity, A.D. 70. A natural branch once broken off 
could be reunited only by engrafting— in no way 
differently from a wild-olive branch. Consequently, 
any Jew, seeking to come into Christ since the 
day of wrath upon his nation, could come in only 
under the same terms and conditions as a Gentile. 

The Apostle would have his hearers understand 
that the rejection of Christ and his crucifixion did 
not end the mercy of God toward them. These matters 
were merely steps in the divine plan for the 
execution of divine mercy;— the promises were still 
theirs, yea, they would be for their children, and 
ultimately for all mankind, however far they might 
be from God at that time. But he intimates distinctly 
that a divine election is connected with the 
matter, and that only those called of God could 
at present be expected to hear and to respond. And 
this we see about us today, and as we look back 
through the past. As Abraham sent his servant, 
and invited Rebekah to be the bride of his son, 
Isaac, so the Heavenly Father has sent his servant, 
the holy spirit, during this Gospel age, to call the 
antitype of Rebekah, the Church, to be the bride 



of Christ,— joint-heir with his Son. As not all the 

women of the world were called to be the bride of 

Isaac, so at present not all mankind are called to 

be the Bride of Christ. Those invited to this join t-heirship 

must first be related to God, even as the 

one invited to be Isaac's bride was a relative of 

Abraham. Hence the step preparatory to this call 

to join t-heirship with Christ is justification through 

faith. The Apostle's hearers, being members of 

the typically justified nation, needed only to accept 

Christ, as the antitype of Moses, and to recognize 

spiritual Israel as the antitype of natural Israel, in 

order to be fully in relationship to the Lord's call. 

Evidently the Lord was guiding in respect to 
every feature of the establishment of the Church, 
and it was on this account that so large a number 
as three thousand persons were prepared to accept 
the message,— to accept Jesus as their Redeemer 
and King, and to avow themselves his followers, 
his disciples. It is not necessary that we should 
suppose that they were all baptized in the one day, 
nor are we, indeed, certain that they all avowed 
their allegiance to Messiah in the same day; but 
that as a result of that one day's preaching about 
three thousand were added to the Church. These 
were not added to a denomination, a party, a sect, 
but were additions to the one Church, the body 
of Christ,— members added to the one head of the 

R2932 : page 7 

Church. We do not read that their names were 

enrolled as members of the Church, nor that they 

took certain vows, nor that they assented to certain 

confessions of faith. He who accepts Christ 

as his Redeemer and as his instructor, who pledges 

himself to obedience to him, and to walk in 

his footsteps, has taken the only obligation which 

the Scriptures define as marking those who are 

probationary members of the true Church. And it 

is still proper to make an outward acknowledgment 

or sign of this acceptance of Christ by a symbolical 

baptism. The real baptism, the real consecration 

of the heart, or will, its burial into Christ, 

takes place first; the outward or symbolical representation 

of this in water is the good confession 

by which the individual shows, in God's appointed 

way, to his fellows or to whoever may witness, 

that he has died to the world and become alive 

toward God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

That the new converts were "Israelites indeed" was 
demonstrated by the fact that they did not speedily 
fall away and become cold. On the contrary, 
we are informed that they continued stedfast, 
recognizing the teachings of the apostles— 
that God specially used them as his representatives 



and mouthpieces for the instruction of his Church. 
They thus continued in fellowship with the household 
of faith, and this would imply meeting with 
them every first-day of the week to celebrate the 
Lord's resurrection, to unite their prayers at the 
throne of grace, and to build one another up in the 
most holy faith. Breaking the spiritual bread on 
these occasions, they also united in a common meal, 
in remembrance of the Lord's first meeting with 
them and making himself known after his resurrection 
in the blessing and breaking of bread. 
(Luke 24:35.) This has no reference to the Memorial 
Supper, which was celebrated yearly, and not 
with bread alone, but also with the cup, of equal 
importance. 

"Fear came upon every soul"— reverence— an 
appreciation, to some extent at least, of the wonderful 
relationship to God into which they had been 
introduced, and of the wonderful power of God 
working in their midst, and especially manifested 
through the miracles and signs which the apostles 
were thus permitted to perform for the establishment 
of the faith of the justified. 

It has been assumed by some that communism 
as that term is applied today, was practised in the 
early Church; and it is the claim of some that it 
should never have been discontinued, but should 
always obtain amongst the Lord's people. We answer, 
first, that the early Church did not practise 
what is now known as communism; second, 
that something akin to what the early Church did 
practise (but modified) still is the rule amongst 
the Lord's saints; third, the extreme view (and 
practice) of the early Church was apparently not intended 
to remain, was never enjoined by the Lord 
nor the apostles, and serves rather as an evidence 
against the feasibility of the doctrines of communism 
under present conditions. 

So far as the record shows there was no compulsory 
division of wealth, such as communism 
proposes. On the contrary, everything was voluntary; 
and everything of the same kind is just as 
free, just as voluntary, and just as proper, now as 
then,— no more so, no less so. Some of those who 
owned farms and personal property sold them and 
brought the money and placed it at the Apostles' 
feet— gave it into their charge. Some may have 
given all that they had in this manner, but it is 
not so stated. On the contrary, various things give 
the inference that Barnabas, who sold the field and 
gave the money, may still have retained other properties, 
which no doubt, he would have been willing 
to have disposed of later, and to have made similar 
use of the money as it might be needed. The sin 
of Ananias and Sapphira did not consist in their 
not putting all of their property into the common 



treasury, but in their deceitfulness in the matter; 

—in their pretending to give the entire proceeds 

of one property when they did not do so. Some 

Scriptures clearly intimate that some of the Lord's 

people at that time had private possessions aside 

from those which were put into the common fund. 

(See Acts 12:12; 21:16.) It is possible, of course, 

that in the two instances cited the properties might 

have been given to the community and might have 

been returned when the community failed, and 

when the believers were scattered abroad. On the 

other hand, we think it reasonable to suppose that 

the selling of the possessions was merely to such 

an extent as was necessary to supply the wants of 

all— so that none of the Lord's people might lack 

while others had superfluity. This kind of brotherliness 

and common interest should still prevail 

amongst the Lord's people. Indeed, to a considerable 

extent it must prevail, or else we are none 

of his. We are not to forget, however, that the 

necessity for private provision of this kind today 

is less than it was eighteen centuries ago; for now 

there are many more opportunities for earning a 

livelihood, and many provisions for the aged, the 

sick and the infirm. The public provision for the 

poor today is probably quite superior to that which 

was accorded to the poorer brethren under consideration. 

The same spirit of charity finds ample 

opportunity today. On every side we see brethren 

and sisters having need, not of the meat that perisheth, 

but of the "meat in due season," the spiritual 

food, and having need also of the robe of justification. 

There is abundant opportunity for all to 

join in dispensing these blessings, worth so much 

more than temporal good things to those who have 

need of them. 

It is noteworthy that the apostles neither commanded 
nor advised communism; nor do their writings 
intimate that it prevailed in the early Church. 
As showing that there were both rich and poor in 
the assemblies of the primitive Church, note the 
Apostle Paul's words to Timothy, "Charge them 
that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, 
nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living 
God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy: 
that they do good, that they be rich in good works, 
ready to distribute, willing to communicate; laying 
up in store for themselves a good foundation against 
the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal 

R2932 : page 8 

life." (I Tim. 6:17.) The same Apostle reproves 
some of the wealthy brethren for improper displays 
in connection with the Memorial Supper, saying, 
"Have ye not houses to eat and drink in, or despise 



ye the Church of God, and shame them that have 
not [wealth]?" (I Cor. 11:22.) The Apostle John 
intimates differences in financial condition when he 
asks, How could he who loves God shut up the 
bowels of compassion against a brother, who lacks 
life's necessities. (I John 3:17.) The Apostle 
James says, "If a brother or sister be naked and 
destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto 
them, Depart, and be ye warmed and fed, notwithstanding 
ye give them not those things which are 
needful to the body, what doth it profit?"— 
James 2:15,16. 

Indeed, in our judgment, the necessary lessons 
of life could not be so well learned, either by the 
rich or the poor, if community of goods were either 
the law or the rule amongst Christians. There can 
be no question, however, respecting the propriety of 
community of provision for those who are in want, in 
distress. It is in harmony with this thought that 
the Apostle advises each to lay by him on the first 
day of the week, according as God hath prospered 
him, a share of his income,— for good service to the 
Lord and to the brethren, in temporal and spiritual 
things. (I Cor. 16:2.) No doubt, after the Millennial 
Kingdom shall have brought the willing and 
obedient of mankind to perfection, there will be 
some kind of communism such as we may presume 
obtains amongst the angels. Even then it will be 
a communism which will recognize some head or 
authority; for amongst the angels, we are informed, 
there are principalities and powers, cherubim and 
seraphim, and God over all. 

The early Church, full of love for the Lord and 
for each other, is a beautiful and in many respects 
an ideal picture, in which we can rejoice: no wonder 
it is recorded that they had joy, gladness, in 
their hearts, and in their thanksgiving to God, and 
that the people in general, their neighbors, were 
pleased with them and rejoiced in their loving 
spirit. How delightful it would be if all the Lord's 
people in the world today could be thus in harmony 
with each other and appreciated by their 
friends and neighbors. Indeed, we must suppose 
that the Lord specially shielded the infant Church 
for a short season, until it should become somewhat 
established in knowledge and in faith, else 
the Great Adversary would have raised up opposition 
and persecution more quickly than he did. 
Even as it was, it was but a little time until the persecution 
arose, and with it the testing of those who had 
espoused the cause of Jesus. Then came the great 
scattering under persecution, so that those who had 
learned the way of the Lord learned additionally 
patience and obedience;— some of them even unto 
death, and others being scattered abroad became 
preachers of the gospel of Jesus and their newly-found 



hopes in him. 

The Lord "added to the Church daily such as 
should be saved," says our Golden Text; or, as the 
Revised Version renders it, "such as were being 
saved." As the same Apostle Peter declares, the 
salvation promised us is still future,— we are waiting 
for it; it is "to be brought unto us at the revelation 
of our Lord and Savior Jesus," at his second 
advent. (I Pet. 1:13.) But meantime there is a 
beginning of this salvation in the present life. Even 
now we are, as the Apostle declares, "saved by 
hope." (Rom. 8:24.) The salvation is not merely 
of hope, either, but it begins to take hold upon us, 
mentally, morally and physically— the regenerating 
work begins; the new mind, the new will, is 
the start, and from that proceeds true obedience to 
the Lord's Word, progress in knowledge and progress 
in grace, and all the progress of the new 
creature. It often, indeed, means the sacrifice of 
the earthly interests of the natural man, but it 
means the development of the new creature. It 
means the progress of the work of salvation in the 
heart, which alone God recognizes; and the new 
creature thus making progress is ultimately to be 
perfected in salvation by a share in the "first 
resurrection." 



R2933 : page 8 

SUCH AS I HAVE, GIVE I UNTO YOU. 

-ACTS3:1-10-JAN. 26.- 

"The Lord is my strength and my song; 
he is become my salvation."— Exod. 15:2. 



PROBABLY it was not long after the day of 

Pentecost that the events of this lesson 

transpired. Our last lesson notes the fact 

that the believers, filled with their new joy, went 

frequently to the Temple for prayer and thanksgiving. 

This lesson shows us Peter and John attending 

the Temple service at the hour of prayer, 

three o'clock in the afternoon. These two had been 

with the Lord and with each other for now several 

years. Both had been disciples of John the 

Baptist, and previously they two had been together 

in the fishing business. They were also specially favored 

amongst the twelve, being with Jesus on the 

Mount of Transfiguration, and in the inner circle 

in the Garden of Gethsemane, etc. Although Peter 

was probably the eldest of the disciples, and John 



probably the youngest, and although their dispositions 
were quite different in many respects, apparently 
there was a strong element of harmony between 
them— they both loved the Lord very intensely, 
and they were both of ardent temperament. It was 
natural, therefore, that these two should be considerably 
in each other's company because of special 
compatibility. While it is well for the stronger 
brethren to pray with and company with the 
weaker sometimes, for the assistance of the latter, 
it is well also that kindred spirits should come together 
in communion with each other and with the 
Lord, as in this case. 

As the apostles evidently went frequently to the 
Temple, and probably often by the same route, 
through the "Beautiful Gate," it is more than likely 
that the lame beggar, who had long been accustomed 
to that locality, in seeking alms, had seen 
them almost daily. Indeed, it would not be surprising 
if a knowledge of the Pentecostal wonders 

R2933 : page 9 

which had converted several thousand, and been 

"noised abroad," had reached the poor beggar, as 

well as many others of the religious class, who assembled 

almost daily at the Temple. Quite evidently 

therefore, the beggar knew Peter and John in advance 

of his healing. If so, it would to some extent 

account for his readiness of faith, by which, 

accepting the Apostle's word and hand, he was 

healed. 

Why the Apostle Peter on this particular occasion 
was led to bestow a blessing upon this man 
we may never know, for it is probable that in that 
time, when there were no hospitals for the lame 
and blind, etc., the Apostles frequently passed by 
others as badly crippled and distressed as this one, 
without proffering aid. It would seem, however, 
that the man was an "Israelite indeed"— from the 
way in which he received the Lord's blessing. 
Otherwise, instead of having a heart overflowing 
with gratitude and thankfulness, he before would 
have been in an attitude of discontent, repining at 
his lot and complaining of divine providence; and 
in such a frame of mind his attitude after his healing 
would have been one of complacent satisfaction 
rather than of gratitude. He would have felt that 
he had received no more than his due. The connections, 
therefore, seem to indicate that the Lord's 
providence directed the apostles to him specially, 
on this account. And so it is with those of the 
Lord's people today who are in a right attitude of 
heart. They will, whatever their condition, find 
much to be thankful for, and can trace the Lord's 
providence and grace in life's affairs, notwithstanding 



its trials and difficulties. Such people are the 
objects of God's care, and have the assurance that all 
things are working together for their good. The 
Lord's providence may not always bring them physical 
health and strength, but it will surely bring to 
such the highest blessings which it brought to the 
poor cripple of this lesson— a knowledge of the Lord 
and a share of his spiritual favors. 

At that time, when there was no provision for 
the indigent and helpless, alms-begging and almsgiving 
were entirely proper. It is creditable to the 
civilization of our day and land, however, that the 
helpless are provided for at public expense— all 
property paying a poor tax or alms tax. It strikes 
us as being as much wrong to encourage public 
begging now, as it was right to respond to it at the 
time mentioned. If the friends of the indigent cannot 
amply provide for them the public can, and 
should, and generally does; and it would be a false 
pride which would ignore these ample provisions 
and not blush to seek others. 

The Apostle said, "Silver and gold have I none." 
We can scarcely suppose that he intended this 
statement to be taken literally, for in the preceding 
verses we have the record that considerable property 
was sold, and the proceeds laid at the Apostles' 
feet— put at their disposal. But this evidently the 
apostles considered as belonging to the Lord and 
not to themselves— as trust funds. We assume, 
therefore, that the Apostle meant, Silver and gold 
we have none to give you, but we have something 
better to give you, something which God intended 
we should dispense. And undoubtedly what the 
Apostles gave was more valuable than money to 
the poor cripple. 

So it is today; we are unable to respond as liberally 
as we would like to the requests which sometimes 
come to us for financial aid. The means which 
the Lord has put into our hands we understand him 
to intend us to transform in the main into spiritual 
food and clothing and strength and help, for the 
sin-sick and lame and for the error-blinded; and accordingly 
we are sometimes compelled to say, silver 
and gold we have little to give; but of the spiritual 
blessings we are willing to give liberally— without 
money and without price. 

Our Lord's words were, "The poor ye have always 
with you; but me ye have not always." In 
seeking to be helpful to brethren in the Church and 
to the unfortunate in the world it is well that all 
should cultivate a largeness of heart; and yet it is 
well also to remember that in the cases of many of 
the Lord's children adversity has evidently been of 
the Lord's intention, to bring to them blessings 
which they would not be prepared to receive in any 
other manner. We are to endeavor to be helpful to 



each other, while seeking not to conflict with the 
operations of divine providence, and the learning of 
important lessons by those whose welfare we seek. 
We should never forget the Apostle's inspired words. 
-2Thes. 3:10. 

"It is more blessed to give than to receive." Undoubtedly 
every child of God has realized the truthfulness 
of this; God is ever a bountiful giver, and his 
people, in proportion as they cultivate this quality, 
generosity, are therefore cultivating a grand, God-like 
quality. "Do good and lend, hoping for nothing 
again [no reward]; and ye shall be children of the 
Highest." (Luke 6:35.) If we cannot always give 
much money, or if we cannot give as much as we 
would like to give, to those who are in need, we 
may always, like Peter, give something. We cannot, 
like him give health and strength miraculously, 
since we are not endued with those apostolic 
powers; but we can give a word of encouragement, 
a kindly look, a helping hand over difficulties; and 
these will often be more valuable than money, and 
sometimes more appreciated. Even an "enemy" 
should be fed, if hungry; but neither friend nor foe 
should be encouraged in indolence, nor in 
wastefulness. 

We notice how distinctly Peter acknowledged 
the source of his power, and how he was not ashamed 
of any feature of divine truth. He boldly declared his 
miracle to be in the name of "Jesus of Nazareth." 
He did not say, in the name of Jesus, the greatest of 
all Jews, the highly esteemed friend of Joseph of 
Arimathea, and of Nicodemus, one of your influential 
rulers; but, ignoring all such human weaknesses, 
he plainly declared that it was Jesus the Nazarene, 
the despised one, whose power had healed. We 
find some of the Lord's people today far less courageous 
than Peter; inclined rather to feel ashamed 
of the truth and ashamed of the agencies God has 
used in its dissemination;— for fear that these would 
be a reflection against it. We should rather follow 
the Apostle's course, and be very courageous and 

R2933 : page 10 

ready to publicly affirm whatever we find possessing 
divine sanction. Whatever agencies God may make 
use of in connection with his service we may be sure 
that he has some purpose, some object in view, and 
that his purposes will best be accomplished by 
plain, candid, truthful statements, like Peter's. 

The description of standing, leaping and walking, 
may well represent the first efforts of one who 
had been born lame, and who consequently had 
never learned how to walk. However, the strength 
was in his limbs, and abundantly testified to the 
miracle wrought. The poor man was not ashamed 



of the agents whom God had used in his restoration. 
He shouted praise to God, and held on to his two 
benefactors, advertising them to the people, and 
thus advertising also the Gospel message, which 
they had to give, which undoubtedly was the very 
purpose the Lord intended. Here, too, is a lesson 
for us, not to be ashamed of those whom the Lord 
may use in connection with our spiritual healing- 
much more valuable, much more to be appreciated 
and acknowledged before God and men, than any 
temporal blessing. Indeed, the natural sight, natural 
hearing, natural walking, and natural enjoyment of 
every kind, are insignificant in comparison with the 
spiritual enlightenment and hearing and strength to 
walk in a spiritual way, as the spiritual joys are 
higher than the natural. 

Peter was not self-seeking; he was alert to use 
every opportunity, every opening, that might come 
to himself, to the glory of the Lord and of his 
cause. And so when the multitude gathered together 
he used the miracle of healing as his text— 
as a demonstration of the power of the risen Jesus, 
operating through him; and he straightway declared 
to the people that this was the same Jesus whom 
their rulers had crucified some two months previously. 
He distinctly disowned that either he or 
John had any power of themselves to perform such a 
miracle; he did not say, either, that the healing was 
by a natural law operated by the man's faith; nor 

R2934 : page 10 

did he say that the healing was by "Science"; nor 
did he deny the facts, and claim that the man's impotence 
was merely a wrong thought, the correction 
of which had given relief. He told the truth,— 
that the man had been ill but was now made sound 
by the power of Jesus. Nor did he spare his hearers, 
but pressed home the truth of the responsibility of 
their nation for the crucifixion of one who not only 
was innocent and just, but who was the sent of God, 
the Messiah, the Prince of Life. 

Here is another lesson for us. When we obtain 
the attention of men it is not to be frittered away, 
either in the discussion of unprofitable topics or in 
personal boastfulness; but is to be turned directly 
to the Lord's glory, to the preaching of the good 
tidings of redemption through the precious blood, 
that it may be known that all blessing of every kind 
comes through the merit of that sacrifice, and from 
our risen glorified Lord. 

Our Golden Text surely represents the heart-sentiments 
of every member of the household of 
faith. The Lord is our strength; we lean not upon 
human might,— neither of our own or of other 
men. We hold the Head, from whom not only 



come the laws which govern us, but from whom 
come the strength, the direction, the protection, 
the care, which we need and which we enjoy. The 
Lord is become our salvation; he has saved us from 
the condemnation of sin through faith in the blood; 
he has rescued us from the love of sin. He has not 
only revived us, but strengthened us, and enabled 
us to walk in the narrow way, and to do so with joy 
and gladness and leaping. He is our salvation 
already— the salvation that is to be brought unto us, 
and thus to be complete in us, in the first resurrection, 
is already begun— for we are already passed 
from death unto life, and have the witness of this 
in the holy spirit. 



R2934 : page 10 

QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST. 



ABRAHAM'S WIFE-HIS NIECE? 



Question.— In the Tower for July 15, 1901, p. 233, 
Sarah is mentioned as Abraham's niece. How can 
this be harmonized with Gen. 20:12, "She is my sister; 
she is the daughter of my father, but not the 
daughter of my mother"? 

Answer.— In olden times it was customary, instead 
of speaking of grandchildren, to call them 
children, as, for instance, "the children of Israel." 
"All the souls which came out of the loins of Jacob 
were seventy souls"— yet some of these were grandchildren 
and some great grandchildren. The 
thought is that Haran was the eldest son of Terah; 
that he had two children, Lot and Sarah, and that 
these were near enough their uncle Abraham's age 
to be his companions. Under the rule above mentioned 
Sarah, if the daughter of Haran, would be 
counted the daughter of Terah, not by his wife, but 
by Haran's wife. We would not insist that this 
view of the matter is beyond question, however, and 
those who think differently have full right to do so. 

PALESTINE AS A REFUGE. 



Question.— What are the facts respecting Palestine 
at the present time? Is it being rapidly settled 
by the Jews in colonies or otherwise? Would it be a 
good place for those who have a knowledge of present 



truth to emigrate to? Would it be a good place 
for serving the truth, or would it be a favorable place 
as respects escaping the coming time of financial and 
social trouble? 

Answer.— We could not recommend friends of 
the truth to emigrate to Palestine. They would find 
almost no opportunity for serving the truth, and, as 
respects the time of trouble, we might say that the 
poor of that land are continually in trouble enough, 
and that even in the future the Scriptures assure us 
that the time of trouble will reach Palestine. Furthermore, 
not only would it be impossible to circumvent 
the Lord and thus escape the coming trouble, 
but additionally the Lord encourages his faithful 
people to believe that he will deliver them from the 
trouble wherever they may be. As respects the resettlement 

R2934 : page 1 1 

of the land; it progresses very slowly; 

first, because few of the Jews are interested deeply 

enough to live in such a country under present conditions. 

Second, because Jews have not been permitted 

to settle there since the Sultan's ukase prohibiting 

their settlement in 1892. Jews going 

thither are only permitted to land if provided with 

permits, which allow them to remain about 30 days. 

The Zionists are hoping to report some new and 

more favorable arrangement at their next Congress. 

CONVENTIONS ARE "HOLY CONVOCATIONS." 



Question.— Are the conventions, such as the one 
recently held in Cleveland, and the One-Day Conventions 
mentioned from time to time in the Watch 
Tower, of real benefit? Do they not reach merely 
the rich, who can afford to make the journey, etc.? 
Are they in harmony with Scriptural precedents? 

Answer.— Yes, we have every reason to believe 
that the Lord's blessing is with this department of 
the work, as well as with the other departments. 
Of course all of the friends are not able to attend the 
conventions, but this is not, we think, an argument 
against them. All are not able to attend the regular 
gatherings of the Church every time, sometimes because 
of sickness, and sometimes for other reasons. 
If both husband and wife cannot attend a meeting 
it should be to the advantage of the absent one that 
the other does attend, because of the rehearsal of 
truth upon his return. Similarly with the Conventions. 
Our experience is that those who attend the 
Conventions and return home are greatly blessed 
themselves, as they endeavor to repeat to the 
brethren some of the precious thoughts they have 



gleaned, and to inspire their hearts with the letter 
and sentiment and spirit of the truth. 

Furthermore, it would be quite a mistake to suppose 
that those who gather at these Conventions 
are wealthy; very few of the Lord's people are rich 
in this world's goods. We never advise anyone 
to spend for travel money that is needed for bread 
or clothing; but as a rule those who are in attendance 
find themselves abundantly rewarded for the 
time and money expended. In our judgment the 
Conventions are indeed a great blessing, and it is 
for this reason that we are extending the One-Day 
Conventions in various directions. The Pilgrim 
visits are somewhat similar; they cannot visit every 
town, but friends from nearby places, seeing mention 
of their coming to the vicinity, can attend at 
small expense, upon writing us for any particulars 
necessary. 

As to Scriptural precedent: We remind you that 
the Jews had numerous Holy Convocations; and that 
our Lord and his disciples frequently attended these, 
especially the Feast of the Passover. The Apostle 
Paul also hasted in his journey that he might be present 
at the Passover, and en route we remember that he 
sent on for the elders of the Church at Ephesus to 
meet him, and hold a little by-convention. However, 
in matters of this kind, where the spirit of the truth is 
being carried out, it would not matter if we had not 
an exact correspondence in deed in the early Church. 
For instance, they had neither books nor tracts nor 
journals, nor Bibles with marginal references, or 
otherwise. Some of these things are blessings which 
accrue to us because we are living in the most favored 
day which the world has ever seen. As our day brings 
many additional trials, besetments, enticements and 
cares, to "choke the Word," so, by God's grace, it 
brings also many opportunities for assembling ourselves 
in little and in larger groups. For all of these 
we give thanks, and all of them we endeavor to use 
to the Master's praise and to the comfort and upbuilding 
of one another. 

THE FATHER DRAWS NOW, THE SON THEN. 



Question.— In the Watch Tower you have pointed 
out that in the present time only a limited number are 
drawn, and they by the Father, to the intent that, following 
on, they may become members of the Church, 
which is the Bride of Christ; you have also pointed 
out as Scriptural that during the Millennial age the 
drawing will be general— "all men"— and that it will 
be done, not by the Father, but by the Christ. I recognize 
that these statements are in full accord with 
the presentations of Scripture, but am at a loss to 



know in what manner the drawing of the future will 
differ from the drawing of the present time, and this 
is my question. 

Answer.— The drawing or influencing of all men, 
by and by, will be through the truth; and the same is 
the drawing power now. Few are drawn now, because 
darkness, ignorance, prejudice and superstition 
prevail, the god of this world blinding the masses 
and keeping them deaf to the voice of righteousness 
and truth, so that only they can now hear and appreciate 
the truth who have "an ear to hear." The majority 
of the race are fallen, and their appreciation 
of the principles of righteousness is too warped and 
twisted to permit the truth to have its proper weight 
and influence upon their hearts in drawing them to 
Lord. Yet this is the only class that God wishes 
specially to draw now, and even of those who are 
thus amenable to the influences of righteousness now, 
and somewhat drawn by it, comparatively few are so 
in love with truth and righteousness that they are 
willing to sacrifice every other interest as respects the 
present life, on its behalf. Yet only such are now 
sought by the Heavenly Father to be joint-heirs with 
his son. 

R2935 : page 1 1 

But by and by, when under the Father's arrangement 
the Son shall begin his reign as King of the 
earth, he will exercise a drawing influence upon all, 
by restraining Satan from deceiving, and by opening 
the eyes and ears of understanding, and by causing 
the knowledge of the truth to fill the whole earth as 
the waters cover the great deep. Thus, although the 
drawing of that Millennial age will be very similar 
to the drawing of this present time, as to kind, it will 
be much more general, reaching every class and every 
condition, and helping each and all, who will respond, 
out of degradation and ignorance and sin and death, 
back to full harmony with the principles of righteousness. 
The special drawing which the Father accomplishes 
is in connection with what is called "the 
election according to favor," while the drawing which 
Christ will accomplish in the next age will be the 
operation of free grace, upon all and for the benefit of 
all. 



R2935 : page 12 

DRINKING AT THE BROOK 

"He shall drink of the brook in the way: 
therefore shall he lift up the head."— Psalm 1 10:7. 



OUR TEXT refers directly to our Lord Jesus, 
and secondly to all the members of the church, 
his body, each one of whom must share his 
experiences— walking in his steps and drinking of 
the same "brook," if they would in due time share 
with their Lord in his exaltation, to glory, 
honor, and immortality; this exaltation being 
represented in our text by the expression, 
"lift up the head." In ancient times as at 
present, human language was full of figures and 
symbols, water representing truth, and drinking of 
water representing appropriation of the truth, 
namely, wisdom (See Prov. 18:4); and lifting up the 
head, exaltation.— See Gen. 40:13. 

Our text is given as the reason for the glorious 
blessings and honors predicted of the Christ and described 
in the preceding verses of the same psalm. 
Let us notice these. The first verse is directly applied 
to our Lord by the Apostles (Acts 2:34; Heb. 1:13; 
I Pet. 3:22), and our Lord applied the same to 
himself. (Matt. 22:44.) A figure of speech is again 
employed, descriptive of our Lord's relationship to 
the Father in Glory; he is not literally seated beside 
him at his right hand, but he has been honored 
with a superior station, a position above all others- 
he specially is at the right hand of divine power. 
Nor does his second coming hinder or change this 
relationship; at his second coming he will still be 
at his Father's right hand as he himself, declared 
(Matt. 26:64.) At the Father's right hand during 
the Millennial Age, the Father, through him, shall 
subdue all things to himself— put down all opposing 
authority and insubordination; blessing those who 
come into heart-harmony with his kingdom of righteousness, 
and destroying from the earth all who after 
fair knowledge of good as well as evil, choose the 
evil. These will be considered as followers of Satan 
instead of followers of God, and the second death, we 
are specifically told, is for the Devil and his messengers, 
servants. -Matt. 25:41. 

The description of the Millennial Kingdom is continued 
by the Prophet, who declares, "Jehovah 
shall send the rod of thy strength out of (or 
through) Zion"— primarily the Church, the 
"Bride," the "body" of Christ; the rod or 
sceptre or authority shall be exercised through 
the Church, by the Lord Jesus the Head of 
the Church, under the divine commission,— "Rule 
thou in the midst of thine enemies." This is not 
in any measure fulfilled yet. Jesus when in the flesh 
did not rule in the midst of his enemies, and the 
Church has not thus ruled; on the contrary, both he 
and his followers have been subject to the powers 
that be, and the violent have taken the kingdom by 



force and have despitefully used the Head and the 
body members. (Matt. 11:12.) The enemies are 
not yet made the footstool of the Lord, Zion has not 
yet been glorified, and Messiah's sceptre or authority 
has not yet gone forth therefrom. On the contrary 
we are still in "this present evil world," we still wait 
for the completion of the elect Church that together 
she may be glorified with her Lord— enter into His 
glory— when he, the due time having come, "shall 
take unto himself his great power and reign;"— then 
the nations will be angry, etc., (Rev. 11:18) and divine 
wrath will come upon them; and following that "day 
of wrath" shall come the promised blessing, upon all 
who shall demonstrate under the good opportunities 
of that Millennial Kingdom, that they love righteousness 
and hate iniquity. 

This latter class— those who during the Millennial 
age, during that day of his presence, shall become 
the Lord's people (I Cor. 15:23)— are referred to by 
the Prophet when he says,— "Thy people shall be 
willing in the day of thy power." The day of his 
power is not yet here, as the poet declares: 
"Wrong and evil triumph now." The "Prince 
of this world" still rules and is "god of this 
world" as the Apostle asserts; because our Lord 
has not yet taken to himself his great power nor 
begun his reign. The people who shall be willing in 
the day of his power are not, therefore, the saints of 
this Gospel age: these latter are only the "first fruits 
unto God of his creatures" and are willing before the 
day of his power— willing to hear the Shepherd's 
voice and to follow him; willing to sacrifice all and 
to lay down their lives in his service, for the brethren. 

Evidently, therefore, those referred to as "Thy 
people" who shall be willing in the day of Christ's 
power, the Millennial Age, are those whom our Lord 
represents as his "sheep," in the parable of the sheep 
and the goats. They are those who after the Son of 
Man shall be seated on the throne of his glory, and 
after his Church is seated with him in his throne, 
and after the judgment or trial day for the nations, 
the world, is ended,— after the knowledge of the Lord 
has filled the earth, after it has gradually proved the 
savor of life unto life, or death unto death to the 
world, shall be found truly "his people,"— willing, 
nay, glad to serve him when they know him and 
understand his will. As his sheep they will desire 
to follow in the way of righteousness, truth and holiness; 
as his people they will not need to be coerced 
further, but learning the truth in the day of his 
power, when the adversary is bound and when the 
eyes of their understandings are opened, they will be 
willingly his people. And all who shall not then become 
willingly his people will be esteemed his enemies, 
"goats," angels or messengers or servants of 
the adversary, and be destroyed with him in the Second 



Death. 

"In the beauties of holiness, from the womb of 
the morning thou hast the dew of thy youth." That 
is to say, as morning after morning comes forth fresh 
and vigorous as its predecessor, as the sun grows not 
old and feeble, so with Messiah, and so also with those 
accepted as the members of his body, they will have 
perpetually the freshness and vigor of youth,— glory, 
honor, immortality, the divine nature— this is part of 
the blessing that is promised, and which will result, 
our text tells us, from drinking of the brook in the 
way. 

Having told us of the kingly power and authority 
of Messiah, it is appropriate that the Lord through 
the prophet explains to us that Messiah's priestly 
office is to be also of a higher type than the earthly, 
—that his priest and kingly offices are to be blended 
and united as was typified in Melchisedec, who was 

R2935 : page 13 

both king and priest. Our Lord when on earth was 

not of the Aaronic priesthood, nevertheless, Aaron 

was his type, and the sacrifices which Aaron performed 

were typical of the "better sacrifices" performed 

by the antitypical priest, in the laying down 

of his own life and in the consecration and sacrifice also 

of all those who are his during this Gospel age, who 

thus "fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 

Christ." By and by our High priest will have completed 

all that was illustrated in the Aaronic type, he 

will have finished the Day of Atonement sacrifices, 

and then the glory promised will follow,— instead of 

a suffering priesthood there will be "a royal priesthood" 

—a reigning priesthood.— I Pet. 2:9; 

Rev. 5:10. 

Then follow assurances that this glorious priest-king 
will prosper, that his reign of righteousness will 
be successful; the assurance being that God will be 
at his right hand supporting him and bringing matters 
to a successful issue,— smiting down kings and 
wounding the heads over many countries, and subduing 
all things mightily. The great day of trouble 
coming is very generally referred to as "the day of 
Jehovah,"* the day of His wrath, although it will be 
under the direct supervision of our Lord Jesus, for the 
purpose of introducing and establishing his Millennial 
dominion. 

These, foregoing, descriptions of the greatness of 
Messiah and his kingdom, lead up to our text; and 
it, as before suggested, is given as the reason why so 
great blessings, honors, and dignities and authority 
are conferred. "He shall drink of the brook in the 
way; therefore shall he lift up the head— [be 
exalted.l" 



LEARNING OBEDIENCE BY THE THINGS SUFFERED. 

As we look into the Word for testimony upon the 
subject, we find that our dear Master did indeed learn 
certain lessons of experience; as the apostle declares, 
he "learned obedience in the things which he suffered." 
Not that he had ever been disobedient to the Father's 
will, but that his testing at the time that he came 
into the world to do the Father's will was of a character 
and of an intensity such as never before had been 
brought to him nor any other creature. His obedience 
attested his love to the Father, attested his 
faith in the Father's love and justice; and in all these 
things he fully approved himself of the Father; 
he overcame every trial, he drank frequently 



♦Millennial Dawn, Vol. 1, Chap. 15. 

R2936 : page 13 

of the brook of wisdom, in connection 
with these lessons. Moreover, it was expedient 
that he, to be the great High Priest of 
mankind, should be touched with a feeling of their 
infirmities, and therefore that he should be tempted 
in all points like as his followers are tested— along 
the line of personality, of self will; along the line of 
worldly ambition; along the line of faith and trust; 
along all the lines of obedience to God's plan. He 
drank deeply of the cup, and rejoicingly said, "The 
cup which my Father hath poured for me, shall I not 
drink it? "-John 18:11. 

And now we come to a point of special interest 
in our text; for we perceive that if it was necessary 
for our glorious Lord from the heavenly courts to 
drink of the brook of experience, and gain wisdom 
by the things he suffered, endured, and thereby to 
demonstrate his confidence in God, it is equally necessary 
that all the members of his body should likewise 
drink of the brook in the way, if they would hope 
to share with the Lord in the Kingdom blessings- 
glory, honor and immortality, the divine nature. 

Our dear Master's time for drinking at the brook 
is past, yet the lessons and encouragements therefrom 
are still before us in the Scripture records. It is now 
our time to drink of the brook of experience,— to 
learn the lessons that are necessary to our preparation 
for the Kingdom. It is not enough that we have 
tasted of the brook of experience, that we have 
learned something of obedience, that we have endured 
some trials, that on some occasions we have 
learned obedience through the things we have suffered; 
we must continue drinking until we can gladly 
say— Father, thy will, not ours be done! If we 



drink not of the brook in the way we shall not share 
in the glory to follow. 

Some of the Lord's people not discerning the matter 
in its true light, are disposed to pray that they may 
be spared from trials and temptations; whereas they 
ought to understand that the trials and difficulties of 
the consecrated are witnesses of the spirit *that they 
are children of God, and are under his training and 
preparation for a glorious share in the Kingdom, to 
which he has called us. Because if we are not tried 
we cannot be "overcomers"; if we do not suffer with 
him, and learn to endure hardness as good soldiers, 
and to esteem our trials and difficulties from the right 
standpoint, and to count it all joy when they come to 
us, knowing their object and knowing the Lord's sustaining 
grace and strength, we will not be "fit for the 
Kingdom." 

Others interpret the trials of life as evidences of 
divine disfavor, and fail to realize that they are designed 
of the Lord to shape and polish our characters 
and thus to work out for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory. Because of their misunderstanding 
they are profited little by many of life's 
experiences through which they are called to pass— 
they feel the rod, but not discerning the loving purpose 
behind it, they fail to learn the lesson intended. 
Let us become more and more awake, more and more 
alive to the things of God,— to the facts of the case as 
he presents them to us in his Word— to our call to 
joint-heirship to the Kingdom, and incidentally to 
the drinking of the brook of experience and wisdom in 
the way that will fit and prepare us for the glories 
to follow. 

Drinking of the brook does not, however, imply 
that we sorrow and are disconsolate above others; on 
the contrary, those who drink of the brook properly 
are full of joy. As the apostle declares, they are enabled 
in everything to give thanks unto God,— in life's 
difficulties, as well as in its pleasures— even as he 
again says, Count it all joy when ye fall into divers 
difficulties, knowing that under divine providence they 
will work out for you a greater blessing. (James 1:2.) 
It is the world, which must also share its part 
of life's difficulties, that sorrows as those who have 
no hope, or who have false hopes. The apostle points 
out side by side the world's condition and the 



*See Millennial Dawn, Vol. 5. 

R2936 : page 14 

Church's condition under the trials and difficulties 
of this present evil world, saying, "The whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain until now, waiting for 



the manifestation of the sons of God." Then he explains 
the position of God's people, begotten of his 
spirit, who are walking in the Lord's footsteps, and 
drinking of the brook in the way, saying, "We ourselves 
also groan within ourselves waiting for the 
adoption, to wit, the deliverance of the body"— the 
body of Christ, the Church. This hope, which we 
have, gives a changed coloring and silver lining to 
every dark and troubled subject which comes to us in 
common with mankind; so that inspired by draughts 
from the brook we can sing in the house of our pilgrimage, 
even though as yet we must also groan, because 
we are in this imperfect tabernacle, this unsatisfactory 
mortal body. 

We want to ask the Lord, our Master and Head, 
that he will bless us more and more, as with fresh 
zeal we shall endeavor faithfully and rejoicingly to 
drink of the brook of life's experiences, and gain 
wisdom therefrom that will fit and prepare us for his 
service by and by; and which will the better fit and 
prepare us for his service also in the present time, and 
enable us by his grace to show forth his praises in 
all the trying circumstances and vicissitudes of life so 
as to glorify him in our bodies and spirits which are 
his. Let us, as we drink of the brook, take a lesson 
from the little birds, which when drinking repeatedly 
lift the head as though giving thanks to God. Let us 
continually give thanks to our Lord for every taste 
of life's experience, for every lesson, for every trial- 
appropriating them all to our spiritual development. 
The time for lifting up our heads in glory is nearing, 
too, and already the Master directs that seeing (with 
the eye of faith) the evidences of their approach, we 
may lift up our heads and rejoice, knowing that our 
redemption draweth nigh.— Luke 21:28. 



R2936 : page 14 

INTERESTING LETTERS FROM FRIENDS. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

Pray do not think that I write in a captious spirit, 
but the extracts from "The Jew," are statements so grossly 
overdrawn, if not absolutely and entirely untrue, that 
if you were to cause such accusations to be verified here 
before inserting them in the Tower, where absolute truth 
alone should appear, they certainly would not appear 
therein, except so far as true. 

There is, and has been of late, a great influx of Jews 
("Infidels, Turks, and offscouring of Europe") into England, 
London particularly, and it is not surprising that 
their ignorance of the language and generally, their clannish 



herding together, their filthiness and their habits 

and manners, as well as their injury to the employment 

of others, should be resented almost exclusively by a 

poor and uneducated people whom they displace or come 

into unpleasant contact with (and particularly at this 

time). 

Precisely the same feeling is manifested toward Chinamen 
in San Francisco, and on the Pacific coast, etc., the 
difference being that in the United States there is legislation 
against them,— but here Jews and any nationality 
have absolute freedom and assured and certain protection 
and even-handed justice. 

Such articles as that from "The Jew" are calculated to 
produce hatred, because they manifest a spirit of gross ingratitude, 
and wilful lying (there is no other word for 
it), when the Jew question is considered broadly and not 
from perhaps some isolated case. As to the political parties 
being pledged to anti-Semitism, or any other charges 
against them as a people, or even against their capitalists 
(except it may be one or two German Jew South African 
firms), these are on a par with the rest of it and not 
worthy of notice. The fact is that newly found freedom, 
with some, cause them, from ignorance, to be aggressively 
and offensively assertive, and presume upon the liberty of 
action and speech, etc., accorded them— and so they assist 
largely in bringing about that of which they 
complain. 

I write out of warmest personal regard, and respect 
and sincere Christian love. 

I am, dear Brother, Yours truly in Christ, 
B. C. HUGHES-England. 



[Nothing was farther from our intention than to intimate 
that the masses of the British are Jew-baiters: nor 
that those who do the baiting are without provocation. 
We merely mentioned it as "news;" and as evidence that 
the Jew will yet, as the Bible declares, be persecuted in 
every nation and thus be driven back to Palestine when 
Zionism shall succeed in opening that door.— Editor.] 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

Greetings from the Church of Los Angeles! 

According to 1 Cor. 16:2, we have endeavored to follow 
Paul's advice, and have provided a treasury, from 
which is drawn, the expenses of the church, the expenses 
for volunteer service, also the expenses of any in need; 
and from this treasury we now send the Tract Society a 
little thank-offering. We, as a body, unite in the desire, 
to express our appreciation of the privilege of obtaining 
this literature for "Volunteer" work, and of the opportunity 
to serve it, while it is yet called day. Our earnest 
desire is to help the Bride to make herself ready; our earnest 



prayer is for the establishment of the kingdom. 
We desire to thank you and the "Tower" office assistants, 

R2937 : page 14 

for your labor of love to the Church, especially for 
all efforts expended in our behalf. Above all we thank 
our Heavenly Father, who is the giver of every good and 
perfect gift, and we know of no better way to express our 
gratitude than to send to the fund the enclosed $50.00, 
which has been raised for this purpose together with the 
surplus in our treasury. 

We cannot hope to pay for the thousands of pages we 
have distributed; but we trust you will accept this as an 
expression of our gratitude. 

We ask your prayers, that each of our number may 
be more zealous, more faithful, more fervent in spirit to 
serve our God and lay down our lives for the brethren, 
loving His approval above all else. 

With Christian love and prayers for your steadfastness, 
we remain, your fellow-servants, in Christ, 
Church of Los Angeles. 



My dearly beloved Bro. Russell:— 

My poor heart overflows with gratitude to our dear 
Lord, for the beneficial and sweet moments we have so 
richly enjoyed with you during this, the first Christian convention 
that I have ever seen in the city of Richmond. 
Dear brother, rest assured that your labor is not in vain 
here; for the 12th and 13th of October, 1901, will long be 
a pleasure to think of. The feast of good things continued 
with some of us the next day, while God's dear children 
before leaving the city have been telling of the joy 
and benefits received. No jars, no objections, no schism 
or worldly contention; but praise and thanks to God from 
every quarter,— that we attended the convention and all 
received such a blessing. 

Truly our prayers for this season of refreshing were 
answered. We thought that we loved you, very dearly before, 
and esteemed you very highly for your works' sake; 
but these sessions with you have kindled our love so 
much, that we almost feel impatient for the beginning of 
eternity when in God's kingdom we part no more. O 

R2937 : page 15 

brother, the Lord knows that I feel these sentiments, and 
I believe that the other dear ones also do. This season 
with you has built us up in the most holy faith, and we 
pray that it may long, yea, very long last us. The dear 
brethren leaving for their homes were saying, "How clear 
this point was made; and how rich was that thought; 
and how long I have wanted to see dear brother Russell, 
the channel through which our God has sent us the blessed 



truth, and my longings have been realized." 

We do hope, that it may meet with your approval to 
still further encourage us by reporting our convention in 
the next "Tower." With this hope, I give as nearly as I 
could count them, the number present, i.e., believers. I 
made the count one hundred and twenty-eight, possibly a 
few over or under. Fourteen symbolized their consecration 
by water baptism. Five states and District of Columbia 
were represented. Pray for us here, dear brother, 
that we may continue faithful, and let our light shine, 
through love and humility as well as otherwise. May our 
Father's richest blessings be with you to the end. 
Your brother in the love and service of our dear Lord, 
M. L. STAPLES,-Virginia. 

[This report is late;— crowded out of our previous issues. ED.] 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

How I long to see you. I have had a big fight and 
gained a glorious victory. I send you my article prepared 
for the Conference. I had a hard time to get a hearing, 
as my name was called before I reached the seat of Conference. 
Had I been there then I could have had the 
floor; but after that it was difficult. After pressing the 
matter they allowed me five minutes to speak and I read 
rapidly until I reached the sentence, "Thy Kingdom come," 
two thirds through, and there the Bishop called me to 
order. He said I had used up six minutes and I asked for 
an extension of time but could not get it. (They had 
enough.) So I asked our own City Editor if he would like 
to publish it and he consented. 

There was a great surprise I assure you, at Syracuse 
Conference, when I withdrew from it and gave my reasons 
even partially. I commenced giving out tracts— 
until all were gone. When I gave one I said, "Read that 
carefully, when you are all alone." I have a good many 
old friends in the Conference and Church (Nominal), but 
thanks be to God, I am the Lord's free man. 

Some have asked me what church I am going to unite 
with, and my answer is the "Church of the first born, 
whose names are written in heaven." 

Yours in love, B. F. WEATHERWAX,-New York. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

I wrote you a short time since for some samples of 
your publications to which you kindly replied, by forwarding 
me several copies of the "Watch Tower" and some 
tracts, all of which I have carefully read. I am more 
than ever convinced of the correctness of your views of 
Scriptural truth. I try to make the Word of God the 
Counsellor and Guide of my life, and I rejoice in every 
development of light and truth. 



Have you a Church organization? if so, what is it 
called, and what is the form of your church government? 

What is required of persons desiring to unite with 
the Church? Have you a regular ministry? and how are 
they appointed and employed? An answer to the foregoing 
questions, and all information you may be able to 
furnish will be much appreciated. 

That you may not be in ignorance as to whom you 
address, I will say, that I am a minister in the Congregational 
Church, and if you desire can give you satisfactory 
references. 

Since writing you, Vol. I., "The Plan of the Ages," 
has been recovered, and though much mutilated, is still 
readable. I herewith enclose you 25c in stamps for which 
please send me Vol. II., "The Time is at Hand." The 
other volumes, I will order later on, or after carefully reading 
this. 

There is great unrest and dissatisfaction among professing 
Christians, and it seems to me they desire, as they 
truly need, instruction concerning the truth as it is in 
Jesus. How shall this be furnished? It may be you have 
tracts for free distribution; if so, and you feel like entrusting 
me with a small supply, I will endeavor to place 
them where they will do the most good. 

Pardon my long letter, and if you find time, amidst 
your arduous labors, I would be glad to receive a reply. 
Yours in Christ, 

L. F. WAY,-Texas. 

[We sent the Brother a copy of "Zion's Watch Tower" 
containing an article on "Which is the True Church?" 
with our answer and hope to hear from him further, and 
still more enthusiastically after he has read more.— 
Editor.! 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

The brethren have done excellently in distributing the 
tracts sent us. 

They had an amusing, though joyful experience in 
distributing at the last meeting of the "Christian" Church 
Convention. They began distributing to the few stragglers 
that came out before the close of the meeting. Among 
these was a minister who upbraided them and told them 
that he should warn the people against them. This he 
did, announcing from the pulpit that there was literature 
being distributed at the door that should not be read and 
everyone should refuse to accept it. The result was that 
the people crowded around the brethren with outstretched 
hands eager to get them. The clerical gentleman probably 
never served God better in his life than he did when 
he forbade the people reading the tracts. Everyone was 
surely read in search of forbidden fruit. 

We have already had an illustration of the truth of 
your prediction in the last Tower. Last Sunday a local 



preacher in talking of the people who had "jumped the 
track" after defining Christian Science and the Dowieites 
said,— "There is another class of people, who claim to 
hear the call 'come out of her,' who separate themselves 
and put a weird interpretation to the Scriptures. What 
are these? "Religious anarchists! nothing more, nothing 
less." 

Surely this is an indication of what we may expect in 
the near future. May the dear Lord strengthen us that 
we may be prepared to stand fast in the faith when that 
evil day shall come. 

Yours in the blessed hope, 

(Mrs.) J. M. WHITE.-Iowa. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

I know that you will be gratified to learn that the 
Cleveland Convention has proven an increasing blessing 
to me, the Lord using it and its influence, among other 
things, to increase my hungering and thirsting for righteousness, 
i.e., the walking more zealously in the footsteps 
of the dear Master, using every occasion, and as far 
as possible, making occasion, to do his commandment- 
love the dear brethren as he loved us. Then, too, what 
grand opportunity we occasionally have to bear testimony 
to the world of our faith in the kingdom, and how it will 
make all things right. Our little band of faithful ones 
here is growing in zeal and knowledge, and the spirit 
of the Master. 

I want you to rest assured, dear brother, of my increasing 
love for you, and appreciation of your work in 
the Lord. As Paul was to Timothy, so, in a great measure 
at least, have you been to me, a father in Christ; and 
in the Lord's own good time and way, I hope to testify 
more fully to you my appreciation of all you have done 
and are doing. It comforts me to tell you that in every 
prayer— secret— I bear you to the throne of favor, realizing 
that as the Lord has appointed you to be so prominent 
a teacher, you receive a correspondingly severer 
trial, or testing. Thank God, we know His grace is sufficient 
for all your needs, and that having begun He can 
finish His good work in you. May your faith fail not. 

I did not intend so long a letter, realizing how fully 
your time is occupied. Remember me in love to the 
household with you. 

In the bonds of Christian fellowship, 
W. E. PAGE.-Wisconsin. 



page 17 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. JANUARY 15, 1902. No. 2. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 19 

Anti-Semitic Move Renewed 
in Russia 19 

The Zionist Congress 20 

The Decay of Belief 20 

Some Suggested Remedies 20 

A Pastor's Testimony 21 

The First Persecution 21 

The Great Jehovah's Plan 23 

"With Him— Called and Chosen 

and Faithful" 24 

Attempting to Deceive God 28 

May We Defend Earthly Interests? 29 

page 18 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



NEW SUBSCRIBERS AND OLD ONES. 

We welcome the lists of new subscribers now coming in, 
and greatly appreciate the zeal of the friends, manifested thus. 
We offer no "Premiums," preferring to have only such help as 
is tendered to the Lord by grateful hearts. They shall receive 
their reward in another form,— from the Master. 

But, however glad we are to get new names on our lists, 
we are still more pleased to have old ones continue there. It 
will be with pain that we will now, shortly, cut off our list the 
names of several hundred whose subscriptions expired a year 
ago, and who have neglected to send money for renewal, or 



request to have the journal continue on credit, or on the free 
list,— as the "Lord's Poor." 

We give all such this final notice; and explain that unless 
you state the matter explicitly, no record is made in our subscription 
books; and thus our list-clerk assumes that you have 
not been heard from and are either dead or no longer interested; 
and the name is dropped. 

If you sent us money and we received it, you get a mail 
acknowledgment of it. If any mistake appears drop us a card 
at once, explaining. If your paper ceases to come to you, write 
at once; we will be glad to reenter your name; but it would 
save both you and us trouble if you would express your intentions 
promptly when your subscription (whether cash, 
credit or free) expires. We desire that all the deeply interested 
shall have the journal so long as they live and it is published. 
We have no desire to force or intrude it upon any one. 



If you subscribe for a friend on account of Good Hopes 
or sending the money, please notify him to expect the journal, 
otherwise he may be less interested in examining it. 



R2938 : page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



AMERICA is forcing a revolution on Europe 
as certainly as God reigns. 

How? By taking the bread out of European 
mouths, by sending men, women and children 
to bed supperless, by forcing European millions to 
live upon two meals a day, and those two scant ones, 
in reality not more than one and one-half. American 
genius, American machinery, American push, 
American capital is doing that, and each revolution 
of American engines brings the inevitable day of 
doom for Europe nearer. 

How long has it been since the American manufacturer 
began to realize his power? Ten years, perhaps. 
What has he accomplished toward the inevitable 
end in that time? He has closed European 
factories; he has cut European profits on manufactured 
goods to the minimum; he has thrown European 
workmen out of employment, he has forced 
Europe a long step ahead toward the day of 
revolution. 

But the end is not yet. Scarcely have we seen 
the beginning. Wait until a heavier over-production 
than we have yet witnessed cuts prices on manufactured 
articles still lower. Who can best stand 
such a cut? The American. Why? Because he 



has not already been forced to the last notch. He 
does not know the meaning of small profits. When 
he begins to sell on a small margin of profit the European 
manufacturer will go out of business, and the 
revolution will be on. 

Of all the nations of Europe England, blood-stained 
England, is least able to stand the dark days 
that are to come. Our people have drank more liberally 
of the liquor of prosperity and financial freedom 
than have those of other nations. We have cultivated 
a taste for the luxuries of life that is hardly 
known among the peasant classes of the continent. 
It will be hard to renounce these, and I fear they 
will not be renounced without a struggle that will be 
the dearest and darkest in the history of the English 
empire. 

American prosperity means European bankruptcy, 
and bankruptcy means anarchy.— W. T. Stead. 

This is a gloomy picture, not only for Europe 
but for the entire world; for the world today is bound 
together as never before. If Europe suffers, America 
will just as surely suffer. The poor world, the 
"groaning creation" has our sympathy as it opens 
its eyes to the grand result of its highest civilization, 
under its inexorable law of selfishness. Would that 
we could point out to this brilliant editor, and to all 
men, the glorious prospect we see in the Word of God 
—the silver lining of the cloud, which they see not;— 
the dawning of the long-promised Millennial Day. 
But a clear insight into the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the divine love and plan 
is intended only for the "little flock," yet. "None 
of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.' 
-Dan. 12:10. 

Those who were readers of Zion's Watch Tower 
twenty years ago, will remember how astonished they 
and others were at its presentation, from the Scriptures, 
of the very conditions which all men now perceive 
to be fast hastening toward us;— anarchy in the 
midst of the greatest prosperity the world has ever 
known. Those who have newly come into the truth, 
and who never saw the earlier issues of our journal, 
are often amazed at the statements they find in the 
Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., when they notice that it was 
published in 1886. 

Our Master, who gives us in his Word the inside 
information, tells us to note the fulfillments; and 
adds, "When ye see these things begin to come to 
pass, then know that the Kingdom of God is nigh at 
hand. Look up, lift up your heads and rejoice, for 
your deliverance draweth nigh."— Luke 21:25-31. 

ANTI-SEMITIC MOVE RENEWED IN RUSSIA. 



Vienna Dispatch.— Again the Jews in Russia are 
being harassed. Presumably this is by order of the 
government, since the oppressive measures are not 
confined to any one place. The ministry of the interior 

R2938 : page 20 

has appointed a special commission, under the 
presidency of M. Dournovo, to revise the laws and 
regulations governing the Jews. Heretofore Jewish 
matters have been discussed and reported upon by 
the clerical department. Intervention by the ministry 
of the interior, acting on its own discretion, is 
likely to lead to a more stringent policy than ever. 

Jews of all classes are now prevented from moving 
freely about Russia in pursuit of their professions. 
For example, the law allows certain classes of 
Jews to reside in St. Petersburg or Moscow, but it 
does not expressly say that a Jew merchant has the 
right to trade in those cities. Therefore, if a Moscow 
Jew merchant wishes, he may go to St. Petersburg 
and he may even live there, but he may not 
trade there. If he dies his wife and children are immediately 
"cleaned out." This is the phrase used. 
They are compelled to go to the Jewish "pale," or 
the place from which they originally went to St. Petersburg 
or Moscow. 

In every form of activity known in Russia today 
the Jew is in some way represented, and, as he 
has no friends except those of his own religious persuasion, 
he is a convenient anvil for every official 
hammer. The Russians hate the Jews because they 
fear them even more than they fear the Germans or 
the Poles. 

Now that the ministry of the interior has taken a 
hand in the persecution, there will be no refuge. 
The officials will treat them with less mercy even 
than the clerical department, which formerly had 
them under supervision. There are instances where 
the clerical authorities have shown some mercy toward 
Jews, but there is none where the purely political 
officials have treated him as anything better than 
a convenient scape-goat.— Chicago Record-Herald. 

THE ZIONIST CONGRESS. 



As per announcement, the Zionist Congress opened 
December 26th, at Basle, Switzerland. It was attended 
by about one thousand delegates, twenty-five of them 
from the United States. Dr. Herzl of Vienna, the 
founder, presided, but had nothing definite to report 
from the Sultan of Turkey, respecting Palestine. He 
reported, however, that in his audience with him, in 
May last, the Sultan had expressed his sympathy with 



Zionism's ambitions, declared himself the friend of the 
Jews, and that he considered them desirable as colonists. 
Failure to receive something more tangible was 
a source of disappointment to the Congress; but it is 
not discouraged. It has thus far accumulated about 
$1,000,000.00 toward its object;-nearly all from the 
poor Jews of the world. 



R2938 : page 20 

THE DECAY OF BELIEF 



PRESIDENT CYRUS NORTHROP, of the 

Minnesota State University, recently delivered 
an address before the Chicago Baptist Social 
Union. In it he made the following reference to the 
present religious conditions. He said in part:— 

It seems to me that in looking at the religious 
condition of the country— I do not mean the statistics 
of the churches, nor the amount of gifts to missions 
and philanthropy, nor the general condition of the 
church as an organization— but I do mean the state 
of thought in the church itself in reference to its own 
faith; it seems to me that we are confronted by four 
marked changes which have grown into prominence 
in the last few years. If I am wrong I shall be glad 
to know it, and if I am right I shall be grateful, as 
I am sure you all will be, to any Biblical scholar who 
will show us the truth. These changes stated briefly 
are: First— A decay of belief in the supernatural. 
Second— What I may call the disintegration of the 
Bible. Third— New views respecting inspiration. 
Fourth— Loss of the sense of accountability. 

These four changes are essentially one. They 
are at least shoots from a common root— and that 
root is doubt as to whether God ever has had any 
communication with men. Under this doubt Christianity 
ceases to be the religion which God intended 
for men to cherish, and becomes simply one of the 
religions of the world— a purely human device, like 
Confucianism or Mohammedanism, of no more authority 
than these and to be preferred to these only 
as its teachings are more reasonable and uplifting. 
There is a world of difference between saying this 
thing is true because God said it and God said this 
because it is true. The former carries with it the certainty 
of "Thus saith the Lord." The latter is of no 
validity, because many things may be true which God 
never said. And if God never said anything to men 
inspiration becomes so attenuated that it is hardly 
discoverable under the more or less theory which 
grants inspiration of some degree to every one who 



voices a noble truth, and grants no higher inspiration, 
though perhaps a greater degree of inspiration, 
to any one else. Under this arrangement a man 
must first get his idea of God and then determine 
whether anything is the product of divine inspiration 
according as it meets or does not meet that idea. 
There is in this no possibility of revelation in the 
usual sense. The order is inverted— God does not 
reveal truth to men; the truth on the contrary, reveals 
God. Now this may or may not be satisfactory 
to some. But it is, to say the least, very unsettling 
to human faith and very depressing to the ordinary 
Christian who does not know enough about God's 
style to determine whether he said a thing or not, 

R2939 : page 20 

and who is not sufficiently familiar with the internal 
signs of inspiration to determine whether any particular 
writing reveals God truly or not. And this 
condition of things is the darkest part of the outlook 
at the opening of the twentieth century. 

SOME SUGGESTED REMEDIES. 

FOR THE PULPIT: 

a. "Preach the Word." Restore the Bible to its 
rightful place as the Word of God divinely inspired 
and supremely authoritative. Use the Old Testament 
Scriptures as our Lord used them; freely and 
without apology. He never explained them away. 

You need not. To discredit your text book is to discount 
your message. Eliminate the "ifs" and "perhapses," 
and proclaim the Word in the power and 
demonstration of the Spirit. 

R2939 : page 21 

b. Remember your calling; it is not to exploit 
shifting philosophies and passing fads; sociology, 
evolution or even higher criticism; but to declare the 
gospel of the grace of God. The former never edified 
a church or saved a sinner or comforted a human 
heart. The latter is the wisdom of God and the 
power of God unto salvation. 

"The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a 
dream; and he that hath my word let him speak my 
word faithfully." 

c. If the Bible doctrine is true that the one sufficient 
remedy for man's sin is the sacrificial death of 

the Divine *Substitute— not his teaching or his example 
—then the popular teaching of "salvation by 
character," is manifestly unscriptural and unwarranted. 
"He suffered for us, the just for the unjust, that 
he might bring us to God." 



d. "The fatherhood of God and the brotherhood 
of man," as so often indiscriminately and universally 
applied to saint and sinner alike, is equally unscriptural 
and misleading. 

There is no spiritual Fatherhood without spiritual 
birth. "That which is born of the flesh is flesh." 
"Ye must be born again." 

FOR THE PEW: 

a. "Take heed what ye hear." "Let no man deceive 
you with vain words." "To the law and to the 
testimony; if they speak not according to this word, 
it is because there is no light in them." "Examine 
yourselves whether ye be in the faith." "Be ye ready 
at all times to give... an answer for the hope that 

is in you." 

b. "Be not conformed to this world, but be ye 
transformed by the renewing of your mind." "Be ye 
blameless and harmless, the sons of God in the midst 
of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom 
ye shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word 
of life." 

c. Live and walk habitually in the light of 
Titus 2:11-14. 

A PASTOR'S TESTIMONY. 



Joseph Parker, of London, on the 40th anniversary 
of his pastorate of the City Temple, said: "Looking 
back upon all the chequered way, I have to say 
that the only preaching that has done me good is 
the preaching of a Savior who bore my sins in his 
own body on the tree, and the only preaching by 
which God has enabled me to do good to others is the 
preaching in which I have held up my Savior, not as 
a sublime example, but as the Lamb of God that taketh 
away the sin of the world." 



*We must understand this to mean,— the substitute 
which God furnished: otherwise it would be out of accord 
with the Scripture testimony, and the meaning of the word 
ransom,— "a corresponding price." 



R2939 : page 21 

THE FIRST PERSECUTION. 
-ACTS4:1-12.-FEB. 2.- 



"There is none other name under heaven 
given among men whereby we must be saved." 



THE COMMOTION caused by the healing of 

the cripple by James and John, and the gathering 

of the crowd of worshipers to whom they 

preached, brought upon the apostles a new difficulty. 

The priests, whose ministries were more or less interrupted 

by the disturbance, felt a grievance against 

those who thus attracted attention away from themselves 

and their services, and the officers of the Temple, 

whose duty it was to preserve order, were also 

disturbed. These, coming upon the preaching Apostle 

and the interested multitude, arrested the three 

who were the cause of such a commotion, that the 

matter might be enquired into. It was toward evening, 

and therefore too late to gather the members 

of the Sanhedrin Court. The three who had been 

witnessing for God and for Christ were put in ward, 

in the prison; not as felons, but for trial. It would 

have been possible for the imprisoned men to have 

viewed their situation from the standpoint of unbelief, 

and to have said to themselves and each other: God 

did not approve our work, and hence has permitted 

us to be thus arrested and imprisoned, and now we 

know not what the result will be on the morrow, for 

those who crucified our Lord may crucify us also. 

Or they might, in unbelief, have reasoned still 
otherwise, and have said to each other: After all, 
what right have we to think that God has anything 
to do with these matters? We are like other men, 
and have merely found some new way in which natural 
law operates in the healing of the sick: God 
evidently is not concerned in this work; for if he 
were surely he would not have permitted us to come 
into these straits, while we were seeking to serve 
him and to declare the good tidings. But we may 
safely assume that the thoughts and words of the 
prisoners took a totally different direction. Full of 
faith, they no doubt said to themselves: We know 
not in what way the Lord may intend to use this, 
which seems to be a disadvantage to us, and an interruption 
to his work; doubtless however, he will 
use it in some manner to forward his cause and to 
reach more of his people with the truth. 

As a matter of fact, the Lord evidently intended 
through this seeming calamity to bring to the apostles 
a still grander opportunity of testifying to the 
truth on the next day— of preaching to a class which 
they might never again have opportunity to reach— 
the priestly class, the ruling class, represented in the 
Sanhedrin, and those who would gather at its sessions. 
When the Sanhedrin Court opened the next 
morning, amongst its seventy members, representatives 



of the most influential classes in Jerusalem, 
were Annas, the high priest, and Caiaphas, his son, 
both of whom had about two months previously presided 
in the trial of the Master himself. Nevertheless, 
the apostles were evidently not at all dismayed by 
the dignity of the Court— the Lord evidently fulfilling 
to them his promise, "Ye shall be brought before 
kings and governors for my sake, for a testimony 
against them and the Gentiles; but when they 
deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall 
speak; for it shall be given you in that hour what ye 
shall speak." (Matt. 10:18-20.) That Peter, as 
spokesman for the three, was supernaturally assisted, 
is implied in the narrative. "He was filled with 
the holy spirit." 

It is not amiss here to notice that the Jewish 
party which most particularly persecuted our Lord 

R2939 : page 22 

was the sect of the Pharisees, the holiness people 

of that time, basing their opposition upon our Lord's 

public declarations of their hypocrisies,— the Sadducees 

taking less interest in the persecution. But, on 

the contrary, in the Acts of the Apostles, the persecutions 

of the Church seem to have been largely at 

the hands of the Sadducees. The Sadducees should 

scarcely be considered a religious party, for they denied 

the resurrection of the dead, and denied also 

the existence of spirit beings, and hence believed 

principally in a religion for the present life merely. 

The Sadducees were the policy-men of that time. 

They favored harmony with the Roman Empire, and 

might, indeed, be termed the politicians of the Jewish 

nation. History says that the high priest and his 

family, and those principally in influence, were Sadducees. 

It is evident, therefore, that the preaching of 

the resurrection of Jesus, and of some spiritual power 

by which he could work through the apostles to the 

healing of the man born lame, would be an aggravation 

to these Sadducees, because it was directly in 

conflict with their belief and teachings. 

Indeed, it is worthy of notice, here and in subsequent 
lessons, that one of the main features of the 
Gospel which the apostles preached was the doctrine 
of the resurrection— that Christ had risen from the 
dead, and that through him in due time not only believers 
should be raised from the tomb, but ultimately 
all the world of mankind be released from death,— 
that each and all might have a full share in the judgment 
or trial for life everlasting, which had been 
secured by the ransom sacrifice of Christ. No wonder, 
then, that the Sadducees specially resented this 
new doctrine, which antagonized their views and to 
some extent supported their religious opponents, the 
Pharisees. 



It may at first seem peculiar that a court trial 
should be held in respect to the healing of a cripple. 
However, the object of the trial evidently was, if 
possible, to condemn the apostles for having practiced 
necromancy, sorcery, the black art. For, according 
to the law, a witch or wizard or necromancer, 
a spirit medium, was to be put to death. 

If Peter had been filled with fear he would not 
have spoken as he did to this Court, or if he had 

R2940 : page 22 

been filled with the spirit of egotism and boastfulness 

he would have spoken differently;— he would have 

spoken unwisely, rashly, no doubt. But filled as he 

was with the holy spirit, the spirit of meekness, patience, 

gentleness, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, 

and guided in his words by this spirit, he made 

an address which is beautiful, both for its simplicity, 

its directness, and its meek-boldness. His opening 

sentence had in it, possibly, a gentle irony respecting 

a trial for a good deed; but, as on previous occasions, 

he immediately proceeded to disclaim for himself 

and his associate, John, any power, any authority, 

in connection with the matter, and declares that 

the miracle was performed in the name, by the authority, 

by the power, of Jesus of Nazareth. Once 

again, he is not ashamed to own that the one he acknowledges 

was contemptuously called the Nazarene; 

nor to say that he is a follower of the one who 

was crucified as a malefactor. While telling the plain 

truth, that this very Sanhedrin had caused the death 

of Jesus, he states the matter without bitterness or 

acrimony. 

Peter allowed the fact that God raised up Jesus 
from the dead to stand as the proof that they had 
erred in their condemnation of him; and, without 
parleying the question, he proceeded to assure his 
hearers that this one, Jesus, whom they despised 
and rejected, had nevertheless been owned of God 
as the "chief corner stone" of the great Temple 
which God purposes to build. He thus referred their 
minds directly to a Messianic Psalm (1 18:22) familiar 
to them, pointing out its fulfillment in Christ, and 
declares, "Neither is the salvation in any other." This 
expression, "the salvation," to his hearers would have 
the sense of, The salvation for which we Jews, as a 
nation, have been waiting and longing,— a national 
salvation, and an individual salvation in the Kingdom 
of God. 

Let us mark well also the inspired utterance of 
the Apostle, "There is none other name under heaven 
given among men whereby we must be saved." 
This would be a difficult lesson for his hearers to receive. 
It would mean a total revolution of their 
theories, hopes, aims, plans and projects. It would 



mean that they had been wrong, utterly wrong, in 
all their expectations for some time. It would mean 
that they had, as teachers, been misrepresenting the 
divine plan and misleading the people. The Apostle's 
course, however, was plain. It was proper that 
he should state the matter clearly, without peradventure, 
that his hearers might have a full testimony 
respecting the truth. 

The Apostle's words are "a hard saying" today, 
also, in the nominal church. False doctrines have 
made it appear an unreasonable statement in the 
minds of Christian people generally. They say, This 
cannot be so, because if true, it would mean that the 
heathen are lost. If true, it would mean that our 
friends and neighbors and relatives who have never 
believed in the name of Jesus, who have never accepted 
him as their Savior, are lost; and by "lost" 
they would mean— gone into eternal torment. Thus 
does false doctrine becloud and contradict the truth. 
But how beautifully and how simply might the Apostle's 
words be received just as they are, if all could 
but realize that the whole world was already lost, 
already condemned, by one man's disobedience; already 
under sentence of death and passing into it. 
Peter's declaration is that only those who have accepted 
Jesus have yet come under the terms of the 
only salvation God has provided: and, since Jesus 
"tasted death for every man," it follows that in God's 
"due time" every man must come to an opportunity 
of hearing of the only name, and of accepting the 
one salvation. This opportunity, according to the 
Scriptures, will be during Messiah's reign in the 
Millennial age, when "the knowledge of the Lord 
will fill the whole earth," and "all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed" by the glorified Christ and his 
glorified Church unitedly, the spiritual seed of Abraham. 
-Gal. 3:16,29; Jer. 31:34. 

Blinded by the inconsistencies of doctrines received 
from the "dark ages," many of the Lord's 
professed people are today grappling with this question 
of who shall be saved, many or few, and fail to 

R2940 : page 23 

see that the greater part of God's plan of salvation 
is to come after the calling and perfecting of the 
"elect," the Church. Thinking that the present life 
ends all trial for every creature, many are convincing 
themselves that the Apostle erred, and that instead 
of one name only being given for salvation 
there are many names— including those of heathen 
divinities and teachers. They fail to see the ransom 
and its importance, as paving the way for teaching 
of any value or assistance. Hence they vainly hope 
that the ministries of Confucius and others will somehow 
or other save them, separate and apart from 



Christ, whom the Scriptures declare to be God's appointed 
Savior for the whole world,— and of whom 
Peter, under the plenary inspiration of the holy spirit, 
declares that his is the only name whereby salvation 
must be obtained, if obtained at all. These false 
hopes turn the eyes of many away, so that they cease 
to look for the God-ordained "Sun of righteousness," 
whose beams, we are promised, shall shortly enlighten 
and bless all. -Mai. 4:2. 

Very evidently the testing for the saints in this 
end of the age is coming along this very line— belief 
or unbelief in the testimony which God has given 
us through his Son, and through his chosen apostles, 
—"the twelve." Those who are faithful to the Word 
of the Lord will come off conquerors; those who 
yield to human theory, miscalled wisdom, will fail, 
will stumble, will be separated from the true wheat, 
the entire remnant of which must shortly be gathered 
into the garner. We thank God that this stumbling 
and unbelief will not mean the Second Death 
to all who stumble, because very few today evidently 
have that sufficiency of light and opportunity essential 
to a sentence to the Second Death;— very 
few obtain their full trial. We are to judge ourselves 
closely, however, and build no false hopes for ourselves, 
if we are among the favored few who have 
tasted the good word of God and been made partakers 
of the holy spirit. We are to remember the 
Apostle's caution that such as have enjoyed these 
favors, if they should fall away, would be doing despite 
to God's grace, and would afterward find no 
place for repentance.— Heb. 10:29. 

R2945 : page 23 

THE GREAT JEHOVAH'S PLAN. 



I am so small, and thou so great; 

So weak, and thou so strong; 
Yet from my heart there flows to thee 

A true and loving song. 
Thou art Jehovah, God! 

And hast in thy control 
The empire of the universe, 

Where suns and systems roll 
In wide expanse of trackless space, 

Yet held in place by thee; 
Each sphere into its orbit set, 

Through vast immensity. 

Of dust am I, and to earth's dust 

I'll molder and decay; 
This living frame and pulsing heart 

Will soon have passed away; 



But is it all of life to live, 

Or all of death to die? 
Thy Word proclaims a ransom found, 

On whom we can rely. 

Thou art the mighty King, 

Thy name, the Holy One, 
But unto thee a living way 

Was opened by thy Son. 
He is our righteousness; 

Through him comes peace with thee; 
And in his name we favor seek, 

And are from sin set free. 

He tasted death for every man; 

He dieth once— no more; 
And by his sacrifice secured 

Man's rights he will restore. 
"Death" was the penalty of sin, 

But Love o'er Death hath won; 
For the gift of God is life supreme, 

Eternal, through his Son. 

He died for all of human kind; 

He rose that they might live; 
And, as God's Word is ever true, 

This greater life he'll give! 
In sheol, hades, hell, 

In earth, or oceans' deep, 
His voice and power will soon be felt, 

To wake from death's long sleep. 

The one true church, the "little flock," 

The Holy Spirit sought, 
As kings and "royal priests" of God, 

Are to the Father brought. 
"First fruits" are they of those who slept: 

Joint-heirs with Christ, their Lord, 
When he, who is their life, appears, 

He'll bring them their reward. 
Made like the One they serve and love, 

His nature to them given; 
His power, glory, honors share; 

Their home, with him, in heaven. 

As "Abraham's seed," they'll bless the earth 
And rule with loving sway; 

Instruct and teach the way to life 
Is to God's laws obey. 

But they who will not hear this Priest- 
Christ and the Church— his wife, 

Will be cut off by second death, 
Destroyed from hope of life. 

But they "who will" need never die, 
And glories, yet unknown, 

Are kept reserved in store for those 



Who loyal love have shown. 
Thus up the scale to perfect life, 

In "highway" wide and broad, 
The ransomed race can seek and find 

Full harmony with God. 

A race redeemed, an earth new made, 

Riches and wealth untold; 
A world where righteousness will dwell 

And man his God behold! 
Where pain and sickness, grief and death 

Are memories of the past; 
Where loving faithfulness to God 

Forever more will last, 
With curse removed, the blight of sin 

Entirely swept away, 
And man God's image evermore 

Abides in perfect day. 

R2946 : page 23 

This is thy finished work, 

Thy own most glorious plan; 
And this the wondrous love thou'st shown 

Toward sinful, fallen man. 
Oh, Israel's God! How great art thou! 

What wisdom, love and grace 
The eye of faith will always find 

When we thy dealings trace!— Mrs. Jennie M. Stratton. 



R2940 : page 24 
"WITH HJM--CALLED AND CHOSEN AND FAITHFUL. 



BECAUSE considerable interest is being manifested, 

by our readers, on the subject of the 

Gospel Age call, and the prospects of those who 

have consecrated themselves to the Lord since 1881, 

we take this occasion to present some thoughts supplemental 

to what we have already presented, in our 

issue of Nov. 1, 1901, and in Dawn, Vol. III., pages 

212-216. 

The terms of the gospel are necessarily those of 
a call or invitation; leaving the matter of acceptance 
open and optional with the invited ones. Hence 
we read, "Many are called, but few chosen;" and note 
that, the invited are advised, not commanded, to 
make their "calling and their election sure," by compliance 
with the terms of their call. (Matt. 20:14; 
2 Pet. 1:10.) Commands to accept an invitation to 
joint-heirship with Christ, and penalties for not accepting 
that invitation, would be as incongruous as 



to have given a call or invitation to keep the Law 
Covenant, or, in the Millennium, to invite the keeping 
of the Laws then to be promulgated. We cannot 
even suppose that the holy angels are merely invited 
to obey the divine mandates. We must suppose 
that they are under a law commanding their 
obedience. We must assume that they have much 
of the spirit expressed by our dear Master, who is 
represented as saying, "I delight to do thy will, O my 
God; thy law is written in my heart." If this were 
not their attitude they would surely not be holy 
angels. 

The reasonableness of a Creator, through his 
representative, giving his just and good commands 
rather than invitations, becomes so apparent upon 
a little reflection, that we want to scrutinize all the 
more closely this question:— Why did God, during 
this age, apparently depart from so reasonable a rule, 
and, instead, to allure us with a high-calling, inviting 
us to become joint-heirs with his Son in the Kingdom? 
Why does he send word to us saying,— "Ye 
are not under the Law, but under grace"— favor? 

The reason is, that divine law can demand no 
more than even-handed justice; and the Lord's purpose 
during this Gospel Age is to select a "little 
flock" along lines of self-denial, sacrifice,— beyond 
what Justice could demand. Hence of necessity this 
must be accomplished by a call— an invitation, with 
exceeding great and precious promises attached as 
incentives; "that by these we might [be encouraged 
to faithfulness, and so] become partakers of the divine 
nature,"— in the Kingdom.— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

God foreknew us; we were "Elect according to 
the foreknowledge of God the Father." "And whom 
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate must be 
conformed to the image of his Son." He determined 
in advance that as the Son must pass through severe 
tests before being accepted to the divine nature, 
so also, all who would be acceptable to joint-heirship 
with him must exhibit and demonstrate that 
they have his spirit; that they are copies of him;— the 
very image of him, in their hearts. And the object 
of this Gospel Age is to call, and find, and test this 
predetermined class.— I Pet. 1:2; Rom. 8:29. 

The promises made to the seed of Abraham 
(though appropriated by the twelve tribes of Israel, 

R2941 : page 24 

without divine disapproval) belonged really to anti-typical 

Israel— spiritual Israel. The natural seed, as 

natural branches in the olive-tree (representing divine 

favor) were allowed to grow for a time and be 

tested, but on failure they were broken off;— new 

branches coming forward continually, until our 

Lord's first advent. The branches then in place were 



specially favored with the offer of the highest spiritual 
favor— not under the Law, but under Grace. 

But few, "a remnant," were in the heart-condition 
to appreciate and accept this great favor. The 
majority clung to attempts at self-justification; and 
like their fathers were broken off. Then the message 
was broadened; the invitation went to the Gentiles, 
"wild olive branches" to fill up the places of 
the broken off natural branches;— to complete the 
foreordained number of the elect. The total number 
of branches in the tree is 144,000, springing from 
twelve main limbs or tribes. Keeping up the Scriptural 
figure, we may say that as we who were by nature 
Gentiles, are grafted into the Abrahamic Covenant, 
we are reckoned as members of the original 
twelve tribes,— sealed, spiritual Israelites— until the 
predestined number, 144,000, shall have been 
completed. 

The methods by which the Lord has proceeded 
to call these "elect" are worthy of careful notice. 

(1) Our Lord declares that he called "sinners" 
in Israel "to repentance." This call was no part of 
"our high calling" to a share with Christ in the heavenly 
Kingdom; but it was a preparatory step: guilty 
sinners are not invited to, nor desired in the Kingdom. 
The call to faith and repentance, if heartily accepted 

by the sinner, brings him justification from 

sin— release from divine condemnation— reconciliation 

with the Father. 

(2) "Being justified by faith [after repentance], 
we have peace with God [realizing that our sins and 
imperfections are covered] through the sacrifice of 
our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also [additionally] 
we have access into this grace wherein we stand, 
[viz.,] rejoicing in the hope of the glory of God,"— 
the hope of sharing the Kingdom glories of our Lord 
Jesus. How did we gain access into this grace, after 
justification? By another call or another part of the 

one call— God "called us to glory and virtue [excellence]." 
-2 Pet. 1:3; Rom. 5:1,2. 

In a general way all repentant believers, justified, 
are called or invited to consecrate themselves to 
the Lord; because, as each starts out desirous of doing 
right— (with no thought of self-sacrifice), he goes 
but a short distance until he finds great opposition 
to right-doing, and even to right-thinking. He finds 
his opposition coming not only from the world and 
the devil, as he might have expected, but also from 
his own flesh, and from nominal Christians. These 
four opponents harass the newly justified will— whiles 
in anger, whiles in pity and sympathy— declaring 
that the right way is an impossible one, and that an 
attempt even to follow it will mean the ruin of every 
earthly prospect. 

THE EFFECTUAL CALLING. 



This is a testing time. Will the justified one 
heed the voices of the world, the flesh and the devil, 
and choose a downward or, at least, a compromise 
path? Or will he heed the voice of God, inviting him 

R2941 : page 25 

to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, in the "narrow way" 
which leads to glory, honor and immortality? If he 
obeys God's invitation, he is one of the effectually 
called. His acceptance means a full consecration to 
God;— a renouncing of all earthly hopes and 
prospects, to obey God rather than self or others; 
and to have the blessings God has provided for his 
faithful: (though at this stage he cannot clearly discern 
the reward). This is self-sacrifice. God's acceptance 
of the sacrifice (the consecration) is guaranteed 
by the terms of the general call: further, it is 
attested by receipt of "the spirit of holiness," "the 
spirit of the truth": additionally, by an ability to discern 
spiritual things, and "to comprehend with all 
saints the heights and depths and lengths and 
breadths of the love of God."— Eph. 3:18. 

Since our standing is the result of our acceptance 
of God's gracious call, and since the Father seeketh 
only such as worship and serve him in spirit and in 
truth, it follows that, in the exercise of our free wills, 
we may if we choose renounce our consecration, withdraw 
our sacrifice, and thenceforth walk after the 
flesh, and not after the spirit. But whoever does 
so, of course loses the spirit of God, the spirit of his 
begetting to the new nature,— he is no longer to be 
classed among those begotten of God;— he is of those 
who "draw back unto perdition," destruction, Second 
Death, nonentity. He who is in the begotten 
condition "sinneth not [willingly, designedly, of 
preference] because his seed [the holy spirit] remaineth 
in him:" while it remains he cannot love or 
willingly serve sin.— Heb. 10:39; I Jno. 3:9. 

THE PREDESTINED NUMBER OF THE ELECT. 



The more our knowledge and experience expand 
our judgments, the smaller is apt to be our estimate 
of the number who ever reach the point of making 
such a consecration or self-sacrifice as we have above 
delineated. And, on the other hand, growing experience 
is apt to convince us that comparatively 
few of those who have consecrated themselves, fully 
and intelligently, ever draw back;— in the sense of 
willingly and heartily renouncing the Lord and their 



covenant obligations. 

The large numbers who profess conversion during 
"revivals," etc., and soon fall away, are not to 
be reckoned as of this class. They merely heard a 
call to repentance and reformation; a call which any 
and all are authorized to make, at any time. The 
majority never progressed beyond repentance, even 
to the extent of justification;— the chaffy, confused 
presentations of most of revivalists, and so-called 
teachers, being quite insufficient knowledge to lead 
even to justifying faith— much less to sanctifying 
faith. 

Accepting the word "called" as applying only 
to those who come under the conditions of justification, 
and subsequent full sanctification through a 
belief of the truth; and admitting that these, in all, 
have been very few at any period— truly a "little 
flock"— can we suppose the number so small as 144,000 
from Pentecost until now? 

Examining our own day, and the views of consecration 
now prevalent, and the general scarcity of 
that quality;— remembering that love for the truth 
and the brethren is among the tests of devotion to 
God;— remembering, too, that a knowledge of present 
truth is to be an indication of those now close to the 
Lord in favor;— we are inclined to look into the past 
with far less optimism than in years past. With a 
clearer eye than formerly, for what constitutes a 
saint, and a martyr "beheaded for the witness of Jesus," 
we incline to think that but few of the millions 
of martyrs were really saints,— from the Scriptural 
standpoint. 

For instance, St. Bartholomew's day— and its 
slaughter of French Huguenots: Have we any sound 
reason for supposing that the hapless victims were 
any more saintly or more sinful than the Galileans 
who suffered death at the hands of Pilate?— or than 
the eighteen upon whom the tower of Siloam fell, 
and slew them?— or than a like number slain today 
in Paris, or London, or Berlin, or Vienna, or Rome, 
or St. Petersburg, or Washington? Today, when 
religious questions have been largely removed from 
the arena of party strife, it is somewhat difficult for 
us to realize that, in olden times, all politics turned 
chiefly on religious questions. Suppose that the 
Boers were Catholics and the British Protestants, or 
the Filipinos Protestants and the Americans Catholics, 
—and then imagine how partizan historians could 
write up both sides of these wars, and describe their 
victims as Christian martyrs. 

We are not meaning by this to intimate that 
there were no true saints martyred in olden times, 
anymore than we are denying that some true saints 
may have fallen in the South African and Philippine 
and Cuban and Chinese wars. What we do mean to 
imply is, that any estimate which would rank all those 



millions of the past (who, nobly, and ignobly, died 
for their convictions), as "saints," "overcomers," 
members of the "little flock,"— would be nearly as 
gross a mistake as to suppose that all who have fallen 
for their convictions in modern warfare are such. 
We must remember that the records of martyrs 
such as Cranmer and Latimer, and others less notable, 
who surely gave strong evidences of saintship, 
and whom we hope to meet in the Kingdom, were 
exceptions, and by no means the rule. 

Our estimate of the past must and should be 
based considerably upon our findings of the present: 
and reckoning thus, 144,000 would seem not only 
ample, but large, as an enumeration of the "copies 
of God's dear Son." Let us not forget that in the 
Primitive Church the congregations were small, and 
usually met in private houses. (Acts 1:13; 5:42; 12:12; 
Rom. 16:5; Col. 4:15; Philem. 2.) It was not 
until the apostles fell asleep in death, and errors 
came in and attracted the unconsecrated— by false 
threats and false promises— that the numbers became 
large, and costly edifices were erected. And yet, 
the apostles dealt chiefly with Jews, who for centuries 
had been under the Law Covenant, whose 
mission was to guide them to Christ. Out of all the 
millions of Jews in Palestine only a few thousand 
"received the word;"— so few that Josephus did not 
even mention them in his histories of that time. 

That the result of the Apostle Paul's renowned 
missionary journeys was only small congregations, 
as a rule, seems evident from the records;— because 

R2942 : page 26 

he set forth the gospel so clearly, so uncompromisingly; 

—showing the narrowness of the way, as well 

as the glories of the reward;— not shunning to declare 

the whole counsel of God. Yes, it was afterward 

—after the apostles fell asleep— that the mixed 

and misrepresenting preaching drew and drove multitudes 

into an apostate system;— "tares" to choke 

the "wheat." 

And even though the apostles, through faithful 
preaching of the truth, kept out the "tares" in their 
day, we find that the congregations which they established 
were not by any means all saints. St. 
Paul's epistles generally indicate this; for he sometimes 
addresses them to "the saints and faithful 
brethren" and to those "called to be saints." In these 
epistles, too, he intimates that many are called compared 
to the number who will make their calling and 
election sure. He urges them to take heed lest any 
should seem to come short of the requirements; but 
to so run as to obtain the prize. Hence we could not 
count all of the "household of faith" then, anymore 
than now, in the number of the final overcomers,— 



144,000. 

If we keep in memory the Apostle's statement, 
that God's special favors, light, etc., have come upon 
"the ends of the ages" (I Cor. 10:11), and note its 
correctness,— that special light and favor came at the 
first end, and now also at the latter end of this Gospel 
Age,— it will be helpful in this study. We might 
almost be justified in expecting that the first and 
last half-centuries of this age have not only enjoyed 
special light and favor, but possibly may supply a full 
half of the elect number. 

THE GREAT COMPANY WHOSE NUMBER NO MAN KNOWS. 



But, another matter is to be considered: The 
144,000 are the "called and chosen and faithful;" the 
"overcomers;" whereas the real converts, the true 
saints, in the apostles' day and since, include not 
only the "overcomers" who make their calling and 
election sure, but also those [probably few] who 
"draw back" and become subjects of the Second 
Death (Heb. 6:6; 10:39), and also those who— while 
not rejecting the Lord, nor turning to love sin— still 
fail to fulfill their sacrifice with zeal; and, becoming 
overcharged with the cares of this life, can only be 
"saved so as by fire," and must "come up out of great 
tribulation and wash their robes and make them 
white in the blood of the Lamb," and take a lower 
place than that to which they were called.— 
Rev. 7:9-14. 

Would it be safe to estimate that this "great 
company whose number is known to no man" (because, 
unlike the "little flock," it was not predestinated, 
and consists of such only as fail to reach the 
standard required) would be twice as numerous as 
the "little flock"? If so, it would mean that the total 
number of the truly sanctified and spirit-begotten, 
during this Gospel Age, has been 432,000. But 
we are not to forget that no more than the 144,000 
could be under invitation at one time; because it is 
not reasonable to suppose that God would ever invite 
anyone for whom there would be no place if he 
proved faithful. 

A COMPARATIVE ESTIMATE OF THE ELECTION. 



Suppose, for instance, that 45,000 made full consecration 
during the remainder of the first century, 
and that one out of three gained the victor's crown; 
that would represent 15,000 of the "elect;" the result 
say of 68 years' labor of the Apostles,— garnering 
the ripe wheat of the Jewish nation and starting 



the work among such Gentiles as were "feeling after 
God, if haply they might find him." If for every 
period of 68 years, from the year 100 to the year 
1881, A.D., we estimate the results to have been one 
fourth what they were under the very favorable Apostolic 
ministration, it would probably be very liberal, 
viz., 3,750. We are not to forget that in Israel, 
as the Master said, the fields were already white for 
harvesting. In those fields the Apostles needed not 
to do sowing, but merely to gather in the fruitage 
of the Law dispensation. After the cream of the 
Gentiles had also been gathered in, the work would 
surely go more slowly. 

Calculating on this reasonable and liberal basis, 
the year A.D. 1881, would see 112,500 who had already 
finished their course with joy as "overcomers," 
—and a remainder of 3 1,500 yet needed, to complete 
the predestinated number. Or, if the perfect fruitage 
of the Apostolic period were estimated at 12,000, 
and the remainder on the same basis, the total number 
garnered up to 1881 would have been 90,000; 
leaving a balance of 54,000 to be perfected since 1881, 
A.D. , -up to,-say 1910. 

For our estimates, let us take the former figures, 
as being very conservative;— viz., 31,500, to be 
developed— during, say 30 years. This would be 
considerably above the ratio estimated for the Apostolic 
period; but we are not to forget, on the other 
hand, that this is the harvest time for Christendom; 
—many times more numerous than was fleshly Israel. 
We are not to forget, either, that not only present-day 
inventions, conveniences, etc., permit each laborer 
to do more work, but also, that education being 
much more general now, a more extensive and intensive 
"harvest" work is possible now, than in the 
Jewish "harvest." On the whole, we cannot think 
that these figures can be considered immoderate. 

"THE WISE SHALL UNDERSTAND. "-DAN. 12:10. 



This brings us to another point. We believe 
that the Lord meant us to understand, that one evidence 
of faithfulness today, would be a knowledge of 
present truth. This seems to be the only possible deduction 
from the Parable of the Ten Virgins, from 
the Apostle's words in I Thes. 5:4, etc. And is it 
not as reasonable to suppose that the "elect" will all 
learn of our Lord's second presence, as that every Israelite 
indeed was informed of our Lord's first advent, 
in that separating of wheat from chaff? We are 
to remember, however, that some of those who at 
first were in such darkness that they persecuted the 
faithful, were subsequently rescued from their blindness, 
and became zealous brethren and servants of 



the truth. So here;— our thought is, that none could 
now be esteemed "overcomers," victors, while ignorant 
of our Lord's parousia, etc.; but we believe that 
many, if not the majority of the above mentioned 
31,500, still in darkness, may yet prove amenable to 

R2942 : page 27 

their consecration and come into the light of present 
truth. 

As is generally understood, we believe the prophetic 
Scriptures to teach that the general call or invitation 
ceased in 1881; and on the foregoing calculation 
this would imply that the conjectured 31,500 
consecrated, were written in the Lamb's book of 
life at that date, as fully sanctified persons, who had 
presented their all to the Lord in living sacrifice, to 
walk in the footsteps of Jesus. 

Our hypothesis being correct, these 31,500 have 
been on trial, for now over twenty years; and, meantime, 
the only chance for others to come into this elect 
class has been as the trial time of some of these may 
have lapsed, without their making their calling and 
election sure;— their names being blotted out of the 
Lamb's book of life, and their claims upon crowns 
of life being forfeited, as our Lord forewarned (Rev. 2:10; 
3:11),— they being numbered either among 
God's enemies (Heb. 10:26,27) or among those 
whom the Son will deliver, "so as by fire," in the 
"great company" of Revelation 7:9,13. 

If we are correct in supposing that a knowledge 
and confession of present truth are essential to overcoming 
now, we may give a fair guess at the number 
thus far faithful from the Watch Tower lists and our 
general knowledge of the friends. A liberal estimate 
would be 10,000, walking in the light of present 
truth, and sanctified thereby. This would leave 
21,500 yet in darkness; and probably most of them 
in "Babylon." Of the 10,000 whom we will assume 
that we know, our estimate would be that nearly or 
quite one half of them were not consecrated in 1881, 
—not amongst the 3 1,500. Accepting this as a basis 
of estimate it would teach us what? 

THE WISE VIRGINS GOING IN TO THE WEDDING. 



It would teach us that since 1881 about 5,000 
had gone on faithfully and been granted the light 
of present truth, and have good hopes if they stand 
fast that they will finish their course with joy— in 
death. It implies, that the 5,000 who have consecrated 
and received the light of present truth since 
1881, took the places of 5,000 whose period of probation 
ended without proving them so far overcomers 



as to be worthy of the light. Thus 10,000 of the 31,500 
are already disposed of. Now, of the 21,500 yet to 
be dealt with, what may we expect? (1) That one 
third, or possibly one half the number, will yet prove 
themselves "overcomers" (Rev. 15:2-4; 20:4); and 
(2) that the remainder-10,000 to 14,000-would 
represent the numbers of those whom we might expect 
yet to come into divine favor by a full consecration; 
—to take the places vacated and prospective 
crowns forfeited by the "overcharged." And more 
than this: we must reckon that of those consecrating 
now, even in the light of present truth, there must be 
a testing, a sifting; and that if one half of the smaller 
estimate fail, it would mean 5,000 more to make consecration 
and stand testing; and if one half of these 
fail, it would mean 2,500 more, and so on. 

We should not forget, however, that those entering 
the "race" now have many advantages. (1) We 
may assume, in harmony with reason and our observations, 
that a considerable number who have consecrated 
since 1881, have been under the Lord's care 
and instruction, along the lines of discipline and 
character-building, with a view to their being accepted 
to fill the places of those failing to make their calling 
and election sure,— to joint-heirship in the Kingdom. 
(2) We may assume that, since the general 
call has ceased, none of these would be instructed in 
"the deep things of God," except as they are permitted 
to take their places in the race. (3) We may 
expect that those consecrated in 1881 must close their 
probation for the prize very shortly now. (4) As the 

R2943 : page 27 

"present truth" is now shining very clearly, and is 

getting more generally shed abroad, and is in a condensed 

form, easy of quick assimilation, we should 

expect that characters would form and expand and 

crystallize, now, much more rapidly than ever before. 

(5) We see that the cleavage or gulf is growing wider 

and wider, between "wheat" (true believers, fully consecrated) 

and "tares" (deceived persons misnaming 

themselves Christians, because mistaught by Churchianity). 

As the "tares" more and more openly repudiate 

faith in the blood of Christ, and more and 

more boldly declare for "higher criticism" and "evolution," 

the "wheat" who have been halting and fearful 

toward the truth and its true servants, will begin 

to see that they must decide quickly;— and all of the 

"wheat" class will decide correctly; and some of them 

promptly enough to be classed with the "elect little 

flock." (6) We anticipate continued and increasing 

opposition; so that it will be fair to suppose that 

those giving adherence to the truth will generally 

so well count the cost in advance that comparatively 

few of them will need to be sifted out. 



LABOR,-FOR THE NIGHT COMETH. 



Those who for some time have inclined to wonder 
at our sanguine expectations, respecting the 
progress of the truth, the growing numbers of Watch 
Tower subscribers, etc., now have, in the foregoing, 
our reply to their queries. We doubt not that the 
arguments will commend themselves to the majority, 
if not all of our readers. We trust that it will come 
to you all as a fresh incentive to energy and zeal in 
the harvest work. Faith and patience are qualities 
necessary to every soldier of the cross. Be valiant! 
Quit you like men! is the Apostolic exhortation, and 
it is ours also. Go forth in the name of our glorified 
Head, giving to all true Israelites the "three signs" 
of the Lord's presence. And if in pouring the water 
upon the land it turn into blood, even your blood, rejoice 
and be exceeding glad. Remember that your 
covenant is, to lay down your life for the brethren,— 
even unto death. 

Let each go at once to the throne of grace, petitioning 
the Lord, that in so far as these presentations 
are the truth, they may be blest to his own heart. 
Pray also that the Lord will send forth more laborers 
into his vineyard and inspire yourself and all of 
his faithful "brethren" (Heb. 2:11) to renewed energy 
and effectiveness during the year 1902. Among the 
estimated 21,500 consecrated brethren yet in Babylon, 
several thousand should be ready for the sanctifying 
truth this year. Watch and pray for opportunities 
to serve them, and for wisdom from on high 
to rightly use the opportunities as they come to you. 
May the grace of God abide with us! 



R2943 : page 28 

ATTEMPTING TO DECEIVE GOD. 

-ACTS 5:1-1 1-FEB. 9.- 

Golden Text:— "Wherefore, putting away lying, speak 
every man truth with his neighbor."— Eph. 4:25. 



"WHILE MEN slept the enemy came and 

sowed tares," our Lord's parable explains. 

After the apostles fell asleep in death the Adversary 

had a comparatively free hand in the sowing 

of the seeds of error, and cultivated in the Church 

the tare class, as a result. But at the time of our 



lesson— shortly after Pentecost— circumstances were 

different. The apostles were still in the Church, and 

exercised the special powers of the holy spirit conferred 

upon them, as the Lord's representatives, for 

the establishment of the Church— sowing only the 

good seed, and hindering the Adversary from sowing 

tares or hypocrites in it. Our lesson illustrates 

the method by which the Lord, through the apostles, 

kept the infant church free from hypocrites. 

As previously suggested, a partial community 
of interest amongst the believers was early established. 
A number of the faithful had already sold 
possessions and contributed to the general fund. 
Joses was one of these whose case is particularly 
cited. (Acts 4:36,37.) He was one of the noble 
brethren whose generosity and helpfulness in the 
Church was generally recognized, so that amongst 
the believers he received a new name, Barnabas, 
which signifies "son of consolation," or son of comfort 
and helpfulness. 

Although there was nothing compulsory upon 
any in respect to this selling of goods and giving to 
the common treasury, the very fact that those who 
did so were highly esteemed in the Church would 
naturally become a snare to some who, without the 
real spirit of helpfulness and sacrifice, would appreciate 
and desire to have the approbation of the brethren. 
Ananias and Sapphira, his wife, were of this 
class, desirous of the approval of the Church, yet 
deficient in the real spirit of sacrifice. They had a 
property which they determined to sell, and in order 
to pass before the believers as saints of the same order 
as Barnabas, they pretended to give to the general 
fund the full amount received for the property. 
Secretly, however, they had much less generous sentiments; 
they agreed together that they would retain 
part of the sale-money for future contingencies, 
—yet would pass as sacrificers to the full amount. 

The wrong of their course is manifest. As the 
Apostle Peter declared, the property was their own, 
and after they had sold it they still had a right to do 
as they pleased with the proceeds; but they should 
have been honest about the matter, and if they 
wished to give a tenth, a half or all of the amount, 
it was a matter of their own business alone, and no 
one would have had the least right to find fault with 
or criticise them. The entire wrong consisted in the 
deception practiced— the palming off of a part of the 
price as the whole, for the purpose of deceiving the 
Church and of gaining an applause for an amount of 
sacrifice more than they made. In this and in this 
alone consisted the sin for which they both died. 

The record is that "great fear came upon all the 
company"— great reverence for God and for the 
apostles, his representatives. It brought also a realization 
that consecrations to the Lord were far from 



meaningless forms. This would mean, not only to 
those who had already espoused the Lord's cause, 
but also to all who for some time thereafter would 
identify themselves with the church, that any who 
were insincere would best make no pretensions to 
discipleship. Quite probably the influence of the 
lesson lasted for a considerable time— during the 
lives of the apostles. Since the death of the apostles, 
however, any number of hypocrites have come 
into the Church,— indeed, have been dragged and 
coaxed in to swell the numbers: and God has been 
pleased to permit the many false assumptions and 
false pretenses of these "tares" to go unpunished 
and unchallenged. (Matt. 13:30.) This does not mean 
a change on God's part as respects such characters, 
but rather that the case of Ananias and Sapphira 
was made a special one to serve as a lesson in the 
Church. Likewise, the first offence of Sabbath-breaking 
was punished with death (Num. 15:32-36), 
although Sabbath-breaking was not similarly punished 
subsequently under the law. We are not to 
think of Ananias and Sapphira as being sinners above 
others of their class, because summary punishment 
was meted out to them. 

Those who believe that eternal torment is the 
punishment for sin must, to be logical, suppose that 
Ananias and Sapphira passed on to torments at the 
hands of devils, from which they have since been suffering, 
and such must wonder that many who are 
equally hypocritical in nominal churches of today, 
so far as human judgment can discern, go unpunished, 
and are encouraged by their spiritual leaders 
to hope for a share in the best the future has to give. 

From our standpoint— the Bible standpoint— 
these two deceivers received no other punishment 
than the loss of the present life; and as they were 
evidently not of the "wheat" class at all, and had not 
become partakers of the holy spirit, but deceived 
themselves, as they attempted to deceive others, 
their conduct did not affect their cases everlastingly, 
but merely as respects the present life. They were 
made an illustration of a principle— they served as 
ensamples for the instruction of the Church. They 
received the full penalty of their deception in the loss 
of present life. As respects the future life, an opportunity 
for which the Lord Jesus has purchased for 
all mankind, it will "in due time" be thrown open 
to them and to the whole world, to be accepted or 
rejected, under terms of clear knowledge and obedience. 
They are still heirs to a share of those blessings 
which will come to the world after the spirit-begotten 
Church shall have been glorified, and begun 
the work of blessing all the families of the earth. 

The particulars of the lesson require no further 
detailing. We merely note the fact that the Apostle 
Peter evidently had the gift of discerning spirits (I Cor. 12:10), 



and that God fortified the knowledge 
granted him, as evidence or proof of his apostleship. 
We proceed next to consider some of the lessons 
which may properly be learned from this incident of 
the past, by the Lord's consecrated people of today. 
The lesson is that God desires "truth in the inward 
parts"— in the heart— and that any who have not 
this quality— candor, honesty, truthfulness— cannot 

R2944 : page 29 

be pleasing to God; and therefore cannot share in 
the glories shortly to be dispensed to the elect class 
of this Gospel age.— Psa. 51:6. 

As we look at ourselves, we come to realize how 
imperfect are all the members of the fallen race; and 
when we consider God's perfection, we can conceive 
of only one quality that the fallen creature could possibly 
possess, that would meet with divine approval 
—even when viewed through the merit of Christ's 
atonement. That one quality is honesty. The true 
Christian must, in honesty, confess his own shortcomings, 
his own deficiencies. He must, in honesty, 
acknowledge that his sufficiency is of God, through 
Christ and not of himself. He must honestly strive 
for the standard set before him in the Gospel. He 
must honestly admit that he cannot do the things 
that he would. He must candidly and fully accept 
the righteousness of God in Christ Jesus, as the covering 
for his blemishes. We are inclined to the belief 
that the greatest sin in the Church— even 
amongst the consecrated believers— is the sin of dishonesty 
—the sin of which divine disapproval is so excellently 
illustrated in the case of Ananias and 
Sapphira. 

We have no desire to distort, or to make matters 
appear worse than they really are; but from our 
standpoint the nominal church teems and overflows 
with just such hypocrites— self-deceived, to some extent. 
These are the tares, or imitation wheat. 

Do not all who claim to be Christians profess 
to be following in the footsteps of Jesus,— to bear his 
name, to be his Church, his body, and to take up his 
cross and follow him? Yet how comparatively few 
of the nominal whole have or have ever had any 
thought of so doing? By their profession they declare 
that they have sold their earthly possessions, 
their earthly interests, that they have sacrificed these, 
and presented the whole matter as a loving gift and 
sacrifice to the Lord; yet in reality they have done 
nothing of the kind, and never for a moment thought 
of even as much liberality to the Lord's cause, keeping 
as proportionately little to themselves, as did 
Ananias and Sapphira. 

We cannot judge the heart, and will not attempt 
to do so. We cannot even always tell which 



are grains of "wheat" and which "tares," but out 
of their own mouths we may judge those who profess 
to be "wheat." Some professing thus, and occupying 
very high positions in the Church, even as 
ministers of the Gospel, tell us plainly, not only by 
their actions, but also at times by their words, that 
in pretending to sell out their interests and to turn 
over the entire proceeds in consecration to the 
Lord's service, they have grossly falsified— some of 
them tell us that they do not even believe the things 
which they vowed they would preach. They thus 
tell us that they have been dishonest with men and 
with themselves, in respect to the things of God. 
Truly this is a serious, a dreadful condition. The 
Church of today, instead of being free from deceivers, 
has them in its very highest positions of trust and 
honor,— as representatives of the Lord, purporting 
to be his mouthpieces. 

This is an individual matter still, as it was in 
the days of the apostles. Each individual of the 
Lord's people must answer for his own course, to the 
Lord himself. It therefore behooves all those who 
are seeking divine approval to see to it that they are 
not influenced by the prevalent disposition to hypocrisy, 
but that they deal with the Lord in purity and 
honesty of heart. They should see to it that, having 
covenanted to give to God and his service their 
all, they keep nothing back, but consider their time, 
their influence, their means, their lives, fully devoted 
to the Lord, and that they use these as his— as they 
believe he would wish to have them used— as stewards. 
He who is honest with himself will be honest 
with God, and be honest also with his fellow-men. 
As Shakespeare expresses it,— 

"To thine own self be true; 
And it must follow, as the night the day, 
Thou canst not then be false to any man." 

Our Golden Text is quite to the point, and requires 
no comment. We perhaps should, however, 
guard some against a mistaken view of truthfulness. 
Some persons of large conscientiousness fail to 
properly balance the subject, and reach the conclusion 
that they are bound to answer every question 
that may be asked them, telling all that they know 
upon any subject. This is a mistaken view; we are 
not bound by any laws of honesty to tell all that we 
know in all cases. Some people ask questions which 
they have no proper right to ask— about things 
which are not their proper business: such persons 
should not be encouraged; their queries should not 
be satisfied. Nor is it necessary to truthfulness that 
we should say to them in so many words,— You are 
busybodies, and your questions are impertinent, and 
I will not answer them. On the contrary, a soft 



answer will be better— an answer which will tell 

them as much or as little as suits convenience, permitting 

them to draw the conclusion that for some 

reason unmentioned you would not care to give a 

fuller statement of the facts. An exception to this 

rule would be a case in which the keeping back of 

the information would be to the injury of the inquirer. 

Then, love for our neighbor should prompt 

the giving of the information; perhaps, indeed, the 

volunteering of it without being asked— especially 

if it be concerning a matter of which you have not 

merely an opinion but actual knowledge, without the 

revealing of which he would suffer injury. 



R2944 : page 29 

MAY WE DEFEND OUR EARTHLY INTERESTS? 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

At our Dawn Circle the postal ruling was referred 
to. One sister expressed surprise that you 
should take the position you have in contending 
against it: which remark led to a further exchange 
of thought. A brother said he thought he was supposed 
to give up anything when asked for it, and let 
people impose upon him— that that was a part of 
his sacrifice. Another brother stated he once had 
a house and lot which was two-thirds paid for, when 
some obstacle arose, and rather than have any trouble 
he sent the contractor his deed to the place, letting 
him have it without standing up for any of his 
rights. If our little meeting is any criterion, it seems 

R2944 : page 30 

to me very many of our dear brethren are allowing 
Satan's followers to defraud them of not a little of 
their stewardship. J. H. C 

We publish this letter, with its answer, believing 
that some of the Lord's dear sheep have need 
of counsel along the lines of the inquiry. 

It is difficult for many, to rightly adjust the relationship 
between the two parts of our Lord's command, 
"Be wise as serpents, harmless as doves." 
The harmlessness of the sheep and of the dove beautifully 
represent what should be the character of all 
the Lord's consecrated people as respects violation 
of the rights of others; but a sheep is stupid as well 
as harmless, and the Lord does not recommend that 
his followers shall consider stupidity a Christian 
grace. Rather, he encourages us, in the words above 
quoted, to be wise;— not, like serpents, in venom 



and disposition to injure and attack, but like serpents 
in wisdom; that this wisdom in us may be combined 
with the harmlessness of the dove and of the 
sheep. 

This combination of wisdom and gentleness— a 
wisdom used for good and not for evil purposes,— 
is in the Scriptures denominated "the spirit of a 
sound mind." This sound mind was well illustrated 
in the conduct of our Lord and of the Apostle Paul, 
the leading representatives of the truth and examples 
of the flock in the New Testament. To illustrate: 
When our Lord was assailed by the scribes 
and Pharisees, who sought to entrap him in his teachings, 
he was meek and gentle, as the Lamb of God, 
but not foolish;— he did not run away from the questions, 
but, as the narrative shows us, he entrapped 
in their own arguments those who were seeking to 
entrap him. When his arrest was threatened in Gethsemane, 
although he knew that "his hour was come," 
he did not go forward and say, I know all about this; 
just take me along. He enquired, Why did you 
come here to take me as a prisoner, after night? 
Why were you not courageous enough to take me 
prisoner in the day time, when the multitudes were 
surrounding me, as I taught in the Temple? Then 
he seems to have exercised some influence upon them 
which caused them to go back and fall to the ground. 
But having thus asserted the right, and knowing 
that it was the Father's will that he should now be 
delivered over to their power, he subsequently permitted 
them to take him prisoner. In the judgment 
hall, when reproved and smitten unjustly, our Lord 
defended himself, to the extent of reasoning with 
his assailant, and declaring his own rectitude. 

The Apostle Paul defended himself, frequently, 
before priests and kings; explaining the justice of his 
cause; and on one occasion replied to his assailant, 
"God shall smite thee, thou whited wall." In every 
instance he seems to have used the law, so far as 
there was a law, for his defence, on one occasion going 
so far as to appeal his case to a higher court- 
Caesar's at Rome. Nevertheless, whenever the laws 
did not support him we find the Apostle bringing 
no railing accusation against the laws nor against 
magistrates, but submitting himself, and counselling 
the Church to "be subject to the powers that be, for 
the powers that be are ordained [permitted] of God." 
In all this we understand that the Apostle was entirely 
right;— within the letter and spirit of the Master's 
teaching, when he said, "If any man sue thee at 
the law, and take away thy cloak, begrudge him not 

R2945 : page 30 

thy coat also,"— if he secure it by process of law.— 
Luke 6:29. 



We consider that the brothers mentioned in the 
letter erred in judgment; but we are glad to be able 
to fully approve their heart-intentions. Although, 
by doing as he did, one failed somewhat in his stewardship 
of the means entrusted to his care, and to that 
extent is to be criticized; nevertheless, we are sure 
that the Lord, who looks at the heart, would be better 
pleased to see him thus fail in his stewardship 
than to have seen him violate his conscience in the 
matter. If the property under consideration was 
worth contesting for, in our judgment, it would have 
been his duty to have resisted the injustice practiced, 
in so far as the laws of his State would grant 
him justice. The Apostle's words, "Dare any of 
you, having a matter against another, go to law before 
the unjust, and not before the saints?" (I Cor. 6:1), 
has no reference to such a case as this. It applies 
only to differences between brethren in the Church; 
—amongst the consecrated. A brother is to shield 
a brother in the Church, and to condone any injustice 
suffered at his hands, even as he would shield a 
natural brother and condone his injustice, rather than 
make the matter public before the world. But we 
would have no scruple about going into the State 
courts in an action against a nominal Christian, if he 
attempted to defraud us, provided the amount involved 
seemed to justify the trouble and expense incidental 
to the trial of the case. The reason for this 
distinction between a brother in the Church and a 
nominal Christian would be that nominal Christendom 
accepts present governments and present courts 
as "Christian"— part and parcel of Christendom itself. 
Therefore, in trying a case against a nominal Christian 
in the public courts we would be trying him before 
a Christian court, according to his acceptance of 
the term. 

As respects our appeal to the President against 
the violation of the law by his representatives in the 
Post Office Department. We hold that our action 
was proper, right; and that any other course,— a failure 
to take such action, might have been wrong. 
God opened a wide door of opportunity for the 
spread of the truth through the postal laws as they 
now stand; but a man has arisen, and without the 
authority of the law has deprived us of this open door. 
We are right in appealing to the law; and to the President, 
as the head of all the departments of the Government; 
to protect us in the privileges which the 
law grants us as it stands. We have the same right 
to appeal for justice that our Lord exercised and 
that the Apostle Paul so frequently exercised. We 
believe that the Lord was pleased with the Apostle's 
interpretation of his will; and we believe that he is 
pleased with our interpretation of it in this matter of 
appealing to the President for rectification of an injustice, 
—a violation of law, defrauding us of our 



rights. 

But now, suppose that our protests avail nothing; 
—what will we do? We answer that we will allow 
the sheep and dove nature to control fully; we 

R2945 : page 31 

will neither become anarchists, nor vicious maligners 
of the Government; nor make any attacks upon either 
the laws or those who have defrauded us. We 
will neither dynamite them literally nor with our 
mouths and pens;— we will submit. Why? Because 
we understand this to be a part of the Lord's injunction; 
that we shall be subject to the powers that be; 
that we shall be harmless, as sheep and doves. When 
all the wisdom we possess has been exercised, we 
shall be content; and take the results as being the 
will of God;— knowing that he is perfectly able to 
overrule in the matter as may please him. 

Besides, our readers know that for years we have 
been expecting that the door to opportunities of 
service would soon close; and we are not surprised 
if it closes gradually rather than abruptly. We will 
not be surprised that our protests shall be of no 
avail in this matter. We will consider, nevertheless, 
that we have done our duty; and that failure to effect 
anything should be to us an evidence that the Lord's 
providence is cooperating in the matter with a view 
to restraining, to some extent, the opportunities at 
our disposal. 



page 3 1 

KIND WORDS FROM THE INTERESTED. 



Dear Brother:— 

I did not know there were such publications as Millennial 
Dawn and Zion's Watch Tower until this year. And 
how forcibly they have brought the message to me, "Go 
work in his vineyard!" for indeed the harvesters are few. 
I feel that I could sacrifice all for the Master. But oh, I 
feel my insufficiency when I ask myself what can I do? 
I have an ardent desire and longing to work for the Master 
in an acceptable way, and ask the Father many times 
with streaming eyes to open the eyes of my understanding 
and let me know the truth of his divine plan. We 
have been so blinded by error and misconception of the Truth. 
I have been a member of the "Church of Christ" since 
early girlhood, but I am sorry to say that until the last five 
or six years I belonged to that large body who call themselves 
Christians and do not know God. Since that time 
I have been earnestly seeking for more light and it seems 



that your glorious works have been an answer to that 
prayer. I accidently (?) ran across three numbers of 
Zion's Watch Tower and the first three volumes of the 
Dawn. They have thrown a wonderful light on passages in 
the divine Word which were either neglected, or dark to 
me before. 

Oh, Brother Russell, the wealth of earth could not 
buy from me the knowledge I now possess of the Father's 
glorious plan! With a grateful and earnest heart I thank 
God for the store house of knowledge you have opened 
to my understanding. It seems that you have given me 
the key. May many other souls awake and be brought to 
the knowledge of the glorious coming kingdom and realize 
what it is to suffer with Christ if we would reign with 
him! I am eager and anxious to work for the Master, but 
how, in the way to do the most good? The Church would 
be glad to have me work, at fairs, suppers and entertainments, 
but I cannot do that and call it for the Master. 
What are the qualifications necessary for the colporteur 
work? I think possibly I might work there. Explain this 
matter to me fully, for I am anxious to help with this 
grand work. Remember me in my weakness at the throne 
of grace. I am sincerely your sister, 

Mrs. V. Roughton.— Illinois. 

[Colporteur work explained by letter. Ed.] 



My Dear Brother Russell:— 

I think I have a somewhat peculiar request to make 
of you. I know how busy you are, but your past kindness 
makes me bold to come to you. As the Dawns have 
been published we have received and read them greedily,— 
often reading them in whole or in part several times: and 
we have most surely appreciated them. Our hearts have 
been filled with love and praise to our Father for permitting 
us to see the glories of his plan, the mysteries of his 
blessed Word. We have loaned and given away books, 
tracts and Towers more than we could possibly tell, hoping 
that some hungry soul might find a feast. We tried to 
be zealous and faithful, but realize that we have made 
more failures than anything else. The Father has been 
so good to us. We were permitted to attend the St. Louis 
Convention and that was the beginning of better days to 
us. 

I am now about half way through a re-reading of Vol. 
III. Dawn. I did not realize that I was neglecting the 
Dawns, but I now know that I was. I have had such a 
feast, I cannot express it. I can only praise our Lord for 
stirring me up to the re-reading. 

You see that all these years I have been reading the 
Towers and the Bible and now as I re-read the Dawns I 
understand them so much better. Besides, at first I was 
not capable of grasping so much, all at once. If I knew 
the right words to say that would cause all Watch Tower 
readers to re-read their Dawns, I would write a letter for 



publication in the Tower and I would plead with them as 
they value the truth and their "high calling" not to neglect 
this privilege. I would not call it a duty, for it is 
above a duty, it is a privilege. So now, Brother Russell, 
that is what I want you to do, for you will know the right 
things to say. May the Lord give you the things he sees 
you need to make you perfect in his sight. We thank you 
for all your kindness to us. 

Mrs. S. B. Strate. -Illinois. 



Gentlemen:— 

I have read the three volumes of Millennial Dawn with 
much interest, pleasure, and profit, and am therefore anxious 
to know if any more volumes have been published 
since Vol. III., as intimated in its pages. 

[Five volumes are now out, and two more are purposed. 
Ed.] 

I should very much like to express to the author, the 
great spiritual blessing I have received from a study of 
these three books, fully believing that God has put them 
into my hands. I had been looking for light on these 
things for some time, and before hearing of these volumes 
I had already made some of their opinions my own. 
Hoping that God's blessing may still rest on your labours, 
believe me, Yours gratefully, 

, England. 



Dear Mr. Russell:— 

I received a copy of "Tabernacle Shadows" enclosed 
with a parcel of tracts. I am not able to express how much 
it was appreciated by me, and what a help it was to a 
fuller understanding of God's Word. Some parts I wept 
over, in particular, the verses "My Sacrifice," and about 
the scapegoat. I felt, indeed, the scapegoat more nearly 
represented me, but I am very desirous to be of "the Lord's 
goat,' and to be an "overcomer" by his grace. Sometimes 
I have a strong hope that I may be "accounted worthy," 
which gives me such joy that I can then triumph over 
every adverse circumstance, but sometimes I am discouraged 
by the difficulties of the way. But I thank the Lord 
for his loving favor in allowing me to know these things, 
and trusting in his merit, "I press toward the mark." 

The Watch Towers are my greatest help. I find them 
more so as time goes on, and the way seems more narrow. 
I have received several helpful messages enclosed 
with tracts from the London Branch, which are much enjoyed. 
I am still distributing tracts on Sunday afternoons 
when able, but cannot say much about results. I must 
leave them with the Lord. Several Christian people have 
appreciated them and wanted more, but many have been 
distributed at a distance, so that I do not see the people 
for a long while. But I feel that it is for my good not 



to see great results. His word will not return void but 
will accomplish that for which it is sent, so I can leave it 
with him. With love in the Lord to all at Bible House, 
with much gratitude I remain, yours in our Lord Jesus, 
, England. 



page 33 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. FEBRUARY 1, 1902. No. 3. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 35 

A Gloomy Outlook 35 

"Church Peril— Ground Being Lost" 35 

Water Again Flows in Siloam 35 

Zionism's Prospects as Seen 
by the N.Y. Tribune 35 

Zionism from a Literary Jew's 

Standpoint 36 

God's Message on Peace 36 

The Word of God our Spiritual Food 37 

Persecution Rightly Received 38 

Decision in Character Building 41 

Deacon Stephen, Christian Martyr 43 

page 34 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



ZION'S GLAD SONGS, 5 CENTS-POST-PAID. 



We have arranged for a new edition of Zion's Glad Songs, 
and propose to supply them at 5 cents per copy— post paid. 



HAVE YOU RESPONDED FOR 1902? 

We revise our memoranda for "Pilgrim" service yearly, now, 
as we find that a year is apt to make many changes in conditions. 
Do not blame us if you are passed by, if your Secretary 
has made no request for Pilgrim Visits. 

We find that some of the friends have refrained from requesting 
"Pilgrim" visits because they supposed they would 
be expected to contribute for his railway fare and also for his 
support. This is a mistake: the services of the preaching 
"Pilgrims" laboring under the auspices of the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY are absolutely without charge;-nor do 
they take up any collections. The Society pays their railway 
and all other expenses out of its funds, which are all voluntary 
donations, from such as are able and anxious to serve thus. 

All we ask of the friends visited is that they provide a 
parlor, hall, school-house or church building for the meetings 
and that they board and lodge the "Pilgrim" during the two 
or three days of his visit. We attend to all else. 

RENEW REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM-SERVICE, 1902. 

The Pilgrim routes are made out months ahead; so it is too 
late to write us, as some do, when they learn from last page 
that a Pilgrim is coming to their vicinity. If you desire visits 
write us a Postal Card (or on a card of that size) answering the 
following questions: (a) Have you regular meetings now? 
(b) How many usually attend? (c) Who are the chosen leaders 
of the class? (d) Did the class vote its desire for Pilgrim 
visits? (e) Are you able and willing to secure a suitable room 
for private meetings? (f) Could you arrange also for one public 
meeting? and what number could probably be gathered? 
(g) Where are your meetings held and at what hours? 

You can answer briefly, thus: (a) Yes. (b) 14. (c) John 
Smith and Amos Brown, (d) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) Yes: 100 to 300. 
(g) Bro. Jones' No. 614 First street, at 3 p.m. every Sunday. 

When you see a notice of a "Pilgrim Visit" near you and 
do not know the meeting address, enquire of us by Postal card 
immediately. Those arranging for "Pilgrim meetings" will 
please notify us early respecting their arrangements. If off the 
railroad, name nearest station and further conveyance. 



R2946 : page 35 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
A GLOOMY OUTLOOK. 



President Eliot, of Harvard University, takes a 
rather gloomy view of the future outlook. He says 
that "churches, courts and legislatures command 
less respect and have less influence now than thirty 



years ago." He thinks the church has degenerated 
into poetic generalities or to ritualistic pomp. He 
notes in the judiciary a decline in personal merit and 
in public estimation. "Legislative bodies," says the 
president of Harvard, "have fallen into popular contempt." 
But, gloomy as all this is, he does not despair 
of his country. While the years have been laying 
successive layers of black paint on the religious 
bodies, on the judges of our courts, and on the lawmakers, 
there is still one ray of light shining through 
the gloom. For meanwhile, the school has become 
more powerful, "and education is the one agency for 
promoting intelligence and righteousness which has 
gained strength in the last half century." 

"CHURCH PERIL-GROUND BEING LOST." 



Dr. George C. Lorimer, the noted Boston preacher, 
now pastor of the Madison Avenue Baptist Church, 
says the Protestant Church is in peril; that the dangers 
are from within, not without; that the church is losing 
hold on intelligent thought. In his Sunday sermon he 
said: 

"Every now and then certain things are said which 
betray an uneasy feeling as to the future stability and 
supremacy of Protestantism. 

"But whatever may be said of the gloomy outlook, 
it is not due, as many suppose, to the hostility of Romanism. 
The Papacy has its own troubles. 

"The present perils of our faith are not primarily 
from without. They are from within, and they are 
similar to those which endangered the standing and 
usefulness of the Galatian Church. 

"Romanism is dogmatic. She has come to the 
front as the champion of the Bible against the destructive 
critics, and as the defender of the sacred mysteries 
against the naturalism of the rationalists, while we have 
fallen into the cheap and idle fashion of decrying 
doctrine; and we fail to see that as we drift from the 
theologia sacra we are losing our hold on intelligent 
thought. 

"An additional peril springs from the present 
spirit of Protestantism. The peril is that genuine 
Christians may desire to make their churches centres 
of social influence rather than sources of regenerating 
power. Protestantism today suffers from worldliness. 

"Diminished congregations and depleted treasuries 
are other danger signs."— N.Y. Journal. 

WATER AGAIN FLOWS IN THE POOL OF SILO AM. 



"For over ten years the Pool of Siloam has been 



only a name. Visitors to Palestine who have seen 

this historic spot of late years have found that its 

healing waters have vanished. Just recently the waters 

of Siloam have been made to flow once again, 

and there has been great rejoicing in the Holy Land. 

It appears that Jerusalem has been especially short 

of water of late, and it occurred to some of the inhabitants 

of Siloam to try to find out whether the spring 

which used to supply the pool was really dry. Tons 

of accumulated rubbish were cleared away, and after 

about a month's work the spring was found. The excavators 

discovered behind some fallen rocks an old 

aqueduct running into the valley of the Chadron, 

and into this aqueduct the beautiful, cool, clear water 

had run and been wasting for years." 

ZIONISM'S PROSPECTS AS SEEN BY THE N.Y. TRIBUNE. 



"Has the Zionist movement any prospect of attaining 
its end? 

"Very little. It looks as though the scornful indifference 
of the intellectual and wealthy among the 
Jews were sufficient to promptly dissipate their co-religionists' 
dream of returning to the promised 
land. The latter, to be sure, have in their favor the 
greater number and faith, but against these are arrayed 
the rationalists, for whom the true Messiah is 

R2946 : page 36 

the French Revolution that brought them emancipation; 
the prudence of the rabbis, proclaiming that 
henceforth the Jews have no other country but that 
of their birth (declaration of the grand rabbis of 
France, England, Austria, Hungary, at the Congress 
of Basle, 1897); the money dealers, without whom 
nothing can be done, and who are not willing to exchange 
their banks, their industries, their palaces, for 
the barren and poor soil of Palestine; the politicians, 
for whom the integrity of the Ottoman Empire has 
become a dogma, and who would not permit a Jewish 
state to rise in the midst of the Sultan's Asiatic 
dominions. All these powers of the modern world, 
rationalism, wealth, politics, are barring the way of 
those simple minded, pious souls who persist in striving 
for a redemption of Israel, who dream of a 
temple other than the Exchange and who long for 
the promised land with all the ardor of the Jews of 
the Babylonian captivity." 



Just so! Worldly wisdom fails to discern some 
matters even while they are transpiring. The Watch 



Tower and Dawns pointed out the present Zionist 

movement from God's Word long before its founders 

thought of it. Ever since 1878, when Israel's 

"double" of chastisement expired, the land has been 

preparing for the people and the people for the land. 

In God's due time, and that soon, they will come together. 

Meantime persecutions in various lands are 

the prods, the "staff" of their Shepherd, to awaken 

them and direct their hearts toward the promises of 

which they are heirs.— Rom. 11:26-29. 

ZIONISM FROM A LITERARY JEW'S STANDPOINT. 



To the Editor N.Y. Journal: 
I am not a prophet, but it certainly seems to me 
that without the Zionistic movement, and without 
persecution from without, isolated Jewish communities 
have no sufficient seeds of permanence in a world 
whose civilization is already built up on Old Testament 
lines. Unfortunately, persecution is still unfailing, 
especially in Russia and Roumania, and fortunately 
Zionism is making great strides. Nineteen 
hundred and one will be memorable as the year in 
which the ruler of Palestine— the Sultan of Turkey 
—received Dr. Herzl, and will end characteristically 
with the fifth Zionistic congress. Every congress 
shows an augmentation in enthusiasm and in the prospects 
of what seemed five years ago to be the mad 
vision of a dreamer of the Ghetto. In striking the racial 
chord Dr. Herzl has struck the chord which rings 
truest, and there is no doubt the brotherhood of 
Israel contains the elements of a political force. When 
even America is beginning to exclude Jewish emigrants, 
there will be no place left for the sole of their 
foot but Palestine, and thus forces external and internal 
are beginning to coincide and work together 
for good— the evil force of persecution, the righteous 
force of Zionism. Faithfully yours,— I. ZANGWILL. 



R2946 : page 36 

GOD'S MESSAGE ON PEACE 



Psa. 34:14. "Depart from evil and do good; seek 
peace and pursue it." 

Heb. 12:14. "Follow peace with all men and holiness 
without which no man shall see the Lord." 

Rom. 14:17. "The kingdom of God is not meat 
and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the 
Holy Spirit." 



Rom. 14:19. "Follow after the things which 
make for peace and things wherewith one may edify 
another." 

Rom. 12:18. "Live peaceably with all men." 

I Cor. 14:33. "God is not the author of confusion, 
but of peace." 

I Cor. 7:15. "God has called us to peace." 

I Tim. 2:2. "Lead a quiet and peaceable life in 
all godliness and honesty." 

Jas. 3:17. "The wisdom that is from above is first 
pure then peaceable." 

Isa. 26:3. "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, 
whose mind is stayed on thee." 

Prov. 16:7. "When a man's ways please the 
Lord, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with 
him." 

1 Thes. 5:13. "Be at peace among yourselves." 

2 Cor. 13:11. "Be of one mind, live in peace and 
the God of love and peace shall be with you." 

Mark 9:50. "Have peace one with another." 

Job 22:21. "Acquaint now thyself with God and 
be at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee." 

Jas. 3:18. "The fruit of righteousness is sown in 
peace of them that make peace." 

2 Tim. 2:22. "Follow righteousness, faith, charity, 
peace with them that call on the Lord out of a 
pure heart." 

Col. 3:15. "Let the peace of God rule in your 
hearts, to the which also ye are called in one body." 

Eph. 4:3. "Keep the unity of the Spirit in the 
bond of peace." 

Rom. 10:15. "Preach the gospel of peace." 

Rom. 8:6. "To be spiritually minded is life and 
peace." 

Zech. 8:19. "Love the truth and peace." 

Prov. 12:20. "Deceit is in the heart of them that 
imagine evil: but to the counsellors of peace is joy." 

Psa. 119:165. "Great peace have they which love 
thy law, and nothing shall offend them." 

Psa. 37:37. "Mark the perfect man and behold 
the upright: for the end of that man is peace." 

Psa. 37: 11. "The meek shall inherit the earth; 
and shall delight themselves in abundance of peace." 

2 Peter 3:13,14. "We, according to his promise, 
look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness; wherefore, beloved, seeing 
that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may 
be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.' 

Rom. 14:18. "He that in these things serveth 
Christ is acceptable to God and approved of men." 



R2949 : page 37 

THE WORD OF GOD OUR SPIRITUAL FOOD. 



BY ARCHBISHOP LEIGHTON (ABOUT A.D., 1675). 

THIS IS THE END of the ministry, that you 

may be brought unto Christ, that you may 

be led to the sweet pastures and pleasant 

streams of the gospel; that you may be spiritually fed, 

and may grow in that heavenly life, which is here begun 

in all those in whom it shall hereafter be 

perfected. 

As the milk that infants draw from the breast, 
is most connatural food to them, being of that same 
substance that nourished them in the womb: so when 
they are brought forth, that food follows them as it 
were for their supply in that way that is provided in 
nature for it; by certain veins it ascends into the 
breasts, and is there fitted for them, and they are by 
nature directed to find it there. Thus as a Christian 
begins to live by the power of the Word, he is by the 
nature of that spiritual life directed to that same 
Word as his nourishment. 

Whereas natural men cannot love spiritual things 
for themselves, desire not the Word for its own sweetness, 
but would have it sauced with such conceits as 
possibly spoil the simplicity of it; or at the best love 
to hear it for the wit, and learning, which, without 
any wrongful mixture of it, they find in one delivering 
it more than another. But the natural and genuine 
appetite of the children of God, is to the Word, for 
itself, and only as milk, "sincere milk;" and where 
they find it so, from whomsoever, or in what way 
soever delivered unto them, they feed upon it with 
delight. 

Desire the Word, not that you may only hear it; 
that is to fall very far short of its true end; yea, it is 
to take the beginning of the work for the end of it. 
The ear is indeed the mouth of the mind, by which it 
receives the Word (as Elihu compares it, Job 34:3), 
but meat that goes no further than the mouth (you 
know) cannot nourish. Neither ought this desire 
of the Word to be only to satisfy a custom; it were an 
exceeding folly to make so superficial a thing the end 
of so serious a work. 

Again, to hear it only to stop the mouth of conscience, 
that it may not clamor more for the gross impiety 
of contemning it; this is to hear it not out of 
desire, but out of fear. To desire it only for some 
present pleasure and delight that a man may find in 
it, is not the due use and end of it; that there is delight 
in it, may help commend it to those that find it 
so, and so be a means to advance the end; but the 
end it is not. 

To seek no more but a present delight that vanisheth 
with the sound of the words, that die in the air, 
is not to desire the Word as meat, but as music, as 
God tells the prophet Ezekiel of his people. "And 



lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one 
that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well upon an 
instrument; for they hear thy words, and they do 
them not." 

To desire the Word for the increase of knowledge, 
although this is necessary and commendable, 
and being rightly qualified, is a part of spiritual accretion, 
yet take it as going no further, it is not the 
true end of the Word. Nor is the venting of that 
knowledge in speech and frequent discourse of the 
Word and the divine truths that are in it; which, 
where it is governed with Christian prudence, is not 
to be despised, but commended: yet certainly the 
highest knowledge, and the most frequent and skilful 
speaking of the Word, severed from the growth here 
mentioned, misses the true end of the word. If any 
one's head or tongue should grow apace, and all the 
rest stay at a stand, it would certainly make him a 
monster; and they are no other, that are knowing and 
discoursing Christians, and grow daily in that, but 
not at all in holiness of heart and life, which is the 
proper growth of the children of God. 

And as we ought in preaching, so you in hearing, 
to propound this end to yourselves, that you may 
be spiritually refreshed, and walk in the strength of 
that divine nourishment. Is this your purpose when 
you come hither? Inquire of your own hearts, and 
see what you seek, and what you find, in the public 
ordinances of God's house. Certainly the most do 
not so much as think on the due intendment of them, 
aim at no end, and therefore can attain none; seek 
nothing; but sit out their hour, asleep or awake, as 
it may happen, or, possibly, some seek to be delighted 
for the time, as the Lord tells the prophet, "to hear 
as it were a pleasant song;" if the gifts and strain of 
the speaker be anything pleasing. 

Or, it may be, they want to gain some new notions, 
to add somewhat to their stock of knowledge, 
either that they may be enabled for discourse, or, 
simply, that they may know. Some, it may be, go a 
little further: they like to be stirred and moved for 
the time, and to have some touch of good affection 
kindled in them; but this lasts but for a while, till 
their other thoughts and affairs get in, and smother 
and quench it; and they are not careful to blow it up 
and improve it. How many, when they have been a 
little affected with the Word, go out and fall into 
other discourses and thoughts, and either take in their 
affairs secretly, as it were, under their cloak, and their 
hearts keep a conference with them; or if they forbear 
this, yet, as soon as they go out, plunge themselves 
over head and ears in the world, and lose all which 
might have any way advantaged their spiritual condition. 
It may be, one will say, "It was a good sermon." 
Is that to the purpose? But what think you 
it hath for your praise or dispraise? Instead of saying 



"Oh! how well was that spoken," you should say, 
"Oh! how hard is repentance! how sweet a thing is 
faith! how excellent the love of Jesus Christ!" That 
were your best and most real commendation of the 
sermon, with true benefit to yourselves. 

How sounds it to many of us at least, but as a 
well contrived story, whose use is to amuse us, and 
possibly delight us a little, and there is an end?— and 
indeed no end, for this turns the most serious and 
most glorious of all messages into an empty sound. 
If we keep awake, and give it a hearing, it is much; 
but for anything further, how few deeply beforehand 
consider, 'I have a dead heart; therefore will I go unto 
the Word of life, that it may be quickened; it is frozen, 
I will go and lay it before the warm beams of that 
sun that shines in the gospel: my corruptions are 
mighty and strong, and grace, if there be any in my 
heart, is exceeding weak: but there is in the gospel a 
power to weaken and kill sin, and to strengthen grace: 

R2949 : page 38 

and this being the intent of my wise God in appointing 
it, it shall be my desire and purpose in resorting 
to it, to find it to me according to his gracious intendment; 
to have faith in my Christ, the fountain of my 
life, more strengthened, and made more active in 
drawing from him; to have my heart more refined and 
spiritualized, and to have the sluice of repentance 
opened, and my affections to divine things enlarged; 
more hatred of sin, and more love of God and Communion 
with him. 



R2947 : page 38 

PERSECUTION RIGHTLY RECEIVED. 

-ACTS 5:33-42-FEB. 16.- 

"Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' 
sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven."— Matt. 5:10. 



WE SAW, in a previous lesson, Peter and John 
before the Sanhedrin, and the subsequent 
growth of the Church in numbers and in the 
graces of the holy spirit, including joy and peace with 
God and with each other and with fellow-men. The 
Lord's blessing upon the apostles, through the gifts of 
the holy spirit, enabled them to heal the sick, and at 
the same time to declare that the work was done by 
the power of Jesus, whom the rulers had crucified; but 
whom God had raised from the dead, and who was 



now in heavenly glory, a prince, a Savior, a glorified 
High Priest, ready and willing to grant forgiveness 
of sins and the blessing of the holy spirit to those who 
would accept. 

For a time the chief priests and their associates in 
religious power, ignored the new movement and the fact 
that it reflected against them; but by and by they were 
aroused, and used the power at their hand for the arrest 
of the apostles; at the command of the chief ones 
the latter were put into prison. The account says 
they had "indignation"— margin, "envy." Thus the 
truth, in whatever way presented, has either a savor 
of life unto life, or of death unto death, according 
to the heart-conditions of those coming under its 
influence. In the present case the simplicity of the 
apostles, their earnestness in presenting their message, 
their power and kindness in respect to the healing of 
disease and casting out of devils, and their evident sincerity, 
had a right influence upon all "Israelites 
indeed;" but the formal, perfunctory Israelites, in 
favored positions of honor and affluence, were provoked 
to hatred and envy; envy because of a power 
over the people which they could not exercise; hatred, 
because of a feeling that these teachings were assailing 
and weakening their influence, and tending to break 
down the religious system which they represented. 

So, too, we see matters to-day in nominal spiritual 
Israel. The spirit of sectarianism is jealous and envious, 
and resents and opposes whatever is not in accord 
with it;— fearful of its own fall,— realizing continually 
the weakness of its own position. On the contrary, 
now as ever, the truth, presented in simplicity 
and under the guidance of the holy spirit, will appeal 
to all who are in a right attitude of heart, all Israelites 
indeed, all whose eyes of understanding are open to 
see the inconsistencies of sectarianism and formalism. 
Sectarian leaders in our day have not the power to imprison 
those toward whom they feel enmity; nevertheless, 
having the same spirit as their prototypes, they 
manifest it to the extent of their ability. For instance; 
during the "Volunteer" service in Allegheny 
—in which brethren and sisters quietly and pleasantly 
tendered tracts and booklets free to Christian people 
on Sunday— some of the modern Pharisees and Sadducees 
were envious, and manifested their envy as 
nearly as possible after the manner described in our 
lesson. Some of the preachers commanded their congregations 
not to take the pamphlets, and heaped abuse 
and scandalous epithets upon God's faithful children, 
whose only object in the matter was to serve his cause, 
and to feed his flock. A committee of preachers 
waited upon the city officials and endeavored to have 
their cooperation— to secure the arrest and imprisonment 
of the brethren and sisters unless they would 
cease to preach this "gospel of the Kingdom," and let 
them alone to continue their blinding and deceiving 



of the Lord's flock. They perceive that the truth is 
against them; against their positions; against their 
false theologies. They perceive that the truth has 
Scriptural support, which they cannot answer; and they 
fear lest it should "turn the world upside down," and 
that, in the melee, they would lose some of their dignity, 
honor of men and good salaries. As one of them declared, 
"My bread is not buttered on that side!" 

The city officials, desirous of being on good terms 
with influential citizens, called at our office, rehearsed 
the facts, and notified us to discontinue the work. We 
replied that we are living in the United States, and not 
in Russia; and that there is no law here yet, against 
giving men booklets, any more than against giving 
them bank-bills, if they desire to take them, and if the 
procedure is conducted in a quiet, orderly manner. We 
assured them that if there were any breaches of the 
peace they would not come from the distributors, and 
explained further that those who engaged in this Volunteer 
service were as truly preaching the gospel by 
the printed page as were those who taught orally inside 
the church buildings; and further, that the real objection 
was, that our friends were circulating the true 
gospel, "good tidings of great joy which shall be unto 
all people," while those inside the churches were deceiving 
their confiding flocks, misrepresenting God's 
character and plan, and withal reaping goodly rewards 
for their evil services;— whereas our friends, the Volunteers, 
were preaching the true gospel without money 
and without price;— seeking to educate the people in 
a knowledge of God and of his plan, as revealed in the 
Scriptures. The civil authorities readily saw the justice 
of our position, and there was no interference. Is 
not this a case of the blind seeing better than those 
who boast of having escaped from blindness? 

The Lord's power was wonderfully manifested in 
the early days, not only in the healing of the sick, but 
afterwards in the deliverance of the apostles from imprisonment. 
The angel of the Lord opened the prison 
doors and brought them forth; instructing them to 
proceed in the proclamation of the truth as before. 
The apostles and early Church at this time almost 

R2947 : page 39 

walked by sight; for, under such conditions, faith 
would be very secondary. However, we see that 
the object of this was the establishment of the Church 
upon broad, sure foundations. Subsequently the 
miraculous features were withdrawn, and are still 
withdrawn: frequently the Lord's people have been 
imprisoned and otherwise mistreated throughout the 
age, without any special physical deliverance,— even 
as the miraculous gift of healing also passed away. 
We walk by faith, not by sight; we can see the spiritual 
healings and casting out of evil spirits progress, 



but are not granted physical demonstrations; and if imprisoned 
or otherwise despitefully used, our consolations 
must be those of the heart, grasped by the arms 
of our faith. 

The next morning, on the assembling of the Sanhedrin 
(also termed the Senate), when it was found 
that the apostles were not in the prison, but boldly 
teaching as before in the Temple, the chief priests 
found matters more complicated; and fearing the 
influence of such miracles upon the minds of the 
people, they caused the next arrest of the apostles to be 
made with great leniency, bringing them before the 
Sanhedrin. Thus another opportunity was afforded 
God's servants to testify, and to the chief priests and 
rulers to hear a strictly gospel sermon; and the 
speaker failed not to impress the same points as on 
previous occasions. What an opportunity this would 
have been for honest men, Israelites indeed! What a 
blessing it might have brought them! But being in an 
evil condition of heart they were merely angered, embittered, 
"cut to the heart." 

Their words betray the source of their fear, when 
they said to the apostles. We have already forbidden 
you to teach the people, but instead of obeying us you 
have "filled Jerusalem with your doctrines" (teachings), 
and you evidently intend to bring upon us the 

R2948 : page 39 

ill-will of those who receive your teachings, by charging 
us with the blood of this Jesus. They feared not 
only for the safety of their sectarian systems, but they 
had a personal fear as well. And so we believe it is 
with the chief priests, scribes and Pharisees of to-day; 
they feel not only a necessity for supporting their various 
denominational structures, but, additionally, they 
realize that their personal standing is at stake. In 
proportion as what we present as the truth is accepted 
by the people, the ministers of the nominal churches 
are seen to be false teachers, false prophets, deceivers, 
who ignorantly or wilfully have woefully misrepresented 
the divine character and plan. 

However, if the chief priests, etc., had only understood 
matters better they would not have been so 
alarmed. They would have realized that the apostles 
and their teachings would influence only a comparatively 
small number;— that the large majority of Israelites 
were such only in name; drawing nigh to God 
in outward forms and lip service, but far from him in 
heart. The same is true to-day. The preachers of Babylon 
need have little fear that the true gospel will affect 
the majority of their hearers in the least. On the contrary, 
now, as at the first advent, only such as "have 
an ear to hear" will hear, can hear: the remainder will 
continue under the leading of their blind guides, until, 
by and by, both shall fall into the ditch of general doubt 



and unbelief here, as their prototypes did in the 
trouble which closed the Jewish age. Subsequent 
events proved that, altho' the apostles filled Jerusalem 
with their doctrine (teachings), a comparatively small 
number were ready and able and willing to receive the 
good messages, as the Apostle and the Prophet declare. 
-Isa. 10:22; Rom. 9:27. 

Gamaliel was a great teacher amongst the Jews. 
It will be remembered that the Apostle Paul, as Saul of 
Tarsus, was one of his pupils. Gamaliel was a member 
of the Sanhedrin, and present on the occasion of 
this trial, and his wise counsel turned aside the murderous 
intentions of the chief priests toward the apostles. 
His wise and moderate language draws our esteem, 
and it swayed fully those who heard him say,— 
"Refrain from these men and let them alone; for if 
this counsel or this work be of men it will come to 
nought; but if it be of God ye cannot overthrow it, 
lest haply ye be found even to be fighting against 
God." We must esteem these words as merely worldly 
wisdom, and their author not as an Israelite indeed, 
but simply prudent and, possibly, a just man. So to-day, 
we find men in the councils of the nominal church 
and in the civil councils who are broad-minded, wise 
and liberally disposed. This does not mean, however, 
that these, any more than Gamaliel, are Israelites, indeed. 
They are noble-minded, and should have our 
respect accordingly; but we are not to be surprised if 
we find that they do not accept the truth, and that they 
are not of the "little flock." We are to remember, on the 
contrary, the inspired word— that not many great or 
wise or mighty hath God chosen, but "chiefly the poor 
of this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom." 
(I Cor. 1:26-29; Jas. 2:5.) We would like to 
press this point, because we have found at times that 
some of the Lord's people who have received the truth 
themselves are more or less stumbled by the fact that 
they see good, honorable, noble people who seem 
to have no ear to hear the truth, and no heart to accept 
discipleship amongst the Lord's people under the terms 
of his discipleship— full consecration, even unto death. 
The number of wise, learned people who are willing to 
become fools, in the estimation of men, for Christ's 
sake, is exceedingly small now, as ever. 

The Sanhedrin warned the apostles to preach no 
more in this name,— the name of Jesus— and sentenced 
them to be whipped. Thus they would discredit the 
ministers of the new teaching in the eyes of the many, 
for then, as now, the majority of people were disposed to 
look to their leaders, and to accept their judgment as 
superior. It is well indeed that wise, true leaders 
should be appreciated and acknowledged and followed; 
but it is a lesson that all need to learn, that the 
Lord is the real leader and commander of all those 
who claim to be his people; and that while looking to 
leaders of ability for guidance and for help, all of the 



Lord's people need to look beyond the leader also to 
the Lord; and to have their senses exercised in respect 
to the righteousness, the justice, the truthfulness, of 
the advice and example of their leaders. 

REJOICING IN TRIBULATION. 

As the apostles departed, at liberty, altho' sore 
from the thirteen strokes of a three-tailed whip ("forty 
stripes save one") they doubtless remembered our 

R2948 : page 40 

Lord's words, "Blessed are ye, when men shall revile 
you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil 
against you falsely for my sake." So far from being 
cast down, their experience, because rightly received, 
made them stronger in the Lord. They went again 
before the people to teach, but in no wrong attitude. 
They did not threaten the scribes and Pharisees, reviling 
them as corrupt, etc., nor did they bemoan their 
fate, thinking it strange that the Lord should permit 
these fiery trials to come upon them. No; they were 
true soldiers of the cross; they knew that they had enlisted 
in the Lord's army for service, and not merely 
for dress parade. They realized that present lessons 
and experiences were under providential guidance, and 
would work out for their good. They suffered pain— 
we are not to suppose that a miracle was performed 
to hinder their feeling the lashes, else there would 
have been no merit in endurance;— but their faith so 
firmly grasped the situation, and the Lord's word of 
promise, that we read, "They rejoiced that they were 
counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name." 
The world is full of grumblers, and with good 
cause often; as the Apostle remarks, "The whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth together." But as he 
also declares, "We, who have the first-fruits of the 
spirit, groan within ourselves." The Lord's people 
are not to parade their difficulties, bemoaning their 
lot; on the contrary, they have the throne of grace, 
and the instructions of the Word of God teaching them 
why present evil conditions are permitted at all; and 
how and when and why the time is nearing in which all 
tears will be wiped off all faces, and there shall be no 
more sighing and crying and dying. Instead therefore 
of groaning before the world they should rejoice and 
show forth the praises of him who has called us out 
of darkness into his marvelous light. Our sympathy 
for the poor world without these advantages should 
so bestir us to tell them the gospel, that our own woes 
would be smothered;— partially forgotten. And if 
faithfulness to the Lord and his truth brings us extra 
hardships, as it did to the apostles, this, also, is a 
cause for rejoicing as it was with them. The Master 
instructed us that we should first have sat down 



and counted the cost of discipleship, so that thereafter 

none of the things coming to us as his disciples would 

move us. True, we may all have in our natural dispositions 

a tendency to repine, to grumble, to bemoan 

afflictions which come to us, even in the service of 

the truth; but as we become more and more developed 

in the heavenly character the Lord surely will expect 

of us that we shall gradually attain more and more 

to that standard which he sets for us; in which the 

trials and difficulties of the present will be more than 

offset, more than over-balanced by his gracious promises, 

and by the witness of his spirit, that all these 

things are working together for good to us,— working 

out for us the greater glory by preparing us therefor. 

The developed Christian will surely find himself counting 

present trials and difficulties, even tho' severe to 

the natural man, to be but "light afflictions, not worthy 

to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed 

in us." 

The record is that the apostles so rejoiced that the 
threatenings of the Sanhedrin were powerless to stop 
them from declaring the good tidings— they preached 
not only in the Temple, but in their homes,— wherever 
they had opportunity. And so it must be with the 
same message in all those who receive it now, as well 
as then. They do not need to be "called" by a large 
salary to the ministry of the truth; but without any 
salaries, and even with the wages of tribulation, stripes 
and imprisonment, they rejoice in the privilege saying, 
"He hath put a new song into my mouth;— even his 
loving-kindness." 

We must again call attention to the attitude of the 
apostles— their boldness and their meekness. They 
knew well the Lord's regulation, that his people should 
be "subject to the powers that be," and that they 
"should not speak evil of the rulers of their people;" 
and following this instruction we find that while 
stating the truth very plainly their words contain 
nothing of venom or bitterness or threat. No wonder 
that the people took note of them, that they had been 
with Jesus ! At the same time, in respect to religious 
matters they recognized a higher law, and that the 
same God who directed that they should be subject to 
the powers that be, had given them a message of peace 
and joy and blessing which was to be declared everywhere. 
They could not permit the civil power nor the 
religious power of their time to hinder their obedience 
to God in this matter. 

So it should be with us to-day; we are to be 
strictly law-abiding, speaking no evil of the government, 
nor of its servants: if God sees fit to permit 
them, that is reason enough why we should be subject 
to them. When his time shall come he will institute 
his own King upon his own throne, and we shall rejoice 
thereat; but meantime we can have neither part 
nor lot with those who defame the laws and defame 



the rulers. We may see various things which our consciences 

and judgment of the Lord's Word indicate 

to us are seriously wrong; yet we are to remember 

R2949 : page 41 

that even the poorest government in the world is far 
superior to anarchy, and our sentiments are to be always 
on the law-abiding side of every question. This, 
however, must not hinder us from defending the 
truth and its interests whenever they are assailed;— 
in love, and with the wisdom from above. If the 
Lord has opened a door of opportunity for us for the 
promulgation of the truth, and if, in his providence, 
the laws are favorable, we are to use the opportunities, 
and to protest against any obstruction of them— 
yet not with bitterness. (For instance, our appeal 
from illegal Postoffice rulings.) If special privileges 
then are closed to us, we are to submit, remembering 
that no power could prevail against us except as God 
would permit it. But, like the apostles, we are to continue 
to use our talents, our tongues, our pens, in the 
service of the truth, in making known the good tidings 
of great joy, wholly regardless of what this obedience 
to God shall cost us in the way of earthly 
interests. 

While touching this subject we urge upon all of 
our readers to copy the methods of the apostles in 
their quiet, forceful speaking of the truth. Rarely 
have we found much good to result from boisterous 
argument; and frequently it has, to our knowledge, 
resulted in evil. Those who seem to need boisterous 

R2949 : page 41 

argument evidently have not an ear for the truth, and 
should be let alone. If the Lord's servants adopt such 
methods they are likely not only to do no good to 
their hearers, but evil, and especially likely to do injury 
to their own hearts. The spirit of strife is not 
the spirit of the Lord: his spirit is described in the 
Scriptures as "the meek and quiet spirit," not the contentious, 
boastful, arrogant spirit; and whoever attempts 
to serve the truth and to spread it abroad in 
boisterous argument and boastful manner, is doing 
injury to the cause as well as to himself and his hearer. 

The truth was impressed by the plain, simple statement 
of the facts of the case, by men whose hearts had 
been cleansed by the truth and whose lives were irreproachably 
moral— whose conduct demonstrated their 
honesty, whose joy and rejoicing proved that they had 
in them the new mind of the holy spirit making them 
glad. It was by these manifestations of the spirit and 
power of the truth that the Lord was glorified, and 
that the hearers were blessed; and so it will be to-day, 
and we should order our conduct and words and sentiments 



accordingly. 

R2950 : page 41 

DECISION IN CHARACTER BUILDING. 

How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be 
God follow him, but, if Baal, follow him."— I Kings 18:21. 



MULTITUDES are in an undecided condition of 

mind, not only as respects the worship of God, 

and as respects their faith, but also in regard 

to the common affairs of life. They are not devoid of 

good intentions, good resolutions, hopes and ambitions; 

but these are rather vague and shapeless. Their 

thoughts, their intentions, have not crystalized. As a result 

they are making little progress and accomplishing 

little good, either in or for themselves or others. Even 

worldly people who manifest great decision in business 

and social and moral matters lack decision in religious 

affairs. 

The poet has truly said, "Life is real, life is earnest; 
and the grave is not the goal;" but the difficulty 
with many is that they have not even so good a goal as 
the grave would be. If they could even have that before 
their mind as an end; if they could even think of 
how they would wish to terminate their lives eventually, 
and leave some luminous foot prints in the sands 
of time that would be helpful to others and an honor to 
themselves, it would be very much better, indeed, than 
to pass through life with no aim, no wish, no thought, 
except to eat, to drink, to sleep, to gratify earthly 
tastes. We believe that it is even much better that men 
set their ambition upon money or fame or some other 
object, than to have no fixed purpose before them in 
life; yet money and fame and such matters end with 
the grave, and the Lord's consecrated people, inspired 
by new hopes, new aims, new ambitions, beyond the 
grave, have much advantage every way over all others. 

Nevertheless, even those who have been so highly 
favored of God that the eyes of their understanding 
have been opened,— that they have caught glimpses of 
the glorious things in reservation for the Lord's faithful, 
are frequently lax and measurably indifferent to 
these wonderful things which should induce them to 
zeal and inspire them with courage and strength. 
What is the difficulty? Why do they not accomplish 
more? The answer frequently should be that it is because 
of indecision. They should decide promptly, 
but they hesitate,— holding important questions in 
abeyance, and continuing to balance and to weigh matters 
which they already determined are right. They 



halt between two opinions; they hesitate to take the 
Lord's Word fully and entirely, and to walk boldly 
forward in the right direction, even when they clearly 
discern the footsteps of Jesus and the proper course for 
them as his followers. As one point after another comes 
up and is thus set aside indefinitely, the whole Christian 
course of that individual is stagnated and fresh 
duties and privileges as they appear, are stopped in the 
way by the muddle of mind which unsettled questions 
of years produce; thus indecision has more or less 
hindered them all their lives. By and by there is such 
an accumulation of undecided points and matters that 
they feel the case is almost hopeless, become discouraged, 
grow cold, indifferent, and perhaps fall completely 
away from the faith and its service. 

For all such our text is specially appropriate. We 
want to decide, first of all, who is our Master, who is 
our God; then, having concluded, we want to decide 
promptly that his servants we should and will be. The 
Master warned us of the impossibility of any other 
course being satisfactory, saying, "Ye cannot serve God 
and mammon." Attempt to do so will make us and all 
with whom we are particularly identified unhappy. 
Almost everyone will acknowledge that there is a Supreme 
Being, and that it is the duty of his creatures, to 
serve and obey him. The whole question then should 
be, not as to obedience and service, but merely, Who 
is our God? We see many of the worshipers of Baal, 
Mammon, energetic in their service, and we should 
feel ashamed if we who, by the grace of God, know 
the true God and his gracious plan, are not as zealous, 
as persevering, as energetic, as are the servants 
of error. "What manner of persons ought we to be?" 
We ought most positively to be committed to that 
which we believe to be the truth, and we ought to be 
most zealous in its service. 

A part of the mistake is in the exercise of a wrong 
kind of caution;— proper enough in respect to earthly 
affairs, in which we have to guard our interests 
against unscrupulous fellows; but out of place, impedimenta, 
in our dealings with God. This wrong 
caution says,— Do nothing, until you see how it will 
all end;— I must walk by mental sight at least. But 
this kind of worldly wisdom will not do, in dealing 
with God. He makes the rules by which we may approach 
him and progress in his favor. One of his 
rules is, that every item of truth we learn must be 
accepted and acted upon before we are ready for 
more. They that receive the truth in the love of it, 
will surely serve it with all the decision they can command 
and acquire;— piece by piece, as they receive it. 
They who on receiving truth balance it and ponder 
long whether it will not ultimately cost too much, thus 
give evidence that their love for the truth is not great 
enough,— that it is mixed with selfishness. Such must 



R2950 : page 42 

cultivate love of the truth until it outweighs all other 
things, else they will not be fit for the Kingdom. The 
Lord's charge against those who are about to fall in 
the present testing time, is that,— They received not 
the truth in the love of it— 2 Thes. 2:10-12. 

"CHOOSE YE THIS DAY." 

After Israel had reached the promised land, 
Joshua sought to bring them to such a point of decision. 
He called them together, recited to them the 
Lord's favor and blessing enjoyed thus far, and expressed 
himself in noble language, saying, "Choose 
ye this day whom ye will serve;. ..as for me 
and my house, we will serve the Lord." (Josh. 24:15.) 
So, dear friends, we who realize that the 
Lord has been blessing, guiding and sustaining us in 
the past, should come to a full, positive decision as respects 
our course of life. We should not be content 
for one moment longer to go along indefinitely, serving 
whiles the Lord, and whiles Mammon (selfishness). 
We should settle the matter at once, and for all time, 
that we will be the Lord's. 

The very fact of coming to a positive decision is 
a great blessing, and a great help in the formation of 
character. Every time we come to a decision, on any 
question, it strengthens mind and character and makes 
us that much more ready for another test— along some 
other line, perhaps. One decision for the right prepares 
the way for others in the same direction, just 
as hesitancy, indecision upon one point prepares us 
for hesitancy upon all points, and more or less stops 
our Christian progress and character-building. 

We are not advocating rashness— the doing of 
something without a reasonable, proper amount of 
consideration. But we are urging upon the Lord's 
people the cultivation of promptness, decision of mind, 
in respect to questions we have sufficiently examined. 
Some things may of necessity require pondering, but 
many things in life require no such delay to reach 
a proper decision. The majority of the questions 
which present themselves before the bar of our minds 
could be decided in a moment; and the less time we 
take in reaching a decision on such problems the better 
for us, and for the upbuilding of proper character 
in this regard. 

We need to have some touchstone, as it were, 
some matter which will help us to decide, which will 
enable the mind to reach a decision quickly. This 
touchstone should be God's will; so that to perceive 
the Lord's will in respect to any question would be to 
settle it— as quickly as discerned. There should be 
no thought of opposing the divine will. There should 
be no temporizing, no haggling to see what a thing 



would cost, once we discern that it is the Lord's will. 
There should be no further question about the rejection 
of any matter which we discern to be contrary 
to the Lord's will; no matter how enticing, no matter 
how much of profit or of advantage there may be 
connected therewith. 

Ability to decide quickly, and to decide always 
on the right side, what the Lord's will is, requires 
some experience and discipline; but the sooner we 
begin the sooner we will become proficient; the more 
energetically we set ourselves to know the Lord's will 
and to do it, and to show him by our promptness that 
we delight to do his will, the better and the quicker 
will we find our characters established on proper 
lines. 

There are many gods presenting their claims to 
us, and seeking our reverence. To some, perhaps to 
the vast majority, self is the most prominent idol and 
false god; to others it is fame; to others the family; to 
others wealth. But all these false gods are more or 
less related, and the one name, Mammon, selfishness, 
is appropriate to them all. It requires not a great deal 
of discernment to decide that none of these ambitions 
is worthy of us, and that the worship of our hearts 
and the sacrifices of life should all be to the true God. 

TO-DAY IF YOU SHOULD HEAR HIS VOICE, OBEY! 

The Scriptures appeal to us along these lines of 
prompt decision, and it is because these appeals are 
neglected, not obeyed, that many of the Lord's people 
are so lean and so undeveloped, both in knowledge 
and in character. Mark the appeal, "Today, if ye will 
hear his voice, harden not your hearts." The suggestion 
is that the matter be not put off for another day. 
We cannot tell how distinctly we will hear the voice 
of the Lord's providence speaking to us tomorrow. 
On the contrary, we know that even as we may become 
accustomed to an earthly call, or an earthly 
alarm, so that by and by it would cease to awaken 
us, so our spiritual ears become accustomed to the important 
messages reaching them from the Lord's 
Word. They will have less and less weight and influence, 
and will become less and less helpful to us in 
proportion as we neglect them and fail to act upon 
them. Does not this explain the fact that some who 

R295 1 : page 42 

have newly come into the truth, are farther along 
both in faith and good works than some whose ears 
were blest long ago? 

We are still in the beginning of a new year and 
a new century, and now is a favorable time for us to 
make good resolutions. One of these should surely be 
that henceforth we will cultivate decision of character; 



—that when we hear the voice of the Lord we will respond 
promptly. So that when we see a work of the 
Lord, which we have the privilege of attending to, it 
will be performed not only willingly and well, but also 
speedily. "The Lord loveth a cheerful giver"— a 
prompt giver;— not merely as respects money matters, 
as this text is generally applied, but in respect to all of 
our little offerings and sacrifices to him and for his 
cause' sake. If we would be pleasing to the Lord and 
grow in his favor and in nearness to him, we must 
bring our hearts more and more into the condition that 
he approves, that he loves, viz., heartiness, cheerfulness, 
promptness in every service we may render. The 
trouble with many Christians is, that they have not 
thoroughly learned what a great privilege we of this 
Gospel age enjoy,— in being permitted to present our 
little sacrifices and self-denials to the Lord, under 
the assurance that our imperfect works shall be acceptable 
through Christ to God. 

We have all noted with pleasure the wonderful 
success of that wonderful Apostle Paul. It is well, 
therefore, that we shall note that one of the chief 
elements contributing to the success of his apostleship 

R295 1 : page 43 

was this element of character— decision. Mark how 
this quality of his shines out in the statement, "This 
one thing I do," etc. He had only one real aim or 
purpose in life, toward which he was bending all his 
energies. He had cast aside all others as weights and 
hindrances, and as not being worthy to be compared 
with this one service, so high in its point of privilege. 
The one thing he did was to serve the Lord, to serve 
the brethren, to serve the truth. All other matters 
were secondary to this. If he could accomplish this 
one thing the results would be so blessed, so happifying, 
both now and everlastingly, that he could afford 
to count all other things and objects and aims as loss 
and dross and not worthy of comparison.— 
Phil. 3:7,8,13,14. 

This is the spirit that all of the Lord's overcoming 
people should have. All do not have this character 
or quality of disposition by nature; but in proportion 
as we lack, the Lord will reckon to us of his 
own merit to compensate, if he finds in us the spirit, 
the will, the disposition, to thus follow the example of 
Jesus and the apostles and all the faithful. If we are 
weak in this respect, lacking in this quality of decision 
and firmness of character, we need to be more alert, 
and to go the more frequently to the throne of grace 
to obtain mercy and to find grace to help. But those 
who are naturally weak, and who yet have tried this 
matter according to the lines here laid down,— who 
have sought to cultivate this principle of character and 
decision and firmness for the right, give abundant 



testimony that the Lord is their helper and that in thus 
following the directions of his Word and the examples 
of faithfulness, they have become strong in the 
Lord and in the power of his might. May this be a 
blessed year for all the faithful in Christ Jesus, along 
the lines of character-building, energy and firmness 
for the right and for the truth, as God grants us to see 
these. 

Let us not forget that it is just such a class that 
the Lord is seeking, to be the Bride and joint-heir of 
his Son. He is not looking for those who are perfect 
in this respect; for there is weakness along this line 
throughout the whole human family; there is none 
perfect in this or in other respects, none fit for the 
Kingdom by nature. It will encourage us, perhaps, 
to remember that the Lord is taking the weak things 
of the world and making them strong, and that in proportion 
as we submit our wills to his will we are 
transformed by the renewing of our minds, and that 
he thus works in us to will and to do his good pleasure 
in the establishment of strong, decisive characters, 
through the promises of his Word. To it, as represented 
in Jesus, he exhorts us to look, while we endeavor 
to run with patience the race set before us, 
trusting in him who has redeemed us and called us, 
and who has promised to be our ever-present helper 
in every time of need. 



R2951 : page 43 

DEACON STEPHEN, CHRISTIAN MARTYR. 

-ACTS 6:7-15-FEB. 23.- 

"Fear not them which kill the body, 
but are not able to kill the soul." 

STEPHEN may be acknowledged the second 
Christian martyr— for surely our Lord Jesus 
was the first. We must begin with the first 
verse of our lesson-chapter in order to trace the history 
of this worthy soldier of the cross. An emergency 
arose in the Church, calling for a force of seven deacons 
to look after various temporal matters, and Stephen 
was one of these seven, all of whom were chosen by the 
congregation, not by the apostles, as men of honest 
reputation, wise, and full of the holy spirit. This incident 
suggests to us the loose character of the organization 
of the early Church. It had not cast-iron rules 
and laws, except that the Lord, the Redeemer, was the 
Head of the Church, and that none could be recognized 
as members thereto except as they recognized him as 
their Savior and Lord, and made consecration to him, 
receiving his spirit, and recognized as of his appointment 



and of the holy spirit's designation his specially 
chosen apostles, as the authorized instructors of the 
Church. Aside from this, the necessities of each case 
seem to have guided: and yet, we may safely presume 
that in all the arrangements in the Church, as well as 
in the teachings of the apostles, the holy spirit directed; 
—for the benefit also of those believing on the Lord 
through their word, throughout the entire age. 

In a previous lesson we saw that a measure of 
communism was early established in the Church; but 
the incidents of this lesson clearly imply that it was 
only limited, and not a complete division of property. 
It was evidently the intention of the early Church to 
provide for the poor of their number who were without 
means of livelihood. Prominent amongst those 
provided for, if not the only ones, were widows without 
income; such at that time must have been comparatively 
helpless and dependent upon charity, since there 
were so few opportunities for earning a living, especially 
amongst women. 

We are not to suppose that there was any intentional 
partiality or neglect of the Grecian more than of 
the Hebrew women. Apparently it was unintentional, 
and possibly arose from the fact that the apostles, 
native-born, appreciated more keenly the needs of the 
native widows than of the foreign-born. These were 
all Jewesses, of course, whether born in Palestine or 
born in Greece. Up to this time the Gospel had not 
been sent to others,— Gentiles. No doubt there was 
some reasonable cause for the murmur. In any event 
the apostles manifested their honesty of purpose in the 
matter by promptly instituting measures for the correction 
of the difficulty. There is a lesson in this for 
all of the Lord's people: if difficulties arise, based upon 
temporal questions, likely to sprout a "root of bitterness" 
or to cause a schism in the Church, the proper 
course would be to throw the responsibility upon the 
shoulders of the whole congregation— to ask for the 
election of some of the number who could give the matter 
better attention, and see that all were justly dealt 
with. We are not to forget that in this as in other ways 
the Lord has clearly indicated that the Church as a 
whole is under his supervision, his care, and that it is 

R295 1 : page 44 

therefore proper that the general affairs of the Church 
be conducted by the congregation and not by one man, 
nor by a clerical class. 

No doubt some of those chosen for the serving 
of tables— the money collection and the food distribution 
—were representatives of the Grecian brethren who, 
knowing the peculiarities of the Grecian customs, would 
be the better able to see to the welfare of the Grecian 
widows. It is here that we get acquainted with 
Stephen, as one of the seven chosen deacons. The 



word "deacon" signifies runner, attendant, servant. 
The "elders" of the Church were more 
particularly chosen according to their Christian 
character and aptness to teach, while the deacons 
were chosen according to Christian character and aptness 
in business affairs. In both instances, however, 
the Christian character, the holiness of spirit and wisdom 
were primary considerations. So with the Lord's 
people to-day: those chosen to any part of the service 
should first of all be recognized as the best and the 
wisest of the number— the possession of a holy, meek 
and quiet spirit, of great value, being carefully considered 
—then natural abilities. 

In Stephen's case we see an illustration of the 
Lord's methods of advancing his people step by step 
in his service: (1) He was honored with a knowledge 
of the truth: faithful in his acceptance of it, and zealous 
toward the Lord, he ere long manifested these qualities; 
and under the guidance of the holy spirit, was 
chosen a deacon. (2) Faithfulness in this, serving 
tables, prepared him for further opportunities, and (3) 
we find him exercising the gift of healing and performing 
signs in attestation of his ministry of the truth; 
which implies that he had actually attained to the position 
of an elder in the Church tho' the apostles residing 
in Jerusalem, perhaps, made an unnecessary election of 

R2952 : page 44 

elders,— for they were all elders. (I Pet. 5:1.) Stephen 
was so full of the spirit of the truth and devotion to its 
service that he had the high honor (4) of being the 
first one of the brethren to follow the Master's footsteps 
in a sacrificial death. Here surely was an advancement 
in service and its honor that may well 
quicken and energize all of the Lord's people to greater 
efforts to serve and please the same Master. He who 
thus accepted the consecrated Stephen, and advanced 
him step by step in his service, is ready and willing 
to-day to take and use those who are similarly consecrated, 
and burning with heavenly zeal. He is willing 
to make of such burning and shining lights in the 
Church, if they in turn are willing to suffer with him, 
that they may also be glorified together in due time.— 
Rom. 8:17. 

Stephen's faith and power and opportunities for 
service came to him along the same lines as faith and 
power have come to the Lord's people since— whole-hearted 
devotion to the Lord, to his people and to his 
truth. "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted." 
Had Stephen been selfseeking and ambitious for honor 
of men or of the brethren we may be sure we would 
have heard little of him, unless, like Ananias, his approbativeness 
had resulted in his being made an example 
of evil-doing. This is a danger which besets every 
brother chosen by the church to any service. Hence 



the apostle's caution "Be not many of you teachers 
brethren." Hence the necessity that the Church choose 
for its servants only those of humble mind; and the 
need of care amongst these servants that they fall not 
into the snare of the Adversary, and after having 
preached to others, themselves become castaways.— 
Jas. 3:1; I Tim. 3:6,7; I Cor. 9:27. 

Stephen in preaching got into a debate with some 
of his day, and was more than a match for them. As 
we read, "They were not able to withstand the wisdom 
and the spirit by which he spake." We are not to suppose 
that Stephen was the greatest of all orators, nor 
even that he had no peers amongst those with whom 
he disputed. In this case the adage was well applied, 
"Thrice armed is he who hath his quarrel just." It 
was because Stephen had the truth, the right side of 
the controversy, and because God was with him, that he 
was more than a match for any of his adversaries. 

The same God is still with his people; and the 
Lord's Word, therefore, is still worthy of all acceptance, 
—"I will give you a mouth and wisdom which 
none of your adversaries shall be able to gainsay or 
resist." (Luke 21:15.) Do we not see this same 
principle illustrated to-day, when humble ones amongst 
the Lord's people are more than a match for all their 
adversaries? The truth being powerful, prevails, though 
it is not always acknowledged to prevail, even as it 
was not acknowledged by Stephen's enemies. 

We are not advocating public debating of the 
truth. We believe that debates, as a rule, accomplish 
little good; because the opponents of the truth are apt 
to conduct their arguments unfairly, deceptively— apt 
to strive for victory, rather than to strive for the truth. 
However, there are cases to-day, like this case of 
Stephen's, in which the opponents of the truth are the 
aggressors; and in such cases those who have the truth 
are not to be ashamed of it, nor fearful, but to trust in 
the promise of the Lord for words and wisdom for the 
occasion. We are not given a report of the discussion, 
but from what we know of Stephen's character, so 
well illustrated in the discourse subsequently delivered, 
we cannot escape the conviction that he spoke to his 
opponents in a kind, generous, reasonable manner— 
that he neither ranted nor stormed nor endeavored to 
throw a dust of false arguments. He had the truth, 
which is sharper than a two-edged sword, and we may 
be sure that he spoke the truth "in love," according to 
the apostolic command.— Eph. 4:15. 

Stephen's disputants were evidently of the Grecian 
Jews, and Stephen himself was also probably of this 
class. Possibly Saul of Tarsus, afterwards the Apostle 
Paul, was amongst those who disputed with him, as 
he himself tells us that he was a sort of ringleader 
amongst those who killed him. (Acts 22:20.) We 
cannot help wondering to what extent young Saul, the 
lawyer, instructed by Gamaliel, and an adept in logic, 



may have taken some lessons and caught some ideas 
from Stephen's reasoning— not enough, however, to 
make transformation of his career. 

It was Stephen's turn to be called before the 
Sanhedrin, that he might give the leaders of his people 
a gospel sermon, the basis of which was Jesus and the 
resurrection. His opponents, who could not down him 

R2952 : page 45 

in argument, were determined to destroy him; and, 

like other zealots, deluded by superstition, they were 

nevertheless influenced by their higher principles to 

desire to accomplish his destruction legally— that is 

to say, with a form of law. Alas, how many people 

now, as well as then, of comparatively noble mind, succeed 

in "deceiving their own selves" into thinking that 

a wrong becomes a virtue, becomes right, if to any extent 

they can wrap it in the folds of the law! The 

Lord's people need to have the spirit of the law, the 

spirit of justice, the spirit of righteousness: without 

this even the best balanced minds may be led astray 

under the pressure of zeal, superstition, or error. 

The doctors of the law and members of the Sanhedrin 
(Saul of Tarsus is supposed to have been a member) 
did not wish to be parties directly to the charges, 
nor to seem to be interested in the destruction of a noble 
man. They therefore procured others to give testimony 
that would be of the kind desired— testimony 
upon which it would be possible for their distorted 
judgments and consciences to render a death verdict. 
Strangely enough, the second martyr, like the first, was 
convicted of blasphemy against God and against the 
Temple, and without any more foundation for the 
charges than in the case of his illustrious Master. Of 
course the charges were distorted, and yet there was 
a measure of truth in them. Just how much allowance 
should be made for those who convicted the Lord and 
Stephen on such evidence is perhaps difficult for us 
to judge. Nor is it necessary, because the judgment 
of such matters is not yet put into our hands. The 
Lord alone knows to what extent the prejudiced mind 
was unable to discern the truth, and to what extent 
the Adversary succeeded in blinding the judgment, 
so as to make the light appear darkness, the truth appear 
error. 

Doubtless, as Stephen heard the charges against 
him, and noticed the advancement of the case, he mentally 
remarked the correspondence between these 
charges against him and those upon which his Master 
was convicted. We may be sure that some such thoughts 
were passing through his mind when his face was so 
wonderfully lit up with the indwelling joy, that it is 
recorded that all sitting in the Sanhedrin "looking steadfastly 
on him saw his face, as it had been the face of an 
angel." But even an angelic face could not move such 



hearts, some of the same, doubtless, that had sat in condemnation 

of the Master himself. Seemingly, Stephen's 

witness was fruitless, so far as his auditors were concerned; 

the same might have been said respecting our 

Master's trial and testimony. And yet, as the latter 

bore fruit on the day of Pentecost and afterward, so, 

doubtless, Stephen's testimony bore fruit subsequently. 

Who can say that that beaming and angelic face was 

not one of the "pricks" against which Saul of Tarsus 

had been contending for some time, when the Lord interrupted 

him enroute to Damascus? 

Who can tell that experiences connected with this 
martyrdom may not have been valuable not only to 
Saul, but to others? At all events, it was Stephen's 
duty, as it is our duty, to be faithful under all circumstances, 
under all conditions, regardless of whether 
appearances indicate the accomplishment of much, or 
of little good. We are to remember that the Lord's 
work is in his own hands, and that our part is to be 
faithful to him and to the truth, to the extent of our 
opportunities. 

The Editor would like, for himself and for all the 
Pilgrims, and for all the elders of the Church everywhere, 
and for all the brethren who speak at all, publicly 
or privately, in the name of Jesus, that Stephen's 
beaming face might be impressed upon our memories. 
If it is, and if every time we stand forth before men 
publicly or privately, as the representatives of our 
Lord, we could so realize his blessing and our privilege 
as his servants, that it would fill our hearts, and beam 
forth from our faces, in gladness, in thankfulness, for 
the privilege of serving, then indeed we would have 
the highest degree of blessing to ourselves, and doubtless 
also would bring the largest degree of blessing to 
all those whose hearts would be prepared for the truth, 
and also for those not yet ready for it, but who are 
under the Lord's discipline and guidance, in preparation 
for it, as was Saul of Tarsus. 

Our Golden Text is very appropriate in this connection. 
It is well that the Lord's people, especially 
when they come into trying positions on account of 
their fidelity to the truth, should remember these, the 
Master's words. Men may kill our bodies, or they may 
speak evil of them, or despitefully use them otherwise; 
but it is beyond their power to injure us as new creatures, 
or to ruin our prospects as respects the future 
life. That life which the Lord has promised to his 
faithful,— the resurrection life,— is beyond the power of 
man. It is the eternal, the invaluable life. If we gain 
it, no matter what the cost may be, as respects the present 
life, and mortal-body condition, we shall have 
made a great bargain, we shall have gained a great 
prize. All who really appreciate it see it to be a "pearl 
of great price," for which they, like the Master, are 
willing to lay down all,— to sell all that they have, 
that they may obtain it. 



R2953 : page 45 

God is able to kill the soul— able to blot out existence 
entirely— and he has threatened to do so in all 
cases of wilful deliberate sin, against full light and 
knowledge. This is a cause both for comfort and for 
fear. For comfort, as opposed to the false human 
teaching that the masses will spend an eternity of woe: 
for fear, lest after having tasted of divine goodness 
and learned of God's gracious provisions for such as 
obey him, any of us should seem to come short and 
lose our all— life! 

To have the proper course in life, to be able to 
meet the trials and difficulties of life as they come to 
us, and to meet them in the proper spirit which the 
Lord directs— in the spirit of rejoicing in tribulation, 
and counting such experiences all joy,— it is necessary 
that all fear of man, which brings a snare, shall 
be removed. And it is our Lord's direction that we 
shall fear Jehovah, and not fear our mortal fellows. 
The righteous are bold as a lion, as well as gentle as a 
dove, and meek as a lamb. This peculiar combination 
should be found in every Christian, and we doubt 
if it will be found elsewhere. 



R2953 : page 46 

"BETWEEN EVENINGS"-A JEWISH VIEW. 



Dear Brother Russell:— Allow me to express to 
you my deep gratitude for your kindness in supplying 
me gratuitously with the Watch Tower and booklets. 
I have not language at my command to convey to you 
how thankful I feel to our heavenly Father for raising 
you up as one of his honored servants in the spreading 
of the present truth, and trying to build up and 
assist those of the household of faith in their walk in 
the narrow way. It is proving a great blessing to me. 
I lay awake for hours meditating on the great and 
precious promises of God and the glorious prospect 
there is in store for those whom he has called according 
to his purpose. 

In reading the last Tower for Dec. 1st, I was 
much helped by your interpretation of "The Voices of 
the Three Signs," also with the typical meaning of 
"The Passover Lamb." But I can not quite understand 
what you mean when you say, "On the fourteenth 
day of the month it was to be killed between 
evenings (between six o'clock the one evening and 
six o'clock the next evening— the usual Jewish day)." 
If the lamb had to be killed on the fourteenth day, 



between the evening of that day and the evening of 
the next, which would be the fifteenth, it would have 
to take place after six o'clock in the evening on the 
fourteenth day, and that would not correspond with 
the time of the death of the antitype as recorded in 
Matt. 26:45,46,50; Luke 23:44,46; and yet the properties 
which the passover lamb was to possess, the manner 
in which it was to die, the effects which were to 
be produced, and the ceremonies which were to be 
observed, as recorded in the twelfth chapter of Exodus, 
have been fulfilled in a most remarkable and striking 
manner in the promised Messiah, Jesus of Nazareth, 
our blessed Lord. 

Having been brought up in the Jewish faith up 
to the age of 20, 1 always understood the matter to be 
thus: The killing of the lamb was on the evening of 
the fourteenth day, or more correctly speaking, according 
to the original, Bain haarbayim, between the 
evenings, that is, between the sun's declining west 
and his setting about three o'clock p.m. For the 
Jews observe two evenings in each day. The first 
commences after twelve o'clock at noon, and the second 
at three o'clock, p.m. Between these two 
evenings the daily evening sacrifice was offered up 
and immediately after the passover lamb was killed 
and prepared. But if the passover fell on the weekly 
Sabbath, i.e., on Friday, they began an hour sooner, 
that they might despatch their business by the time 
that the Sabbath began. Hence that day is called the 
preparation of the passover.— John 19:14. 

The Jews computed their days from evening to 
evening; i.e., from the setting of the sun of one day 
to the setting again on the next day. This appears 
to be the command given by Moses, "From even to 
even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath." (Lev. 23:32.) 
Moses, in giving an account of the Creation, says, 
"And there was evening, and there was morning, one 
day." (Gen. 1:5.) By the evening and the morning 
the Jews understand the same portion of time that we 
call day and night, or twenty-four hours; the former 
continued from the rising of the sun until its setting, 
and from that time till his reappearance was called 
the night. The division of time into hours was not 
known in the days of Moses.— Compare Gen. 15:12; 
18:1; 19:1. 

The day was again divided into two equal portions; 
from the rising of the sun until noon was the 
morning, and after that, until the sun had gone down, 
was the evening. Hence we read only of morning 
and evening sacrifices. Again, the morning and the 
evening were divided each into two equal parts, for 
the regulation of the morning and evening sacrifices 
and prayers. 

The morning sacrifice and prayer was allowed to 
be offered at any time between the rising of the sun 
and the third hour, i.e., 9 a.m., and the evening 



sacrifice and prayer may be offered up at any time 
during the first evening, Hebrew, erev katon, the 
short or lesser evening, i.e., from noon until ninth 
hour, or 3 p.m.; and from that time until sun 
setting, is called in the Hebrew erev gadol, i.e., the 
greater evening. It was between these two evenings 
the paschal lamb was to be slain, and so was Jesus, 
the antitype, the Lamb of God, who taketh away the 
sin of the world as recorded. 
I remain, dear Brother Russell, 
Faithfully yours in the Lord, 

J. Gronowsky,— England. 



page 46 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Dear Brother Russell:— I have been just a little 
tardy in sending in my offering to the "Good Hopes" 
fund; but I have desired to tell you how the Lord is 
blessing the efforts put forth by one of his weak and 
timid children. Praise his holy name, he has such 
wonderful power! About two weeks ago the pastor 
of the M. E. church gave me a conditional promise 
to take my name from the record. This did not 
satisfy me, and I requested a prayer-meeting at our 
home in the country. Yesterday a half dozen of the 
church members, including the pastor and wife, came 
out, and I had the opportunity I had long wished 
and prayed for. I asked God to help me to tell some 
of the good things which he has given me to see and 
understand from the Bible, through the use of the 
Key, which he allowed you to supply. Praise his 
name, he did help me boldly to tell of them. I was 
strongly criticised, but it was done quietly. Bro. U. 
again promised that he would take my name from the 
record, as I told him the Lord had given me assurance 
that it was his will that I do so. (Rev. 18:4.) 

Bro. U. once told me that he read Dawn fifteen 
years ago, and thought he burned it. He tried 
to persuade me not to read such books, saying they 
were the work of the devil. Yesterday he and his 
wife told me they had a set of "Dawns," and that 
there were many good things in them. I wonder if 
they secured them after my first talk with them. 

One sister told me of the influence of a talk I 
gave the Epworth League last year, when I was assigned 
to lead the meeting. How glad I was that the 
topic given was the Parable of the Draw Net! I 
tried to bring out prominently the idea that the Lord 
is not trying to save the world in this, the Gospel age, 



page 47 

since their time is in the future; the Gospel age being 
for the choosing of the little flock, the bride of Christ. 
So the sister said that on account of my influence 
they could not get any one to join the church. How 
I wish she was not too blind to discern the Lord's 
work! 

One of the friends to whom I had the "Tower" 
sent, has written thanking me, and stating that it 
was just the kind of reading she enjoyed. The Lord 
is pouring out great blessing upon our home, tho 
my brother is the only one who has come fully into 
harmony with the Truth. 

I pray God's blessing to rest continually upon 
you, and ask that you pray that his work here may 
continue to grow. 

Yours in the work of the Master, 
Jessie Ganson,— Nebraska. 



Dear Brother:— 

I am so glad to tell you that two or three in 

are becoming interested in "Dawn" writings. I took 
two Towers to a friend to whom we had previously 
lent some. He delighted me by saying, "They are 
always welcome." We then loaned him a "Dawn," 
and were told that he said to another friend that "he 
had a book now which helped him to sort it out for 
himself." 

A poor, old, but intelligent friend of ours was 
speaking in her parson's presence of what she had 
read in the Dawn. He said, "Have you seen them? 
Burn them, burn them!" He warns all not to be led 
astray by us. He lately got up a sermon on Hell, 
and had the town filled with bills. We, of course, 
did not go, and have not been for many months. We 
study our Bibles, Dawns and Towers, and get more 
good than we ever thought to get in this life. 

We delight in the Towers, and when they are 
read, count the days until the next one will come. 
And how we are longing for the next volume of 
Dawn, I cannot tell you. We can't keep the light to 
ourselves, but feel as though we must try to share it 
with others. Faithfully yours, 

Mrs. S. J., -Cumberland. 



Dear Friends:— Through the kindness of some 
brethren here I have been supplied with Millennial 
Dawn, Vols. I. and II, and have not the language to 
express the joy and comfort afforded me through the 
Divine Plan of the Ages, revealing more abundantly 
the inexpressible loving-kindness of our Heavenly 



Father. I have been an ordained minister of the 
Baptist church for ten years, endeavoring to enlighten 
the people and comfort the saints. In fact, I have 
spent my time and living in the work, and have just 
come to the understanding that very much that I 
thought to be meat in due season, and which I gave 
them, was but the husks of tradition. Imagine, then, 
the comfort, the joy, the consolation since the pall 
of gloom is removed, and I begin to understand the 
teaching of the Word concerning Restitution, etc. 

Some of my friends are getting alarmed; they 
think such exposition of Scripture very dangerous, 
and I desire to be fully prepared to meet their 
objections. Yours in much love, 

L. B. Pounds,— Alabama. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

Will you kindly give me some instruction as to how 
I am to answer the "world" when questioned about my 
Church? The people who know me ask why I do not go 
to church. I tell them that I belong to no man-made 
systems; that the Lord Jesus is my Teacher, and the Bible 
my Church; that Christ Jesus has set me free, and I 
belong to him, and to do his will is more to me than my 
daily bread. 

To this Churchianity answers: "So do we belong to 
him; and we assemble ourselves together to show the 
world that we love to serve him, and you do not." I can 
only make answer that my trust is in him; that I know 
he leadeth me, and that so long as I walk by the light 
he has given me I shall never be alone nor fall; and that 
by the grace of God I am called to be a witness to the 
fact of his presence now in this sick old world. Blessed 
be his holy name! I can not say that I belong to your 
church, for I do not even know by what name your church 
is called. Besides, I do not know if you recognize me as 
a sister. I can not say that I am a Second Adventist, for 
I know nothing about them, except that they are looking 
for Christ to come at any moment with an audible "shout" 
and visible "great glory," which I do not believe to be the correct 
view. 

I have found only four persons here that know anything 
of your publications; and they have only a vague 
idea as to the purport of your teaching. One woman told 
me she had been informed that Millennial Dawn and Ingersoll 
taught on parallel lines (Oh!), and her pastor told her 
to have nothing to do with it for it was "a dangerous book." 
Well, I sent her home with Dawn Vol. II., and a handful 
of Towers. She will read them and get a blessing, for 
she has "ears to hear." The second person, a man who 
has a set of Dawns, says that he bought them just to 
help on an agent, that he was a good (?) Baptist and that 
he could not afford to read Dawns, as he did not want to be 
called a crank. The third person, a woman, held up her 



hands, and cried out: "Oh, my! I am a Baptist! a Baptist, 
from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet!" 
Adding, "I suppose you are waiting to hear the trumpet 
sound." I told her the trumpet was sounding now, and that 
I was awake and conscious of every note it made. 

She stared at me, as though she thought I had lost 
my mind; and finally said she would read the Tower to 
please me, but as for the Dawn, it was "too much for her" 
(which is the literal truth). I gave her a few "Towers" 
and left her. A few days after her father (a preacher) 
came on a visit, and the Towers were bundled up and sent 
back to me. I long to point out Jeremiah 25:35,36 to such. 

As to my experience with "Babylon" at large,— I am 
laughed at and looked upon as a sort of harmless lunatic. 
My old friends, who have known me as a devout church-woman 
for years, are really concerned about my sanity and 
spiritual condition, because I do not attend church services, 
nor participate in their sociables, fairs, etc. And 
when I refused to have anything to do with the "Ladies' 
Aid Society" the climax was reached, and I am now a 
dangerous person to know. 

Glory be to God the Father, I rejoice and am "exceeding 
glad" to be counted worthy to suffer the least bit for "his 
name's sake." I know I am gaining knowledge, and I feel 
that I am growing in grace, according to his good pleasure. 
I have the faith, and, thanks be unto God, I have 
the witness of the spirit, by which I am exercised daily to 
do his holy will with joy and thanksgiving. 

Will you excuse this long letter? There is no human 
being of our faith near with whom I can commune. In 
that respect I am utterly alone. I feel that your great 
loving heart will respond to my call for instruction, and 
a word of encouragement. 

May his peace, grace, and love ever rest upon you and 
yours. Pray for me. 

Yours in the faith, 

B. L. PALING.-Alabama. 

[Answered by letter— and printed matter. Editor.] 



page 49 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. FEBRUARY 15, 1902. No. 4. 



CONTENTS. 

The Hopes of the Early Church 

Respecting Our Lord's Coming 51 

The Parousia First— The Epiphania 

and Apokalupsis Follow 56 

"The Morning Cometh" 56 

Further Obstacles to the Dawns 56 



Stephen's Defence and Execution 57 

Persecution and its Good Fruit 59 

How Tyndale's Persecution 
Resulted 60 

Deacon Philip's Ministry 60 

Interesting Questions Answered 63 

page 50 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

Every letter you send through the mail may be a more 
or less potent messenger of the truth, even on its outside, 
by the use of these envelopes. They catch the attention 
not only of those to whom they are addressed, but postmen 
and others have an opportunity, and often the curiosity, to 
read their message of peace;— the gospel in a condensed 
form. 

NEW SUBSCRIBERS AND OLD ONES. 

We welcome the lists of new subscribers now coming in, 
and greatly appreciate the zeal of the friends, manifested thus. 
We offer no "Premiums," preferring to have only such help as 
is tendered to the Lord by grateful hearts. They shall receive 
their reward in another form,— from the Master. 

But, however glad we are to get new names on our lists, 
we are still more pleased to have old ones continue there. It 
will be with pain that we will now, shortly, cut off our list the 
names of several hundred whose subscriptions expired a year 
ago, and who have neglected to send money for renewal, or 
request to have the journal continue on credit, or on the free 



list,— as the "Lord's Poor." 

We give all such this final notice; and explain that unless 
you state the matter explicitly, no record is made in our subscription 
books; and thus our list-clerk assumes that you have 
not been heard from and are either dead or no longer interested; 
and the name is dropped. 

If you sent us money and we received it, you get a mail 
acknowledgment of it. If any mistake appears drop us a card 
at once, explaining. If your paper ceases to come to you, write 
at once; we will be glad to reenter your name; but it would 
save both you and us trouble if you would express your intentions 
promptly when your subscription (whether cash, 
credit or free) expires. We desire that all the deeply interested 
shall have the journal so long as they live and it is published. 
We have no desire to force or intrude it upon any one. 



R2953 : page 51 

THE HOPES OF THE EARLY CHURCH RESPECTING 
OUR LORD'S SECOND COMING. 



SOME earnest and faithful Bible student has 
published a little tract treating the above subject 
so simply and beautifully that we feel constrained 
to lay before our readers copious extracts therefrom, 
as follows:— 

No one can read the New Testament with care 
without discovering that the members of the early 
Church were men of hope as well as men of faith. Indeed, 
hope seems, more than faith, to have been the outstanding 
feature of the character. Not that they really 
had more of this than that; the twain were one; they 
formed one noble edifice, one stately ship. But faith 
was the foundation work; hope, raised upon it, caught 
the eye of the beholder. Faith lay beneath the water 
line; hope reared the mast and spread the sail high in 
the sight of men. Their faith looked back to Calvary; 
but, in a sense, it was an act completed. They were 
not always looking backward; forward they peered, 
with steady gaze. The attitude of expectation was 
their daily, hourly attitude. Something was about to 
happen— someone was coming— and they are seen to be 
on tip-toe, looking for and hasting unto the event. 
To them it clearly seemed a consummation most devoutly 
to be wished. They constantly referred to it as 
"a lively hope," "that blessed hope," "this hope," "one 
hope," "our hope," "the hope of our calling," "the 
hope set before us." Every reference shows that it 
completely filled their hearts, and was the dominating 
influence in their lives. It almost diverted them from 
ordinary work and duty, the warning being required 
not to stand "gazing up into heaven." 



The hope thus cherished was not of a private kind, 
attainable by this believer at a certain time, and that 
one at another. It was one great hope, to be fulfilled 
to all the church, not even excluding them that slept, 
at one defined and selfsame time. "No prophecy of 
Scripture is of a private interpretation," and this hope, 
it is evident, was not to be fulfilled to individual believers. 
It was not a matter of personal and private 
experience; not the coming of Christ to the individual 
heart, nor the approach of death to each separate 
person; but something affecting the entire community 
of Christians at the same point of time. 

I. What was that hope which so controlled and 
cheered those early saints? None other than "that 
blessed hope, the glorious appearing of the great God 
and our Saviour, Jesus Christ." They believed with 
all their hearts in Jesus Christ, in his wondrous life 
of miracle and grace, and in his sacrificial death on 
Calvary's sad tree. They believed that he had 
triumphed o'er the grave, and had come forth to resurrection 
life. Many of them had seen him in his resurrection 
form, and had been witnesses of his ascension 
to the heavens. They remembered the words of the 
Lord Jesus, how he said unto them, "I go to prepare a 
place for you; and if I go and prepare a place for you, 
I will come again and receive you unto myself, that 
where I am, there ye may be also." They had heard 
"two men in white apparel" say, "This same Jesus 

R2954:page51 

which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so 
come in like manner as ye have seen him go into 
heaven." With simple faith they all accepted these 
great promises. The authority appeared to them sufficient, 
the meaning transparent. The Lord had gone; 
the Lord would come. He had disappeared from 
view, but only for "a little while," until the "times of 
restitution." When these times came, he would appear 
again, and each one seemed to say, "Whom I shall see 
for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not 
another." This was to them the "one far-off Divine 
event to which the whole creation moves." 

IT WAS THE LODESTAR OF THEIR LIFE, 

the goal and climax of their being, and round it their 
communion with each other, like their testimony to the 
world, continually revolved. 

Even if men try, they cannot keep this subject out 
of sight, so long as the New Testament is read. The 
late beloved evangelist, D. L. Moody, made the admission 
that he was originally much opposed to this doctrine, 
"until," said he, "from constantly meeting with it 
in the reading of Scripture, I was constrained to become 
a believer in it; and now it is, to my mind, one of the 



R2954 : page 52 

most precious truths in the whole Bible." One verse in 
every thirteen in the New Testament refers to it more 
or less directly; in the Epistles alone the proportion is 
much greater, being more like one in ten. In First 
Thessalonians it is fully one in seven, and in the Second 
Epistle nearly one in three. 

First Thessalonians is usually recognized as the 
earliest Epistle we possess. In our inquiry now it is of 
value, then, to note that the belief in Christ's return was 
a conspicuous feature of the Church to which it was 
addressed. In the opening chapter the apostle testifies, 
"Ye turned to God from idols, to serve the living and 
true God, and to wait for his Son from heaven." The 
second chapter ends with a reference to the prospect of 
meeting "in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at 
his coming." At the close of chapter three the prayer 
is offered. "That he may stablish your hearts unblamable 
in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming 
of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints." Chapter 
four finishes with the announcement, made by direct 
inspiration, that "the Lord himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, 
and with the trump of God." In chapter five the letter 
is brought to a conclusion with the prayer that they 
who received it may be "preserved blameless unto the 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ." 

In Second Thessalonians there are but forty-seven 
verses, yet in no fewer than fifteen reference to the 
Lord's return is made. The apostle declares "the Lord 
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty 
angels." He beseeches the brethren to steadfastness "by 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering 
together unto him." He speaks of "the brightness 
of his coming," and the "consolation and good 
hope" it brings; also he prays, "The Lord direct your 
hearts into the love of God, and into the patient waiting 
for Christ." 

First Corinthians is another of the older writings; 
and it proves that there at Corinth, as at Thessalonica, 
the Church had taken up the hope of which we speak. 
"Ye come behind in no gift," says the apostle, "waiting 
for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ." He tells 
them not to sit in judgment upon one another, but to 
wait "until the Lord come, who both will bring to light 
the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest 
the counsels of the heart." Above the table where they 
sit to celebrate the scene on Calvary, he writes the 
superscription, 

"TILL HE COME"; 

and over all the tombs where sleep the silent saints, he 
carves the sentence, bringing hope and joy, "Christ the 



Firstfruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming." 

Even when the apostle has to utter the dread 

word "Anathema," he straightway softens it with "Maranatha,' 

"The Lord comes," as though to let them know 

that, after all, judgment belongeth to another; men need 

not quickly curse their fellows. 

In the Epistle to Philippians the time of the Advent 
is repeatedly referred to as "The Day of Jesus 
Christ," and for it they are taught to wait. "He which 
has begun a good work in you will perform it until the 
day of Jesus Christ." "That ye may be sincere and 
without offence till the day of Christ." "That I may 
rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain." 
It is clear that the Philippians shared the apostle's hope, 
because he says, "Our conversation is in heaven, from 
whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus 
Christ, who shall change our vile body that it may be 
fashioned like unto his glorious body." 

In the Epistle to Colossian saints, the same glad 
note is rung; "When Christ who is our life shall appear, 
then shall ye also appear with him in glory." 
Everything in the early Church was made to hinge upon 
the coming of the Lord. 

To Timothy, the apostle Paul gives various charges, 
and he makes each binding "until the appearing of the 
Lord Jesus Christ." In view of the same event he 
shows that he can hold death in contempt: "I am now 
ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at 
hand; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of 
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, 
shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto 
all them also that love his appearing." 

To Titus, too, he makes it clear that, by this truth, 
not only is the fear of death removed, but life is made 
pure and beautiful, men "live soberly, righteously, and 
godly," "looking for that blessed hope." 

The Epistle to the Hebrews agrees with all the 
other apostolic writings. Repeatedly it speaks of the 
expected day. 

"UNTO THEM THAT LOOK FOR HIM 

shall he appear the second time, without sin unto salvation." 

"Consider one another to provoke unto love and 

to good works. ..and so much the more as ye 

see the day approaching." "Cast not away therefore 

your confidence. ..for yet a little while, and he 

that shall come will come, and will not tarry." 

The apostle James adopts the same appeal; "Be patient, 
therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. 
Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit 
of the earth, and hath long patience for it until he receive 
the early and latter rain. Be ye also patient; 
stablish your hearts; for the coming of the Lord 
draweth nigh." 

The apostle Peter makes much use of Second Advent 



truth. It is the vermilion and the gold with which 
he illuminates his precious manuscripts. To saints in 
suffering he writes, and thus he seeks to cheer their 
hearts: "Ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations, 
that the trial of your faith. ..might be 
found unto praise, and honour, and glory at the appearing 
of Jesus Christ." "Hope to the end, for the grace 
that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ." "When his glory shall be revealed, ye shall be 
glad with exceeding great joy." "When the Chief 
Shepherd shall appear ye shall receive a crown of life 
that fadeth not away." "There shall come in the last 
days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, 
Where is the promise of his coming? For since the 
fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were from 
the beginning of the creation. ...But, beloved, 
...the Lord is not slack concerning his promises 
as some men count slackness, ...but the day of 
the Lord will come as a thief in the night." "What 
manner of persons ought ye to be,. ..looking for 
and hasting unto the coming of the day of God?" 
"Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such 
things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in 
peace, without spot, and blameless." 
Saint John cherishes the same glad hope, and seeks 

R2954 : page 53 

by it to strengthen and to stimulate the Church. "My 
little children, abide in him, that, when he shall appear, 
we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him 
at his coming." "We know that, when he shall appear, 
we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is; and 
every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, 
even as he is pure." 

As for the Book of the Revelation, it really is the 
"Revelation of Jesus Christ," and is all about the 
Second Advent. In it we have the facts, circumstances 
and judgments connected with the Lord's unveiling, or 
apocalypse. "Behold he cometh," is the burden of the 
book; and there can be no understanding of the "words 
of this prophecy," if the coming of the Lord be doubted, 
or be lost to view. Again and again, in the midst of its 
mysteries, the Master's voice is heard crying, "Hold 
fast till I come!" "Behold I come as a thief; 

BLESSED IS HE THAT WATCHETH." 

"Behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, 
to give every man according as his work shall be." To 
this, the seer himself would have us all say, "Amen. 
Even so, come, Lord Jesus." 

It is well for us to scan the Scriptures thus, in 
order that, by line on line, we may convince ourselves 
what was the hope that cheered and edified the early 
Church. After a reading, such as this, there is no room 



for doubt regarding it. The hope they had was that of 
Jesus Christ's return, and nothing else can be maintained 
as answering to the language they employed. 

It could not be a spirit blessing they were looking 
for— a coming of the Lord into their hearts, for 
quickening and enlightenment; for such sweet spiritual 
presence they had never lost. "Lo, I am with you 
alway," he had said, "even to the end of the world"; 
and evermore "Christ in the heart the hope of glory" 
was to them a living, grand reality. They did not need 
a coming of that kind. 

R2955 : page 53 

Nor could they mean the destruction of the city of 
Jerusalem; and passing strange it seems that this should 
ever have been thought to have fulfilled the prophecy. 
What was there in this sad event to constitute a hope? 
It was a hope these men possessed! What had this 
city's fall to do with Gentile saints? Yet they, as well 
as Jews, were made partakers of the Church's hope. 
Above all, why, if the destruction of Jerusalem fulfilled 
the Scriptures relative to Christ's return— why was the 
coming of the Lord proclaimed, and eagerly desired, 
long after Salem's towers were in the dust? The Gospel 
according to John was surely written after that. So 
were his three Epistles, and the Book of Revelation. 
The testimony of the early Fathers is also to the effect 
that the hope of Christ's return remained, like a meteor 
in the heavens, long after Jerusalem was removed. 
Clement of Rome, in his first Epistle, written about A.D. 
95, says, "Let us be followers of those who went 
about in goat skins and sheep skins, preaching the coming 
of Christ." Ignatius of Antioch, about A.D. 100, 
wrote to Polycarp, "Be every day better than another; 
consider the times, and expect him who is above all 
time, eternal, invisible, though for our sakes made visible." 
Polycarp, in an Epistle dated about A.D. 108, 
said, "that God had raised up our Lord Jesus from the 
dead, and that he will come to judge the world and 
raise the saints, when if we walk worthy of him we 
shall reign together with him." Papias of Hierapolis, 
the intimate friend and companion of Polycarp, taught 
the coming of the Lord in all the churches that he visited. 
Justin Martyr, about A.D. 150, spoke of those as 
"destitute of just reason who did not understand that 
which is clear from all Scripture, that 

TWO COMINGS OF CHRIST ARE ANNOUNCED." 

Ireneus also, who flourished as a writer about A.D. 180, 
says, "The Lord shall come from heaven in the clouds 
with the glory of his Father, casting the Antichrist and 
them that obey him into a lake of fire; but bringing to 
the just the times of the kingdom." These men all, with 
one accord, waited for the coming of God's Son from 



heaven. They did nothing so ridiculous as to believe 

that the promises to that end were fulfilled when Jerusalem 

was burned. 

Nor was it death for which these early saints were 
waiting. Not one of them is known to have confounded 
that with Christ's return. In no epistle is death set 
before the Christian as the object of his hope. The approach 
of death, the enemy, can never be the coming 
of the Lord— his friend. It may be that the time between 
the hour of death and the morn of resurrection 
shall pass even as "the twinkling of an eye"; one moment 
may be heard the voices of earthly friends around 
the bed, and the next (as it appears) that call that 
wakes the sleepers in the tomb. But we must carefully 
distinguish between things that differ. Falling 
asleep is not the same as waking, though hardly an instant 
may appear to pass between them; nor is grim 
death the coming of the Lord, though no time seems to 
elapse between the two events. If it be otherwise, and 
the return of Christ means the believer's death, then is 
the Resurrection "past already," for that is always associated 
with the Lord's return. But against this heresy 
we are expressly warned. 

No; if Greek and English words have any meaning, 
those employed by the apostles and the Fathers, 
with their equivalents in our own mother tongue, all go 
to show that a personal and glorious coming of the 
Lord was what those men of God were waiting for. 
No other coming ever crossed their minds. It was not 
till the middle of the Third century that serious opposition, 
or even question, arose as to the doctrine of the 
personal coming and reign of Jesus Christ. "Now," 
says Mosheim, "its credit began to decline, principally 
through the influence and authority of Origen, who 
opposed it with the greatest warmth, because it was 
incompatible with some of his favorite sentiments." 

The English Baptist churches in their Confession 
of Faith, presented to Charles II. in 1660, said, "We believe 
...that the same Lord Jesus who showed 
himself alive after his passion, by many infallible 
proofs, which was taken up from the disciples and carried 
into heaven, shall so come in like manner as he was 
seen to go into heaven, and when Christ, who is our 
life, shall appear, we shall also appear with him in 
glory; for then shall he be King of kings and Lord of 
lords." Here there is quite enough to show what was 
the hope within them when the early Christians spoke 
with one another of the coming of the Lord. It was 
"the Lord himself"— for whom they looked and longed. 

II. The reason for such unanimity and enthusiasm 
in the entertainment of this hope must have been both 

R2955 : page 54 

weighty and worthy. The early Christians did not 
lightly hold it, and it would not be with light and careless 



hand they took it up. They must have had as cogent 
reasons for believing in, and hoping for, their Lord's 
return, as they possessed for trusting and rejoicing in 
his first appearing. Back to the first by faith, and 
forward to the next by hope, they looked, with as solid 
assurance in one case as in the other. These were the 
two pivots on which revolved their Christian life, the 
two wings on which they mounted up as eagles; neither 
pivot could be weakened, nor could either wing be 
clipped, without grave injury immediately ensuing. 
"Take unto you the whole armour of God," said the 
apostles, and we may be sure they gave as good reasons 
why the Christian should "take for a helmet the hope 
of salvation," as for his "putting on the breastplate of 
faith and love." 

The foremost reason must have been, that Christ 
himself had said he would return. The word of seers 
and prophets, of apostles and of angels, was of use; and 
these had all united to affirm that he would come again; 
but, after all, the Master of the House, rather than any 
servant, was the One whose word was to be heard. If 
he said, even once, he would return, that would be quite 
sufficient for the faithful heart. Already we have seen 
that many times the 

LORD HAD PLEDGED HIS WORD 

to this effect. He said distinctly, "If I go. ..I 
will come again." "I will come to you." "I go away 
and come again unto you." He spoke of himself as the 
"Son of man," who should "come in the glory of his 
Father"; as the "Nobleman" who "went into a far 
country to receive for himself a kingdom and to return"; 
as the "Master" for whose coming the servants 
were to watch; the "Bridegroom," whose appearing the 
wise virgins all would hail; and as the "Lord" who yet 
would come and reckon with the stewards of his house. 
In these, and many ways beside, the gracious Lord assured 
his loved ones he would come again, and they, 
with trustful hearts, just took him at his word. "To 
doubt would be disloyalty, to falter would be sin." 
Then, as their faith laid hold, their hope was born; for 
they soon found, wrapped in the promises of his return, 
as in a garment fair, all scented with sweet lavender, 
things rare and beautiful, that made those precious 
promises the richest heirloom of the Christian Church. 

The first thing they discovered there was this, that 
in the certainty of Christ's return there lay the guarantee 
—the only guarantee they had— that they would see 
their Lord. Some of those early saints had seen the 
Saviour when he stood on earth; but now his words 
were true, "You see me no more." Oh, how they longed 
to view him once again. To many of them the apostle 
Peter's words were more appropriate, "Whom having 
not seen, ye love; and in whom, though now ye see 
him not, yet believing, ye rejoice." But all the Church 



most earnestly desired to look on him whose love had 
won their hearts. There is evidence that at a very early 
date the words of Isaiah were appropriated, "Thine 
eyes shall see the King in his beauty." 

Apart from the Saviour's coming most assuredly 
there is no warrant given that these anticipations shall 
be realized. It is then that "every eye shall see him." 
No wonder that the early Christians "panted for the 
appointed hour." Then would be the revelation, the 
unveiling of the Lord; "the day of his appearing and 
his kingdom;" and till it came they could not be at rest. 

WE SHALL BE "CHANGED" AND "SEE HIM AS HE IS.' 

They also learned to say, "when he shall appear," 
and "we shall see him as he is," "we shall be like him," 
"changed into the same image, from glory to glory"; 
for "as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall 
also bear the image of the heavenly." This is a marvelous 
announcement, and hardly could we credit it, 
unless it were most clearly given in God's most Holy 
Word. For the assistance of our faith, it is even given 
repeatedly, and we can only gratefully accept the truth. 
The early Christians certainly did this. 

They believed that this "glad change" in them 
"which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the 
Lord," would be accompanied by the awakening of 
them "which sleep in Jesus." For their dear ones who 
were dead, as well as for themselves, their only hope 
lay in the Second Advent. They did not say, "There 
is no death; what seems so is transition." No, they accepted 
death as a reality. "We believe that Jesus died," 
they said, "even so," there are "them also which sleep 
in Jesus." "Blessed are the dead which die in the 
Lord." Still, they are dead, and Resurrection is required 
to make them live. Not by making light of 
death did they attempt to comfort one another; but by 
making much, yea, everything, of the sure and certain 
hope of joyful Resurrection, to take place at the coming 
of the Lord. He was the mighty magnet that would 
yet "descend from heaven," and as steel is drawn to 
steel, so they declared "the dead in Christ" would rise 
to him. 

They believed that that would be the day of their 
presentation to the King. By the apostle Paul they 
were distinctly so informed. In writing to Corinthian 

R2956 : page 54 

saints, he said: "Knowing that he which raised up the 
Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall 
present us with you." Until that day, on various 
grounds, they could not be presented. Christ would 
not even, until then, be King. So long as he was Priest 
within the veil, they could not go to him. The type 
forbade it: "There shall be no man in the tabernacle of 



the congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement 
in the holy place, until he come out." The Lord 
himself declared it: "Whither I go ye cannot come." 
"I will come again and receive you unto myself." For 
that day of joyful welcome to his court they had to 
wait. They did not dream of "going to heaven one by 
one"; they would "be caught up together to meet the 
Lord." They could not think of entering his glorious 
presence until they were "presented." They could not 
be presented until they were prepared and fitly robed. 
Not in the drab dress of this mortal body could they 
stand before him. "This corruptible must put on 
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality." 
But they believed that when he came this 
necessary change in their apparel would be wrought; 
and then should they be brought into the presence of 
the King in "raiment of needlework and clothing 
of wrought gold," "a glorious Church, not having 
spot or wrinkle or any such thing." 

That would be the time, then, of their triumph and 
reward. Sometimes when men die their friends 

R2956 : page 55 

affirm they have gone to their reward; but 

NOT SO SAID THE EARLY CHURCH. 

They could not; for the Lord had definitely named 

another time than that of death: "Thou shalt be recompensed, 

said he, "at the resurrection of the just"; 

"in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in 

the throne of his glory." "Behold, I come... 

and my reward is with me to give every man [then] 

according as his work shall be." The apostle Peter 

confirms that with the word, "When the chief Shepherd 

shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory." "We 

must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ" before 

reward can be distributed, and we are distinctly 

told it is at "His appearing" that this seat shall be set 

up. "Henceforth," said the expiring Paul, "there is 

laid up for me a crown of righteousness which the Lord 

the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day; and not 

to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing." 

He had no thought of going by himself into the 

presence chamber, and in some private way receiving 

his Lord's "welcome" and "well done." No! he wanted 

"all them, also," whom he had known on earth to be 

beside him then; especially those whom he had led to 

taste redeeming love. "For what is our hope, or joy, or 

crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence 

of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?" It is when 

the nobleman returns that he will call his servants, and 

hold reckoning with them. No wonder, then, that 

faithful men kept ever in their minds that great event. 

The coming of the Lord was not denied, nor lost to 



view, until, in later days than those of which we speak, 
the Christian Church had lost its zeal, and in sad, wanton 
ways was walking with the world. 

"Thy kingdom come," he had himself instructed 
them to pray thus, and they believed that till he came 
the kingdom would not come. Not for the gradual 
spread of truth, and the conversion of the world, they 
looked. ...They knew that all the purposes of God 
regarding men would be fulfilled, but they appear not 
to have thought of that as one. The Gospel must be 
preached in all the world, 'tis true; but they accepted 
Christ's own words, that this should be but "for a witness 
unto all nations"; and as James the apostle said, 
"to take out of them a people for his name." They did 
not vainly hope the world would better and yet better 
grow; they knew that "evil men and seducers shall wax 
worse and worse." They never said that things would 
so improve that the last days of this dark age would be 
its brightest and its best. "This know," said they, 
"that in the last days 

PERILOUS TIMES SHALL COME"; 

for wickedness shall be rampant even with "a form of 
godliness." With one consent these early Christians 
waited for the Lord. By his appearing would his kingdom 
be secured. 

Many members of the early Church were Jews, 
and for their nation's sake they wanted Christ to come. 
That day would be a glorious day for them, the time of 
Israel's repentance and recovery. Then "the rebuke of 
his people shall he take away from off all the earth," 
and from their eyes the veil shall be removed. "I will 
pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications; 
and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, 
and mourn." "And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this 
is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save 
us; this is the Lord; we have waited for him, we will 
be glad, and rejoice in his salvation." 

The thought of Israel's salvation at the Lord's return 
would make glad the hearts of the Gentile saints 
as well as Jews; for Israel's restoration, they were told, 
would girdle the whole globe with the glory of the 
Lord. "If the fall of them be the riches of the world, 
and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, 
how much more their fulness?" Then it is that the 
Lord, by his Advent, "shall set up an ensign for the 
nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel"; then 
it is, and not in this the Gospel day, that "the earth shall 
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters 
cover the sea." Then "He shall judge among the nations, 
and rebuke many people; and they shall beat 
their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into 
pruning hooks." 



Peace shall spread through all the earth, 

When the Lord doth come. 
Truth and righteousness go forth, 

When the Lord doth come. 
God with men shall then be found, 
Every place be hallowed ground, 
Life and beauty shall abound, 

When the Lord doth come. 

With such results expected from the coming of the 
King, it is no surprise that it became the early Christian's 
hope. Each member of the Church seems to 
have held it. A Christian who had not this hope was 
an anomaly. Milner says, "This constituted in the second 
century so decidedly an article of faith that Justin 
held it up as a criterion of orthodoxy." Bishop Newton 
says, "It was generally believed in the 

FIRST THREE, AND PUREST, AGES [CENTURIES]." 

Bishop Russell, though an anti-Millennarian, says, 
"Down to the beginning of the fourth century the belief 
was universal and undisputed." While Gibbon, with 
no prejudice either way, says, "It appears to have been 
the reigning sentiment of orthodox believers." He also 
adds, "It was productive of the most salutary effects on 
the faith and practice of Christians." Of course its 
effects were salutary! It disposed the Church to prayerfulness 
and patience, to purity and peace, to sincerity 
and soberness, to loyalty and love, to fidelity and firmness, 
to watchfulness and work. Solace it gave in suffering, 
and in bereavement balm; in persecution perfect 
peace, and even in the martyr's fire the Master's joy. 

Would God this were the Church's hope to-day! 
Only comparatively few within her bounds lay hold of 
it. The doctrine of the Second Advent is by most 
neglected, altho the word of God is full of it. 

When not entirely relegated to the lumber room, it 
is often held up to ridicule, and they who dare to say that 
they believe in it are treated as— well-meaning folk, 
perhaps, but— simple souls, and far behind the age. 
Well, some of us are quite content to be behind the age. 
Whenever it, in any matter, goes ahead of Jesus Christ 
and his immediate followers, we shall let it go. "The 
goodly fellowship of the apostles" is good enough for 
us, and on the subject now before us we are with that 
noble company. Simple we may seem to modern men 

R2956 : page 56 

to be; but it is the ancient truth we hold, the good old 
way we tread. 



THE PAROUSIA FIRST-THE EPIPHANIA AND 



APOKALUPSIS FOLLOW. 



As in the distance the various peaks of the mountain 
are blended so as to be undiscernible, so in the distance 
the various features of the Second Advent of our 
Lord were indistinct. But now is our salvation near— 
"nearer than when we first believed"; and we should 
expect that the holy spirit, which we were assured 
would bring truth to the attention of the Lord's people 
as "meat in due season," would continue to "show 
them things to come" as they would be due to be 
understood. And thus we have found it, praise the 
Lord! God's word is as a shining light shining more 
and more unto the perfect day. In its light we can now 
see that our Master will be present for a time, in the 
harvest time of this age— invisibly present doing a 
work in his church, before any outward sign or revealing 
to the world takes place. His work in his church 
will be the separating of the true from the merely nominal 
—the "wheat" from the "tares." His revealing will 
be in the "flaming fire" the great time of trouble with 
which this age will close, and in which the "tares" 
shall cease to be "tares": but before that fire can come, 
as the parable was given to show, he will be present in 
his wheatfield gathering the wheat into the garner and 
bundling the tares for the burning. 

Another parable also shows that before revealing 
himself in any manner to the world, he calls first his 
own servants and reckons with them. (Luke 19:15-27.) 
Ah! dear brethren what a holy awe it brings to our 

R2957 : page 56 

hearts to know that we are now living in the presence 

of the Son of Man; that now the "wheat" is being 

gathered and the "tares" being bundled;— that now the 

servants are reporting their use of the pounds and 

talents entrusted to them, while the world sees nothing 

and enquires, "Where is the promise of his presence, 

while all things continue as they were from the beginning?" 

Nor can any but the few hear and appreciate 

the evidences, or understand the Master's words that 

as the world knew not in the days of Noah, even thus 

shall it be in the presence of the Son of Man (Matt. 24:37) 

—they shall know not, and the ordinary avocations 

of daily life shall continue,— until disturbed by 

the commotion and trouble of the Epiphania, the Apokalupsis 

of the King in the pouring out of the seven 

last plagues— when the judgments of the Lord shall 

be abroad in the earth and the inhabitants of the world 

shall learn righteousness, and say, "Come, let us go 

up to the mountain [kingdom] of the Lord's house. 

He shall teach us of his ways and we shall walk in his 

paths."— Isa. 2:3. 



Think up the addresses of all your earnest and 
pious Christian friends and send them to us for samples 
of this issue; and if they are interested assure them that 
if they will request it, mentioning this offer, we will 
send them a pamphlet on "The Parousia, Epiphania and 
Apokalupsis of our Lord," free! Call to their attention, 
also, the still fuller treatment of this subject in "The 
Time is at Hand," 360 pages, 25c. or loaned free to 
all who promise a careful reading and to return it 
postpaid. 

"THE MORNING COMETH." 



"Lo! from his Eastern heights sublime, 

I hear the herald's joyous warning; 
Day's glory deepens; far upclimb 

The rosy splendors of the morning; 
See yon triumphant steeds of light 
Chase the retreating hosts of night; 
The valleys sing, the hills rejoice, 
And sounds aloft one cheering voice, 
'Tis coming. Yes, 'tis coming.' 

"Tis coming. Yes, our night of tears 

Shall fade before Immanuel's glory, 
Which now, to gild our earth, appears, 
Foretold in ancient song and story; 
Foretold in that seraphic strain, 
With notes which haunt our world again, 
For traveling through the shadowy years, 
The Just, the Merciful appears. 
Behold! the Lord of glory." 



R2957 : page 56 

FURTHER OBSTACLES TO THE "DAWNS. 



WHEN UNLAWFULLY cut off from the 
cheap rates for mailing the paper-covered 
Dawns, we did the next best thing, and 
availed ourselves of the special rates granted on this 
class of matter, in ten pound lots, by the Express 
Companies. Thus we have been enabled, up till now, 
to send the Dawns, in packs of ten or more, to any 
Express office in the United States at the rate of thirteen 
cents per volume. 

But now this, too, is changed. The Express 
Companies, finding us at their mercy; have adopted 
the same rule as the Post Office. Undoubtedly they 
would be willing to raise their rates on books and 



everything— just as high as Post Office competition 
will permit. 

In view of these facts, we have been obliged to 
increase the wholesale rates on Dawns. It may be 
argued that the increased price will make no difference 
to us, as the Dawns are sold at cost anyway; 
but we answer that our object is to put as large a 
number into circulation as possible— hoping that, by 
and by, they will be more sought and more studied 
by the masses than now;— and we well know that the 
lower the cost the more can be circulated. 

We propose meeting the issue by supplying our 
readers with the cloth-bound Dawns (prepaid to any 
part of the world) for twenty-five cents per volume. 
By having the binding done in very large quantities 
we hope to nearly get out whole; but if at a slight 
loss we will consider it money well spent in the 
wider circulation of the truth. 

One good result will be the better appearance the 
books will make, wherever they may go; another, 
their greater durability; and, additionally, they will 
appear more frequently on the bookshelf, and thus 
become the better known. Order hereafter in cloth 
binding. 

The retail price of Dawns will hereafter be 35 
cents, plus postage, 10 cents; but all Watch Tower 
subscribers are welcome to the wholesale rate as 
above. 



R2957 : page 57 

STEPHEN'S DEFENCE AND EXECUTION 

-ACTS 7:54-8:2-MARCH 2.- 

Pray for them which despitefully use 
you and persecute you."— Matt. 5:44. 

STEPHEN'S defence before the Sanhedrin Court 
turned out to be a defence of the truth, rather 
than of himself. Full of zeal for the Lord and 
for a proper use of his privileges as a minister of the 
truth, Stephen was courageous— seemingly to the extent 
of ignoring all thought of personal safety. His 
defence is not part of this lesson, but it is, nevertheless, 
worthy of consideration. It displays a clear insight into 
the past history of his people, and a clear appreciation 
of the lessons inculcated through their experiences. 
In a word, it gives evidence that Stephen was a Bible 
student— "a workman who needed not to be ashamed, 
rightly dividing the word of truth." Stephen in all this 
was a worthy example to the Lord's flock, the lesson 
still being appropriate. With us also the first thought 
should be the privilege of serving the truth, and if the 



will of God be such, the privilege of laying down life, 
even, in its service. A full consecration to the Lord on 
our part, and a keen appreciation of the truths of the 
Scripture, will ultimately make us courageous— not 
careful for the present life when weighed in the balances 
with the interests of the Lord's cause. But now, 
as in Stephen's day, such courage can only come from a 
knowledge of the divine plan, and the knowledge can 
only come through a right dividing of the word of 
truth;— and such abilities imply a devotion of time and 
energy to the study of truth, and the guidance of the 
holy spirit in the understanding of it. 

The charge against Stephen was blasphemy against 
the holy place, Jerusalem (and especially its holy Temple, 
which sanctified it), and against the law of Moses. 
Passing by the charges, Stephen went into a history of 
the Lord's leading of Israel from the time of Abraham 
down to his own time; and thus showed his full faith in 
the holy places and in the promises and presence of God, 
which made them holy. His familiarity with the facts, 
and the reverent manner in which he stated them, and 
the conclusions which he drew from them, must have 
shown his judges clearly that so far from being a blasphemer 
of Moses and his institutions and holy things, 
he was a firm believer in these, and a zealous advocate 
of them. So with us: when discussing holy things 
there may at times be those who, intentionally or ignorantly, 
will attribute to us evil conditions or evil motives. 
With us, as with Stephen, the best manner of dealing 
with such charges is to show, without ostentation, and 
by deeply reverent manner, that we are trusting implicitly 
in the gracious promises of God, and that we appreciate 
fully his various providential leadings and dealings 
in the past, not only as respects ourselves, but with 
all his holy people. Now, as in Stephen's case, the best 
answer respecting our fidelity to the holy things is represented 
in our knowledge of them, and in the reverent 
manner in which we mention them. 

Stephen rehearsed to his hearers the fact that 
Moses, the great Law-giver, whom they now reverenced, 
had at one time been rejected by Israel, saying, 
"Who made thee a judge or a ruler over us?" But he 
was God's agent and representative, and hence, in due 
time, he became Israel's deliverer. He reminded them 
also that Moses had said, "A prophet shall the Lord 
your God raise up unto you from among your brethren, 
like unto me." The lesson which Stephen desired his 
hearers to draw is, that as Moses was rejected at his 
first offering to the Israelites so the one like unto Moses 
would, like him, be rejected— had been rejected, in the 
person of Jesus. Nevertheless, as Moses subsequently 
became the leader and commander of the people, and 
delivered them, so also Jesus would in due time become 
the great deliverer of his people,— at his second advent. 
He pointed further to the fact that the prophets all 
down through the Jewish age had been refused by the 



people in the time of their presence and ministry with 

R2958 : page 57 

them, many of them being foully dealt with; but nevertheless 
subsequently they were discerned to have been 
the Lord's representatives. Stephen would have his 
hearers recognize Christ as the great prophet, whom 
God had set forth to be the instructor of the people. We 
see no attempt to defend himself, except by showing up 
the truth. He evidently relied upon his course of conduct 
and teaching corroborating the history which he 
was now delineating. Let us also, in our intercourse 
with others whom we would lead into the truth, pay less 
attention to self-defence than to a presentation of the 
divine Word. As the Apostle declares, the sword of 
the spirit, the Word of God, is sharper than any two-edged 
sword. -Heb. 4:12. 

About this time, apparently, some manifestation of 
impatience on the part of the Court caused Stephen to 
hasten to his conclusions abruptly, saying, "Ye stiff-necked 
and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always 
resist the holy spirit; as your fathers did so do ye. 
Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted, 
and they have slain them which showed before 
the coming of the Just One; of whom ye have been now 
the betrayers and murderers; who have received the 
law by the dispensation of angels, and have not kept it." 
(Vss. 51-53.) It is not necessary to suppose that these 
simple, true words were uttered in any harsh tone or 
strifeful manner; for everything about Stephen's attitude 
seems to imply gentleness, forbearance, love. It 
was the truth, and it was the right time to tell it. He 
evidently knew what was likely to be the result anyway, 
and wished to give his testimony, that as those who 
had foretold the just one had been killed it was no more 
remarkable that those who afterward bore witness to 
him should be killed also. 

His persecutors were thwarted; their attempt to 
traduce him and show him an enemy of the Lord, of the 
nation, and of the law, had abundantly failed. He stood 
before the Sanhedrin a great teacher, reproving them, 
and showing from their own Scriptural records that 
they were now intent on doing toward him as their 
fathers had done toward the Lord's faithful in every 
age. His hearers were "cut to the heart." This expression 
reminds us of the record (Acts 2:37) of those 
who heard Peter preach on the same theme— they were 
"pricked to the heart." But people can be pricked to 
the heart, and yet have very different results follow. 
Much will depend upon what is in the heart when it is 
pricked. If it be good the results will be good; if it be 
evil the results will be evil. Out of the abundance of 

R2958 : page 58 



the heart the mouth speaks, and the course of action is 
guided. These men were in a wicked condition of heart, 
and the truths uttered by Stephen were to them stings, 
rebukes, arousing their hatred to a pitch of frenzy— 
"they gnashed on him with their teeth." 

Undaunted by their manifestations of hatred and 
malice, Stephen was so filled with an appreciation of the 
Lord's goodness, and of his being a servant of the truth, 
that he was all aglow with interest in his theme, and his 
face illuminated with an angelic expression, such as the 
truth only can impart. It was then that looking away 
from his own surroundings— away from his enemies' 
faces— he was granted a glimpse of the Lord at the 
right hand of the Father. Whether it was a mental 
vision, such as any of us can awaken in our minds, such 
as the Apostle referred to when he said that we should 
be continually "looking unto Jesus, the author and 
finisher of our faith," or whether it was actually a 
vision granted to Stephen at this particular time, we 
know not;— most probably it was a vision. 

He of course did not see in reality what he described, 
as that would be an impossibility;— "No man 
hath seen God at any time," and the Only Begotten of 
the Father is now the express image of his person, and 
he also would be invisible to humanity; even the light 
of his glory would have smitten Stephen down, as it 
smote Saul of Tarsus a short time afterward. But that 
Stephen should have had a vision or revelation of his 
Master and his high exaltation is entirely reasonable; 
he told what he saw, and this furnished the occasion of 
his death. His adversaries could have found nothing 
against him in anything he had said, or that any witness 
could have proved, but now, affecting great indignation 
at the thought that Jesus, whom they had crucified, 
Jesus the imposter, had become exalted to heavenly 
glory, next to Jehovah himself— this furnished an opportunity 
for the claim that Stephen was a blasphemer, 
and therefore ought to be stoned to death. All being 
in a wrong attitude of heart, the same impulse affected 
all, and they rushed upon the faithful servant of the 
truth, pushing him out of the city to a secluded spot, 
where they stoned him to death. Let us likewise be 
faithful to the Lord, and we also shall have revelations 
of our Lord's glory— not, probably, visions or dreams, 
but such mental pictures as are clearly delineated before 
us in God's Word, which now is commonly in the hands 
of his people; and under the leadings of the holy spirit 
reveals to us the deep things of God which human eyes 
have not seen nor ears heard.— I Cor. 2:10,13. 

The stoning of Stephen would seem to have been a 
violation of the Roman law. The Mosaic law, indeed, 
commanded stoning as a penalty for blasphemy; but 
from the time the Romans took possession of the country 
they seem to have decreed that life could not be 
taken in any legal form except that of the Roman law; 
but Stephen's enemies were so enraged that they were 



evidently willing to risk some personal injury rather 
than be defeated in their purpose of destroying their 
enemy, whom they could not match with Scripture or 
logic. 

The Lord's servants to day are in no particular 
danger of being stoned to death after the same manner; 
but the majority of them have had experiences, nevertheless, 
which in many respects correspond. False representations, 
anger, malice, hatred, strife, etc., hurled 
against the Lord's people, are often hard to bear; and 
yet all those who receive such figurative stoning in the 
same manner that Stephen received his literal stoning, 
are sure to be greatly blessed. They find that although 
such experiences are severe as respects the flesh, they 
are nevertheless helpful, profitable, as respects the new 
nature. They thus demonstrate the truth of the 
Apostle's statement, "The outward man perisheth, but 
the inward man is renewed day by day,"— by just such 
experiences rightly received. 

It is here that attention is drawn to the fact that 
Saul of Tarsus was probably a member of the Sanhedrin, 
which tried Stephen, and surely one of those 
who consented to his death;— standing guard over the 
outer garments of those who executed the will of the 
Sanhedrin, in doing the actual stoning. He refers to 
the matter himself subsequently, in contrite language. 
(Acts 22:20.) Let us have hope, therefore, that some 
of those who today assault us, because of loyalty to 
the Lord and his Word, may yet be amongst those who 
will penitently acknowledge the error of their ways. Indeed, 
a number of instances of this kind have occurred; 
a number of those who are now deeply interested in 
present truth at one time were so bitterly opposed that 
they burned the publications which represent these 
truths, and gloried in the deed. It shows us, too, how 
God looks at the heart, and teaches us that some who 
are not bad at heart may at times be so blinded by 
prejudice that light appears darkness to them and darkness 
light. 

Stephen's attitude in receiving his persecution was 
most noble. He prayed for himself and for his enemies 
—that the latter might be forgiven, so far as he was 
concerned;— they will have enough to answer for and 
to receive "stripes" or just retribution. For himself, 
that the Lord would receive his spirit. There has been 
some query as to what would be implied in this expression, 
"Receive my spirit." We have already shown* 
that the primary sense of the word spirit is energy or 
"life," and that the spirit, energy or life, of all flesh was forfeited 
through sin; but that believers, recognizing the 
fact that Christ has died for our sins, recognizing the 
fact also that whosoever accepts Christ, as his Redeemer, 
receives through him a new right to life— that to 
such the spirit of life is no longer reckoned as forfeited, 
but reckoned as being restored to them again,— and 
that unto eternal life, if they are faithful. Not that 



Christians are privileged to retain their hold upon the 

spirit of life now, and thus avoid dying, but that God 

has promised us, through his Word, that he who has 

the Son has life— has received back again by faith 

through him a future right to life, to be fully attained 

through a resurrection. Nevertheless, it is explained to 

us that "our life is hid with Christ in God," and will 

not be ours until "he who is our life shall appear" at his 

Second advent,— and grant, according to the Father's 

plan, new or resurrection bodies to his people. (Col. 3:3,4.) 

Stephen meant to express to the Lord his confidence, 

his trust, in a future life through a resurrection, 

when he made this expression, "Lord Jesus, receive 

my spirit"— receive my life, preserve my life, that 

it may be granted to me again in the resurrection, according 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. V., Chap. 13. 

R2958 : page 59 

to thy gracious promise: I commit my all to 
thee, in hope. 

Stephen's attitude under persecution may well commend 
itself to us: our love for the Lord and our benevolent 
sympathy with all the gracious features of his 
plan should lift us above any and everything like vindictiveness 
or spitefulness against our enemies; and 
should permit us to see that their mistreatment of us, 
is largely because they are blind to the truth. They 
know not us, even as they knew not the Lord; and, as 
he said, if they called the Master of the house Beelzebub, 
and said all manner of evil against him falsely, we 
must not be surprised if the same should be our lot. 
We know, therefore, to count it all joy when we fall 
into such matters; and should rejoice that we are 
counted worthy of a share with the Lord in the trials 
and difficulties of this present time, that in due time we 

R2959 : page 59 

may be made partakers also of the glory to follow. With 
us also the one thought should be the pleasing of our 
Lord and the attainment, through him, of the life everlasting 
—having him to care for our spirit of life, and 
to revive us again in the resurrection in due time. 

"HE FELL ASLEEP." 

In the midst of his prayer he fell asleep— he died. 
Commenting on these words an "orthodox" writer 
says: "Tho the pagan authors sometimes used sleep 
to signify death, it was only a poetic figure. When 
Christ, on the other hand, said, 'Our friend, Lazarus, 
sleepeth,' he used the word, not as a figure but as an expression 



of a fact. In that mystery of death in which 
the pagan saw only nothingness, Jesus saw continued 
life, rest, waking— the elements which enter into sleep. 
And thus in Christian speech and thought, as the doctrine 
of the resurrection struck its roots deeper, the 
word 'dead,' with its hopeless finality, gave place to the 
more gracious and hopeful word, 'sleep.' The pagans' 
burying place carried in its name no suggestion of hope 
or comfort. It was a burying place, a hiding place, 
monumentum, a mere memorial of something gone; 
...but the Christian thought of death as sleep 
brought with it, in the Christian speech, the kindred 
thought of a chamber of rest, and embodied it in the 
word cemetery— the place to lie down to sleep"— 
Word Studies. 

Throughout the Scriptures the word "sleep" is frequently 
used as a synonym for death— but only in view 
of the hoped-for awakening— the resurrection. It was 
because Abraham and his posterity believed God that 
he was able to raise them up from the dead, and that 
his agreement so to do was implied in the promise that 
all the families of the earth should be blessed, that it 
was impossible for them to think of their departed ones 
as being totally extinct in death;— from that time onward 
sleep, as a synonym of death, became common 
amongst those who waited for the consolation of Israel. 
And in New Testament times, in harmony with our 
Lord's declaration, "The maid is not dead, but sleepeth," 
and again, "Lazarus sleepeth," etc., we have the 
term sleep commonly used amongst the followers of 
Jesus in the various New Testament writings. (See 
Matt. 9:24; John 11:11.) Many, however, who use the 
term sleep, and who place it upon the tombstones in 
their cemeteries, overlook entirely the fact that it implies 
that the sleeping one is unconscious, that he will 
not be conscious until the waking time, the resurrection. 
The figure is a beautiful one, viewed from the 
right standpoint, the standpoint of divine revelation, 
which shows us the blessings of mankind, restitution, 
which are to be expected as soon as the morning of the 
new Millennial day shall have been fully ushered in. 

Doubtless there were many who considered the 
martyrdom of Stephen a great calamity to the Church, 
a great loss of influence; a cutting off of one of the 
ablest exponents of the gospel. But we are not sure 
that they took a correct view. Viewed from God's 
standpoint, quite possibly the testimony which Stephen 
gave at the close of his life was a most beneficial one; 
first in its influence upon the believers, in teaching them 
by precept and example faithfulness, even unto death; 
and that the Lord's people could die as they lived,— 
joyful through the faith that is in Christ. His death 
also probably bore a valuable witness to some of his 
enemies. Quite possibly the Apostle Paul's first favorable 
impressions toward Christianity were received 
through his witness of the courage and zeal of this 



noble martyr,— whose spirit of Christ he doubtless witnessed 

in others of the hated "sect, everywhere spoken 

against." 

So with us; we know not which act in life may 
glorify the Lord most, or whether our living or dying 
would be most helpful to his cause. We are to leave 
this in the Lord's hands, and to remember that our 
course in any event must be one of faithfulness, and 
that if faithful nothing can by any means harm us, but 
all things must work together for our good. 



R2959 : page 59 

PERSECUTION AND ITS GOOD FRUIT. 

-ACTS 8:3-13.-MARCH 9.- 

"Therefore, they that were scattered abroad 
went everywhere, preaching the Word." 

PERSECUTION is never right, nor is it a joyous 

matter; nevertheless, God can overrule 

this, as well as all wrongs, for the good of 

his people, who can learn also the lessons of "rejoicing 

in tribulation," and of tracing divine providences 

through them,— seeing by faith the desirable 

results. The first persecution of the Church began 

about the time of Stephen's death, noted in our last 

lesson. This is variously estimated as having been 

from three to seven years after the day of Pentecost, 

tho we have no means of definite information. 

Saul of Tarsus (afterward called Paul the Apostle), 

was evidently a leader in the heresy-hunting and persecution 

which started with Stephen and extended 

in a general way to all believers,— except the apostles, 

who, for some reason, seem to have been providentially 

protected. 

The persecution began in Jerusalem, because this 
so far had been the center of the work, as our Lord 
had directed,— "beginning at Jerusalem." Not only 
was it the principal city of Palestine, but, as we have 
previously seen, it was the resort of pious Jews from 
all quarters of the world, many of whom sought to 
make it their home in the close of life, even if they 

R2959 : page 60 

had previously lived abroad. The Lord had graciously 

granted a season of development for those 

brought into the Church at Pentecost, and subsequently; 

and now that they had reached a fair degree 

of growth in grace and in knowledge, he permitted 

the winds of persecution to blow against the 

Church, and to scatter the ripened seeds hither and 



thither, in every direction. 

The same God who directed thus in the affairs 
of the early Church still loves and cherishes his own; 
still directs and guides in respect to the interests of 
his own cause, his Zion. Now, as then, it is with him 
to permit or to hinder persecution, according as in 
his wisdom would be for the best interests of his 
people, and the outworking of his glorious plans. 
The persecution which then arose had, doubtless, 
a twofold effect (1) It served to test and to sift those 
who had already named the name of Christ;— to 
prove their loyalty, their willingness to endure hardness 
as good soldiers;— their worthiness to be reckoned 
amongst the overcomers. Not only did it test 
them, but it undoubtedly strengthened them; for 
experience shows us that every trial and test endured 
with faithfulness brings an increase of victory and 
strength of character. (2) It became the Lord's 
means of spreading the truth in every direction, and 
thus of greatly broadening, as well as deepening, his 
work in the world. Having first blessed those who, 
by his providential arrangements, had been gathered 
to one center, he now scattered them, as lights 
throughout Palestine and the adjacent country. 

Drawing applications to ourselves from this 
feature of our lesson, we note how the Lord has gathered 
to this new land, America, a specially prepared 
class of people, liberty-lovers and truth-lovers, from 
all parts of the world. We note how he has lighted 
the torch of liberty and civilization here more generally 
than elsewhere. We note how, in this specially 
prepared soil, he has planted the present truth, 
the "harvest" message which is now shining forth 
in a feeble manner, not only to all the people of this 
favored land, but, to the world in general. We note 
a correspondency, also, in the fact that thus far in 
this harvest our persecutions have been quiet,— 
rather than public, open, and demonstrative. We 
like the early Church, have had an excellent opportunity 
for cultivating the knowledge of the truth 
and the graces of the holy spirit. Surely it will not 
surprise us now, or shortly, if the Lord's providence 
would permit some open persecution; and if this 
should be the divine will, are we in that proper condition 
of heart that it would profit, instead of discourage 
us, and destroy our faith? Would it mean to us, 
as to the faithful of the early Church, merely an enlargement 
of our opportunities, and the broadening 
of the Lord's work today? We trust it would be so. 

An important lesson for all of the Lord's people 
to learn, is that the Lord himself has full charge 
and direction of the affairs of his Church; that he 
who blesses it with his holy spirit, and with the light 
of the knowledge of God, is the same one who has 
permitted a restraining of the persecutions and sittings 
from without and from within. Those who 



learn this lesson thoroughly are the only ones who, 
amid all the affairs of life, can rest themselves fully 
in "the peace of God which passeth all understanding." 
Let us learn to trace divine providences in 
the past, and to appreciate them and to apply them 
as far as possible, to affairs of the present time; and 
then to trust the Lord, even where we cannot trace 
him, knowing that all things shall work together for 
good to them that love him. 

HOW TYND ALE'S PERSECUTION RESULTED. 



As an illustration of how persecutions sometimes, 
indeed generally, greatly prosper the cause of 
truth, note the following respecting that eminent 
English reformer, William Tyndale, who was 

R2960 : page 60 

amongst the first to publish the holy Scriptures in 

the English language. Not being permitted to do 

his work of Bible translating in Great Britain, he removed 

to the city of Worms, Germany, and published 

there his first complete edition of the New Testament. 

Several hundred copies of the work went to 

England. These, by order of King Henry VIII. , 

were bought up for destruction, by the Bishop of 

London; but Tyndale read the meaning of this providential 

hindrance of the circulation of the work thus: 

"I shall get money of him for these books to buy 

myself out of debt, and the whole world shall cry 

out at the burning of God's Word; and the over-plus 

of money shall help me to correct again, and 

nearly to imprint the same." And so it was. Bishop 

Tunstall purchased not only all he could secure in 

Great Britain, but also purchased copies in the city 

of Antwerp, and had a public burning of these at St. 

Paul's Cross, London, A.D. 1526. Later on, in 

spite of the prohibitions of the king, and the energy 

of the clergy, copies of the New Testament, published 

in the English language, were smuggled in by 

vessels laden with grain. 

What we all need is implicit trust in God and a 
burning zeal for the service of the truth, which nothing 
can daunt or hinder. If thwarted in one way 
we are to adopt another plan. If hindered in that, 
to change again— always observing the laws and 
principles of righteousness, and relying upon the 
Lord to overrule the results to his own praise. Under 
the Lord's providence hundreds of thousands of 
copies of Millennial Dawn and millions of tracts 
have been scattered as seed in all civilized 
lands. It would not surprise us at all if some persecution 
or opposition were to arise which would 



cause these seeds of truth to germinate. The man 
who, in his anger, stamped his feet upon the seeds, 
merely pressed them into the earth, where they the 
better took root. And so it may be in respect to any 
opposition which the great Adversary may raise up 
now, and which the Lord may permit. We may not 
pray for temptations, trials and persecutions, nor 
may we pray to escape them; but it is surely our 
privilege to ask that the Lord will not abandon us in 
temptation, but will ultimately deliver us from the 
Evil One— in his own time and way— and generally, 
to overrule our affairs to his own praise. 

DEACON PHILIP'S MINISTRY. 



There was a Philip amongst the twelve apostles, 
but it is not he that is referred to in this lesson. This 
Philip was one of the seven deacons whose choice 

R2960 : page 61 

by the Church has been related. (Acts 6:5.) Evidently 
he had used well the opportunities thus afforded 
him, by attending not only to the distribution 
of the natural food to the needy, but by the feeding 
of his own heart upon the spiritual food also,— thus 
preparing himself, as a servant and messenger of 
the Lord, for further service of a more spiritual kind. 
Philip was one of those whom the persecution drove 
out of Jerusalem. Let us stop here to notice that 
the early Church might have said,— Persecution is 
getting severe; but we will stay where we are, suffer 
imprisonment, etc., esteeming that the Lord is able 
to protect us here as well as elsewhere. This would 
have been sound reasoning; but it would indicate a 
neglect of the Lord's directions to his Church, saying, 
"When they persecute you in this city, flee ye 
into another." (Matt. 10:23.) The persecution was 
intended to scatter them, and failure to take heed 
to the Lord's directions might have led some of the 
most earnest and faithful of the Church to obstinately 
resist the designs of providence. So now, let 
those who may be called upon to endure persecution 
remember the Lord's direction; and after giving a 
proper testimony, if the door of opportunity opens, 
let them remove to another locality, where their 
faithfulness and increased knowledge and wisdom 
in the handling of "the sword of the spirit" may give 
them opportunities for still greater usefulness. This 
was the case with Philip, who removed to Samaria, 
and apparently lost no time in beginning the ministry 
of the truth, preaching Christ. 

It will be remembered that this city of Samaria 
was the capital of a district called Samaria, whose 



people were known as Samaritans; being of mixed 

blood, Jewish and Gentile, they were counted by the 

Jews as though they were Gentiles; hence "the Jews 

had no dealings with the Samaritans." We remember, 

further, that it was respecting these people that 

our Lord said to his disciples, when sending them 

forth, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into 

any city of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go rather 

to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." (Matt. 10:5,6; 

15:24.) Our Lord thus marked the Samaritans 

as being separate and distinct from the Israelites. 

We remember, further, that it was because our Lord 

would not enter into the City of Samaria, and heal 

its sick, that the people of that city refused to sell 

the disciples food, as they passed by. It was in resenting 

this affront that James and John, the apostles, 

said to our Lord, "Wilt thou that we command 

fire from heaven to consume their city?" Jesus answered, 

"Ye know not what spirit ye are of; the Son 

of Man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save 

them." It was a woman from this same city who 

later met the Lord at the well, and got from him a 

little taste of the water of life, then brought many of 

her friends and neighbors, who also tasted and were 

refreshed, and many of them believed on him. 

Nevertheless, our Lord's testimony then was, "Ye 

worship ye know not what;. ..salvation is of the 

Jews. "--John 3: Luke 9:54-56; John 4:22. 

The fact that Philip now came into Samaria, 
under the leading of divine providence, and preached 
the gospel there, signifies that the time had come 
for the gospel to be extended beyond Judaism. It 
implies, therefore, that this incident occurred at least 
three and a half years after our Lord's death— after 
the close of the seventieth symbolical week, and the 
full end of Israel's special favor as respects the gospel 
invitation of this age. Evidently the apostles 
had less strenuous feelings of opposition against the 
Samaritans than against Gentiles in general, because 
they were of mixed Jewish blood. 

The Samaritans were ripe for the gospel, and the 
fact that the Jews had disdained them much as they 
did the Gentiles no doubt made them all the more 
ready to receive the gospel message, which ignored 
all caste and class distinction, and accepted into its 
brotherhood all who confessed their sins, accepted 
Jesus as the Redeemer, and made full consecration 
to him. Philip's preaching was backed by the open 
manifestations of the spirit, in healings, etc., as was 
all the preaching of that time— intended to establish 
the faith, and to counteract the wonder-workings of 
Satan, through necromancers, those possessed of a 
spirit of divination, etc. 

The truth reached the Samaritans just in time to 
rescue them from some of Satan's wily arts, known 
at that time as "Black Art," etc., practiced by Simon 



Magus, the sorcerer. The record is, that his influence 
with the people had been great, both with rich 
and poor; and that they recognized him as possessed 
of "the great power of God." Times have changed 
since then; sorcery and magic no longer captivate 
the world to the same extent, and the great deceiver 
has changed his tactics with the times. As the Apostle 
declares, he assumes a garment of light, and presents 
himself as a messenger of light, for the deception 
of those who are seeking the truth. Today he 
has a variety of devices, snares and traps for those 
who are awaking out of the slumbers of gross superstition 
and ignorance brought down from the dark 
ages. To these he variously presents himself as a 
Higher Critic, searching for the truth in the Bible, 
and finding it a mass of contradiction. To others he 
appears as an Evolutionist, teaching doctrine wholly 
contradictory to that of the Scriptures, proving that 
there was no fall; and hence that there could be no 
redemption from a fall, no times of restitution from 
its consequences. To others he appears as a Christian 
Scientist, affecting the name of Christ as one 
deception, and the name of Science as another, and 
presenting a confused medley opposed to both— yet 
backed, nevertheless, by certain physical reliefs and 
cures distributed (by the same power which worked 
through Simon Magus) to those who will yield 
themselves to the deception, and who will deny the 
truth and persistently stick to the denial;— they shall 
have the reward of healing. 

We who now oppose the Adversary and his 
methods are not armed with the powers of physical 
healing, whereby to appeal to the people; but we are 
possessed of the truth, which operates as an eyesalve 
upon the eyes of the understanding of those 
who accept;— as a cleansing from sin and a relief 
from burdens;— as the oil of joy upon their heads 
and in their hearts. The whole matter has taken a 
higher plane, by reason of the advancement in general 
knowledge and civilization which have come to 
the world as a result of the shining of the light 

R2961 : page 62 

through God's faithful ones in the past. Now, as 
then, the truth brings conviction to those who are 
in a proper attitude of heart, and relieves them from 
the bondage of ignorance, superstition, priestcraft, 
and sectarianism,— bringing them into the liberty 
wherewith Christ makes free indeed all who become 
truly his. 

Those who accepted Philip's message, and made 
a consecration to the Lord, signified it by baptism- 
immersion— in water, symbolizing the immersion 
(burial) of their wills into the will of God as expressed 
in Christ;— signifying that henceforth they would be 



dead to self and to the world, and rise to walk in newness 

of life, as members of the body of Christ. We 

read nothing about a creed or a sect or a denominational 

name, nor about the recording of the names 

in a denominational register. The early Church 

recognized, as we do, that the important matter is 

that believers should be joined to Christ, and that 

their names, on this account, should be "written in 

heaven." Simon, who had previously been the religious(?) 

leader of the people— their leader into 

darkness, into the wiles of the Adversary,— became 

one of Philip's converts, one of those immersed, and 

a constant attendant upon Philip's ministry, beholding 

with amazement the power of God operating 

through him, which power he recognized as being 

superior to the power of Satan which had operated 

in himself. 

News of God's favor to the Samaritans, and of 
their acceptance of the Lord, soon reached Jerusalem; 
and representatives of the whole company of 
the apostles and others at Jerusalem, went down to 
Samaria to note the work of the Lord, and, no doubt, 
to encourage the believers. But they went specially 
because the gifts of the holy spirit (miracles, healings, 
tongues, etc.) could only be communicated 
through the apostles. However well Philip might 
proclaim the gospel and immerse believers, he, not 
being one of the chosen twelve, had not the power 
of communicating those gifts. (As those gifts were 
communicated only by the apostles it is evident that 
they must have ceased in the Church shortly after 
the apostles died.) Peter was one of those sent, and 
John, the very one who had said, "Lord, wilt thou 
that we command fire from heaven, to destroy these 
men and their city?" was the other delegate. How 
much change the Gospel of Christ had wrought, even 
in this good man! He had learned of Jesus, and 
now had the same spirit, which sought not to destroy 
men's lives but to save them. 

When the apostles arrived they prayed with the 
disciples, and then laid their hands upon them, communicating 
some of the gifts,— power to speak with 
tongues, to interpret tongues, to perform miracles, 
etc. As Simon Magus was one of the believers, one 
of the baptized ones, he, with the rest, undoubtedly 
received some gift of the holy spirit. Yet he, and 
quite probably others of the number, were not in full 
harmony with the Lord and his gracious plans. The 
gifts of the spirit might be imparted instantaneously; 
but the fruits of the spirit could only be had by 
growth. Those gifts, therefore, are not to be esteemed 
as being such good evidence of the divine 
favor, and nearness to the Lord, as are the fruits of 
the spirit, which all of the Lord's consecrated people 
of today should possess in some degree,— meekness, 
patience, gentleness, brotherly kindness, love. The 



Apostle Paul declares that if he had not merely one 
of those gifts, but all of them, yet lacked love, it 
would profit him nothing, eventually, as respects the 
great favor to which the Lord has called his Church. 
-I Cor. 13:1-8. 

Simon Magus, while astonished with what he 
had seen, and interested from that standpoint, and 
convinced that the power was a holy one; and although 
he had cast in his lot with the believers, and 
received a gift,— was still "in the gall of bitterness, 
and in the bonds of iniquity," as the Apostle Peter 
subsequently told him. He was thus all the time, 
but neither recognized the fact himself, nor did the 
others recognize it. It was then that his interest in 
the matters under consideration led him to the point 
of asking Peter to give him the apostolic power of 
communicating gifts; promising him in return a good 
compensation in money;— thus showing that he was 
not interested in the truth and its service from the 
right standpoint;— that his was merely a curiosity interest, 
and that selfishness had not given place to 
love; that he would like to have this apostolic power 
so that he could use it in a selfish way, for his own 
aggrandizement, and for his own advantage amongst 
the people. 

There have been many of this same disposition 
since. They are not necessarily worse men than 
many others in the world, because they give evidence 
that they have neither part nor lot with the Lord's 
people. It is safe to say that there are hundreds of 
thousands, yes, millions, of the Simon Magus class 
in the nominal churches of today; men and women 
who have never discerned the real spirit of the gospel; 
but who look at its various arrangements from a 
mercenary point of view, considering what shall be 
the gain or loss, the advantage or disadvantage, of 
their relationship thereto;— and maintaining the relationship 
because of the honor or social position 
or worldly prosperity which it has brought them, or 
is bringing them, or which they hope yet to obtain 
through it. To all such we would like to say, kindly 
but firmly, "Thou hast neither part nor lot in this 
matter." We would not say, nor did Peter say to 
Simon, Your day of grace is past, and you shall be 
eternally tormented. What God may have for such 
in the future, under different conditions, we may or 
may not see clearly; but the point which we are now 
noting is that such characters have no share in the 
Kingdom; neither in its present, nor in its future development. 
Even amongst those who have received 
present truth, we have reason to fear that some have 
received it, not in the love of it, but merely in a spirit 
of curiosity; or with a view to having something 
which they can use as a means for bringing themselves 
into some place of prominence amongst the 
brethren. Such persons are dangerous characters— 



dangerous as respects themselves, and dangerous as 
respects their influence in the Church. Such should 
be carefully avoided in the selection of leaders 
amongst the Lord's people, no matter what their 
natural gifts, riches, or talents may be. 



R2961 : page 63 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



BELIEVERS, AND THE BANKRUPTCY ACT. 



Question: Would it be right or wrong for the 
footstep-followers of our Lord Jesus Christ to take 
advantage of the Bankruptcy Act for the relief of 
Insolvent Debtors? 

Answer: It would be entirely proper for any 
person to take advantage of the law. The thought 
which lies back of this law is that in the vicissitudes 
of life some persons become hopelessly insolvent, and 
that it is the proper thing for their neighbors to relinquish 
their hold upon them and let them have a 
fresh start in life, provided they give up all that they 
have to their creditors. This humane law reminds 
us strikingly of the divine law given to Israel, and 
represented in their Jubilee system, under which, 
every fiftieth year, all debts of every kind were cancelled, 
and each family inheritance was restored; and 
that, we again remember, is but a type, or illustration 
of the heavenly Father's dealings with the world of 
mankind, who are all his debtors, and who, by application 
to the Mediator of the New Covenant, will 
be granted shortly immunity from every previous 
debt, and opportunity to retrieve their fortunes and 
to build new characters, without prejudice from original 
sin and condemnation. 

While it would be lawful and proper enough for 
you to avail yourself of the privileges of this Bankruptcy 
Act, it may not be convenient for you to do so, 
because it would require some considerable attorney's 
fees to put the matter through, and unless you have 
some purpose or object respecting this in the future 
that would make it worth while to have the dockets 
cleared and to permit you to go into some kind of 
business, you had, perhaps, better let the matter stand 
as it is. 

The general principle is a correct one, that the 
world of mankind are, in a general sense, human 
brothers, and that they should not oppress one another, 
but be ready to forgive one another their debts, 



when the circumstances are such that the debtor is 
unable to meet the obligations, and when he will 
probably never be able to meet them without unjustly 
depriving his family of life's necessities. In harmony 
with this thought is the general law of civilized lands, 
that debts are not perpetual, but that at the expiration 
of five years they become void and legally dead, 
unless specially stated to the contrary by the recording 
of them as judgments. However, on the other 
hand, should anyone living in debt come into possession 
of wealth, so that he could pay his obligations, 
it should be his pleasure to pay them, whether he had 
taken advantage of the Bankruptcy Act or not. 

THE GARMENT SPOTTED WITH THE FLESH. 



Question: What is meant by the Apostle in the 
statement, "Hating even the garment spotted by the 
flesh" (Jude 23)? 

Answer: The garment to be worn by Christians 
is the robe of Christ's righteousness, the spotless robe 
which is given to those who come unto the Father. 
All who have love for the Lord and for righteousness 
will desire to maintain as far as possible this absolute 
perfection of righteousness imputed to them through 
faith. To do this they will seek to walk after the 
spirit, and not after the flesh. But notwithstanding 
their good desires they may not infrequently come 
short of the glory of God, and fail to live up to all even 
of their opportunities. All such shortcomings of every 
kind are reckoned as stains or spots on the imputed 
garment of Christ's righteousness— spots, marks of 

R2962 : page 63 

fleshly weakness. Those who have the right attitude 
of heart will hate sin, and hence will hate all fleshly 
spots or weaknesses of every kind, and will make 
haste to take the matter to the Lord in prayer, and, so 
far as possible, to make good any wrong they may 
have committed, even though unwilfully done; and 
thus under the New Covenant the blood of Christ 
cleanses such from all sins, and in this manner they 
are able to keep themselves unspotted from the world. 
By and by this faithful class will experience the 
resurrection change, and being possessed of new 
bodies in full accord with their new minds they will 
thenceforth be without spot or wrinkle or any such 
thing. 

From this it will be plain that none need have 
spots upon his garment except he be careless respecting 
the matter; and such as are thus careless are to 
that extent lacking of the Master's spirit— they are 
not overcomers of the world, but to some extent sympathize 



with sin. This is the class which, for this 
reason, will fail to be accounted overcomers and will 
fail to obtain the great prize of joint-heirship in the 
kingdom. This is the class which will be obliged to 
go through the great tribulation with which this age 
will close, to the intent that in that tribulation they 
may learn lessons which will be valuable to them to 
all eternity, and this learning of lessons is scripturally 
called "washing their robes, and making them white 
in the blood of the Lamb."— Rev. 7:14. 

WITH SUCH AN ONE NO, NOT TO EAT. 



Question: What about I Cor. 5:11? "With 
such an one no, not to eat." 

Answer: We understand the Apostle to refer to 
Church relationships, and that the Lord's people are 
in duty bound to maintain a very high standard of 
purity of morals; so much so that they would not 
even fellowship in the Church or at the common meal 
or love-feast with any who were known positively to 
be of disreputable character. This would not mean one 
against whom merely an evil thought had been encouraged; 
or one against whom the shaft of slander 
had been hurled; for other Scriptures show us distinctly 
that the Lord's people are not to be evil 
surmisers in their carefulness to maintain a high 
standard of Christian living. Verse 10 seems to indicate 
that in our social and business affairs we should 
to a reasonable degree avoid fellowships and dealings 
with the disreputable. 

IS GOD THE FATHER OF ALL MEN? 



Question: The Apostle, in Acts 17:29, seems 
to speak of the natural man as the offspring of God. 
How should we understand this? 

Answer: God represents himself as the Life-giver, 
or Father of every living thing, since all life 
proceeds from him; but, specially, he is the Father, 
or Life-giver of all created in his likeness. The natural 
man was thus created, represented in Adam; 

R2962 : page 64 

and although much of that original likeness has since 
been lost through sin and depravity, it is, nevertheless, 
still proper to speak of the man from the standpoint 
of his original creation. It is to be remembered, 
however, that according to the Scriptures all 
in the transgression lost the standing of sonship. All 
are God's offspring, that is, all spring from, or derive 



their life from the Almighty; but he recognizes as sons 
only those who are in harmony, in fellowship with 
him, and this now includes only those who are 
reconciled through the precious blood. 

GOD COMMANDETH ALL MEN EVERYWHERE TO REPENT. 



Question: In the 30th and 3 1st verses of the same chapter 
we seem to have a contradiction. Verse 30 declares that 
God "commandeth all men everywhere to repent," and verse 31 
declares that the appointed day for the world's judgment 
is future. If the judgment of the world has not yet begun, 
in what sense and with what justice does God command all 
everywhere to repent now? 

Answer: While the command to repent is to "all men 
everywhere," nevertheless it reaches only those who have an 
ear to hear. The vast majority of mankind have not yet been 
commanded to repent, because God's voice through his messengers 
has not yet reached every creature. The assurance, 
however, is that the message shall reach all in due time. And 
whoever hears the message will receive with it a full knowledge 
of the gracious opportunity for complying with its conditions 
and arrangements. In the present age the arrangement 
is that they will be judged according to their faith, while 
those who hear in the next age will be informed of a justification 
by works— that they "shall be judged every man according 
to his works." 

Thus viewed, it will be seen that God's arrangement for 
judging the world in the next age is complete, and it is in 
view of this feature of future judgment, or future trial, or 
opportunity which will be granted to all mankind for attaining 
to everlasting life, that God commands that every one 
should repent of sins and make effort to come back into 
harmony with him and to receive the boon of eternal life. 
Had God made no arrangement through the ransom for the 
giving of eternal life to the world, it would have been useless 
to have commanded repentance; for why should men seek by 
repentance and striving against sin to attain a life eternal if 
it were unattainable— if no arrangement had been made 
through the redemption by which God might be just and yet 
the justifier of those who believe in Jesus and who seek to 
follow his directions and to attain the gift of life in him? 

page 64 

THE ANNUAL MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



Question: If, as you claim, the Scriptures teach 
that the annual celebration of the Memorial Supper 
is the only proper one, please say when and why a 
change has been made to a more frequent observance? 

Answer: (1st) You know, and all know that the 



Roman Catholic, the Greek Catholic and the Syriac 
Churches, as well as the Church of England, celebrate 
Good Friday as the memorial of our Lord's death, and 
the histories of all these churches show its observance 
as far back as church history goes,— any of them, 
all of them. 

(2nd) You know, and all know, that the so-called 
Protestant Churches (Methodist, Presbyterian, Disciples, 
Congregational) ignore Good Friday. Really 
they protest in part against it, but ignorantly, without 
good reason, because of having lost sight of the 
original significance and importance of the day from a 
Scriptural standpoint. Those called "Protestants" 
recognize no particular day, but keep the feast weekly, 
monthly, bi-monthly, tri-monthly, etc., according 
to their fancy or convenience. 

The above facts are known to all; but the reason 
for this change on the part of Protestants is known 
to but few of those even who practice the change, and 
is not to be found recorded in histories of any kind. 
The reason for this we will explain, and it will be manifest 
to all, although we cannot refer you to any other 
writings than our own on the subject. It is:— 

(3rd) The Protestant reformation against Roman 
Catholicism was very properly specially against 
what Papists denominate "the sacrifice of the mass." 
And it was because Papists celebrated Good Friday 
as the most particular mass day, that Protestants 
were so particular to ignore that day. 

(4th) The original deflection in Papacy, by which 
the sacrifice of the mass took the place of the original 
sacrifice made at Calvary, was gradual, and 
covered a long period of time, and is not to be found 
in the particular edict by the Pope or others. This, 
like many other false theories, grew gradually and 
spread itself gradually and unobservedly over the 
nominal Church of that time; and the records of the 
true Church of that time are not to be had, for it was 
so insignificant, in the eyes of the nominal system, 
that its views were ignored, but later on its writings, 
protests, etc., were destroyed as heretical. 

The custom of performing the mass any and 
every day, and at any and every hour of the day and 
night, as might suit the convenience of its observers, 
having gained a thorough foothold, the original day 
(Good Friday) and its commemoration of the original 
sacrifice, was gradually merged by Papists into a 
great mass day. Nevertheless, even in this respect 
it has held a predominant position above all other 
dates with the devotees of the system, and every Roman 
Catholic who makes the slightest claim to faithfulness 
to his Church, is expected to be present and 
participate in the service of Good Friday, whether he 
attends mass at any other time of the year or not. 
This is a matter of fact that can be readily demonstrated 
by application to any Catholic. 



(5th) Church history, as represented, not only 
in denominational literature, but also in the cyclopedias, 
records the fact that the method of computing 
the time for Good Friday was early changed from 
the Jewish method of counting the Passover, to a 
very slightly modified counting which always brings 
the anniversary on Friday and the anniversary of 
Easter on a Sunday. The Jewish method of reckoning 
made the days fall irregularly on any or various 
days of the week from year to year. Hence the 
change to the present method of counting was considered 
to be justified. So universal is this custom 
that the principal almanacs give not only the day of 
the Passover according to the Jewish reckoning, but 
also its date according to this modified counting of 
Christendom— "the Church calendar." 



page 65 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIII. MARCH 1, 1902. No. 5. 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 67 

Hermogenes to Titus 67 

Progress in Church Federation 

Abroad and at Home 68 

Madame Guyon's Full Surrender 

to the Lord 69 

God's Providences Cooperate 69 

Awake Thou that Sleepest and Arise 73 

Sanctified Through a Knowledge 

of the Truth 76 

Letters of Interest 79 

Volunteer Work for 1902 66 

page 66 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



ABOUT BIBLES-CORRECTED PRICES. 

On January 1st we received word from all Bible-publishers 
that the prices were thereafter advanced. We had 
a good supply on hand then, but now, as we are obliged to 
re-order, we must also advance prices, as our Bibles are 
sold at cost prices. 

Notice price list in December 15th issue, and add five 



cents each on all prices under 70 cents, ten cents to all 

between 70 cents and $1.15, and twenty cents to all above $1.15, 

except the India Paper Bibles, which are unchanged. 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER APRIL 20 

In the interest of friends in far off lands— China, Australia, 
Alaska, etc.— we give early notice that the anniversary 
memorial of our Lord's death this year falls on 
Sunday evening, April 20th,— after 6 p.m. 

ORDER ALL THE TRACTS YOU NEED. 

The Post Office Department is considering whether or 
not they will deprive us of the cheap mail rate on the "Old 
Theology Tracts." If you have not a good supply we advise 
that you send your orders at once. 

THE VOLUNTEER WORK FOR 1902. 

Many of the dear friends are still doing splendid service 
in the circulating of the pamphlet "Food for Thinking 
Christians," on Sundays, near church entrances. The 
weather this winter has been quite favorable. The Washington 
City friends, having finished their own territory, 
have been going to nearby cities and towns. The same is 
true of the Boston friends: recently forty-six of them went 
to Lawrence, Mass., and served forty-two churches;— taking 
some as they assembled and others as they dismissed. 

We advise that those who have not completed the distribution 
of "Food" shall do so; we hope to be able to 
supply all the ammunition requisite. Meantime, for those 
who have finished the distribution, we are preparing other 
literature which we hope to have ready for announcement 
in April. Meantime, let us get ready for an active campaign 
—choose captains and lieutenants, and so far as possible 
get all the friends interested. Our experience is that 
those who can and do engage in this volunteer work are 
proportionally blessed. 



R2963 : page 67 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



HERMOGENES TO TITUS. 



PERHAPS the best article which has yet appeared 

in the religious press bearing upon the 

higher criticism, came out in the last number 

of The Wesleyan Christian Advocate over the title of 



"The Epistle of Hermogenes to Titus," written in 

archaic style, belonging to the apostolic days and purporting 

to explain many passages of Scriptures which 

have furnished the bones of contention in recent controversies. 

Every Bible student will enjoy reading 

it. In part, the article reads as follows: 

"Hermogenes, a servant of God, and a minister 
of Christ, and a teacher of the true faith of the Gospel, 
according to the ripe judgment of the present 
age; to Titus, mine own brother, whom I greatly love 
in the truth: Grace, mercy and peace unto thee. 

"Thou hast heard, beloved, of our aged brother 
Paul, that he hath written epistles to Timotheus; and 
I hear, also to thee; in the which he hath set forth 
many things in exhortations unto each one of you. 
In some of these he hath sought to hinder my usefulness 
with thee, and with many others. Remember, 
brother, that he is old and hath divers infirmities, 
and hath little knowledge of sound philosophy which 
edifieth. Therefore, I bear no malice toward him. 
But I write to set in order for thine instruction a 
more reasonable Gospel, which will make thee wise 
and will enable thee to instruct others also. 

"Thou hast heard how our brother Demas hath 
written Timotheus, to teach him how he may gain 
favor with them that be somewhat in authority above 
us; and, moreover, with high esteem among them 
that will not endure the hard doctrines declared by 
Paul in his preaching and epistles. I know thee, thy 
promise and great talent, and earnestly desire that 
thou mayest rise above this Timotheus. Thou hast 
gifts many, and I would that thou mightest be a 
bishop over the Church. Give heed, therefore, to 
my counsel. 

"This Paul hath a lively imagination, such as maketh 
him exceedingly superstitious concerning the 
Scriptures, and an unsafe guide for such as would 
be wise; whilst I am yet young and have had long 
training in the schools of men skilled in reasoning 
concerning divine things, being in their company no 
less than sixty and seven days. Those great men instructed 
me fully in the approved laws, by the which 
we may know of the things which cannot be taken; 
wherefore, I think myself able to lead thee in a broad 
way. I will now set in order unto thee that which 
I have learned. 

"The fathers did teach that Moses hath written 
how God made the heaven and the earth, having been 
instructed in this of God. Know thou, therefore, 
that Moses did beguile them. He obtained many 
accounts of a tradition of creation among several 
ancient peoples, and did patch them together for the 
Hebrews. That Paul accepteth this book of Moses 
as true history, doth show him to lack sound 
judgment. 

"Thou knowest also that it hath been taught that 



the law and the prophets were given by inspiration of 
God. Herein is grievous error. The priests of the 
people of Israel, greatly desiring to lead our fathers 
into righteousness and to make of them a great nation, 
devised those great books. It is true, I cannot 
make known unto thee by which way this is proved; 
but beware of questioning my knowledge in this 
thing; thou wilt show thyself ignorant shouldest thou 
at all call in question our judgment. None but the 
instructed can fully understand these matters. The 
simple and unlearned must needs believe what we 
teach. If they fail to hearken, they are blind and 
cannot see into the deep things of our wisdom. 

"We now conclude that at the least one thousand 
scribes were required to devise the law and the prophets; 
and peradventure, if that number doth not appear 
sufficient we can enlarge it to be even five thousand. 
It was a great work of imagination, and God must 
needs have many men to imagine each a little. 
Moreover, in these books the wise find many things 
contrary to sound reason. I will inform thee concerning 
some of them, in order that thou mayest be 
able to explain them to thy people. The writing 

R2963 : page 68 

which beareth the name of Moses doth declare that 
God did feed our fathers in the wilderness with manna 
from heaven. It is most confidently taught 
among us who are wise that they did lick with their 
tongues a honey, which is found on the leaves of 
the trees in the wilderness, and named it manna. The 
rock which gave forth water when this Moses did 
strike it flowed from a deep well, which he and his 
servants bored through a great rock by night while 
the people slept. The great pillar of cloud by day 
and fire by night which followed the people was produced 
by cunningly mixed powders. Moreover, this 
Moses was a wise magician, and did charm these people 
into a deep sleep, and while they slept, with his 
chosen helpers, he prepared many vessels into which, 
when full of water, they did cast a fine powder. After 
this they soaked the garments of all the people in the 
vessels of water, and it was so that they could no more 
wear out. Give heed concerning what we declare to 
be the truth of the record of the walls of Jericho, 
how they fell. They that be searchers after truth 
set forth that the horns and trumpets which the men 
of Israel did blow mightily made a great commotion 
in the air, insomuch that the walls began to tremble 
greatly, which continuing many days they were 
shaken down and did fall. Know thou also that 
Joshua did, by cunning magic, cause the ignorant 
people to imagine that the sun obeyed him to stand 
still. They were deceived, for their own good, that 
it might profit them withal. Joshua did cause their 



memory to stand still. But we are wiser than to 
teach men that reason that this record is more than a 
fable. 

"I will instruct thee, moreover, concerning the 
book which beareth the name of Esaias. The learned 
now show unto us that many men did bear that name, 
and every one a little part hath written; how many 
it doth not yet appear. When the searching in the 
matter hath ended, it may be shown that peradventure 
a score of scribes had part in making the 
book as it now is. We are now assured that Esaias 
prophesied nothing concerning the sufferings and 
glory of Christ. He spake only of the sufferings of 
all Israel for the sins of King Ahaz. (Why Israel 
should be called to suffer because of wicked Ahaz's 
sins, or why Esaias did write of this, it doth not concern 
us.) The book speaketh nothing of Jesus Christ. 
This we say, and if any teach otherwise, he is thereby 
shown to be in ignorant company, with Paul and 
Peter and John, who have fallen into error, and teach 
old wives' fables, which the instructed reject. 

"We have, also, a deep knowledge of the truth of 
Daniel and his prophecy, which will greatly edify 
thee, and will satisfy those who doubt concerning the 
miracles. Daniel was a man acquainted with many 
strange secrets. He knew how to charm the lions 
that they should not devour him when he should be 
cast into their den. So he feared not to pray; and 
when he was thrown to the lions, he cast a spell over 
them, that they could not bite or hurt him. Thou 
seest he saved himself, and gave God the praise. The 
record of the three Hebrew children and their trial 
in the fiery furnace hath also been shown to be according 
to reason. It hath been made known unto 
us by the teachers of science at whom Paul doth only 
sneer, that at the center of the hottest fire there doth 
always remain a cool place which will neither burn nor 
scorch garments, nor flesh. These Hebrew children 
were aforetime instructed regarding this; and therefore 
they feared not the wrath or power of the king; 
and when cast into the fire they knew immediately the 
place of safety and so were protected. See how reason 
doth make clear things hard to be believed, 
brother.... 

"Finally, I declare unto thee the true explanation 
of the record of Jonah. He fled before the Lord that 
he might not perish at Nineveh. He had not sought 
that appointment and rebelled against going. When 
he took ship, the Lord ordered a vessel bearing the 
name "Great Fish" to follow Jonah's ship. So when 
the sailors did throw Jonah overboard he was picked 
up by the crew of the "Great Fish" and tarried with 
them three days. These earnestly persuaded him to 
accept his appointment, and had such weight with him 
that he consented, and so went to Nineveh. 

"Thou seest, brother, how our views do appeal to 



reason and sound judgment. I am assured that thou 
wilt gladly accept them, and assist us in spreading 
them, especially since Paul hath proven himself unable 
to lead the thinking classes of this great age. 
Thou mayest now be a leader in our school and get 
unto thyself a great name, for much learning, if thou 
dost act with us in this great warfare of the wise 
against the dull and ignorant. Paul hath had the help 
of Peter, John, James and Jude in this contention 
against us, but we faint not and continue to teach the 
people everywhere this doctrine, which maketh faith 
an easy matter. Meditate on these things I have 
written, and thy profiting will appear to all. When 
thou hast fully understood this, I will instruct thee 
in the correct knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ 
in another epistle. The salutation of me, Hermogenes, 
by mine own hand. Farewell." 

PROGRESS IN CHURCH FEDERATION ABROAD 
AND AT HOME. 



English Journals are noting and commenting upon 
the unusual conduct of the Rev. R. C. Fillingham 
of the Episcopal Church. He has recently been exchanging 
pulpits with Baptist and Congregational 
ministers. This is contrary, not only to usage, but 

R2964 : page 68 

to Episcopal law on the subject, and the query is respecting 

what action may be taken by the Episcopal 

authorities,— whether his course will be ignored, 

and thus indirectly sanctioned as being in the interest 

of Christian unity and fellowship, or whether he 

will be reproved, or dismissed, and thus the separating 

fence be kept intact. In his sermon in the Carleton 

Hill Baptist Church, Mr. Fillingham is reported 

by the English Journals, as follows:— 

"Mr. Fillingham took his text from Revelation, 
5th chapter, and part of the 10th verse: 'And hast 
made us unto our God kings and priests.' There 
had always, he said, been an ugly sound about 
priestcraft; it was a word of evil associations. It 
was connected with persecution and with human 
misery. If a number of men got hold of the idea 
that they alone had the truth, it was not unlikely but 
that they would persecute. But, again, it was an unwarrantable 
attempt to rule over the consciences of 
men. Every little curate, who had but just scraped 
through his theological college, claimed to have the 

R2964 : page 69 

keys of heaven and hell in his waistcoat pocket, 



whereas a Spurgeon and a Clifford were to be outside 
altogether. 

"After dwelling on these points, Mr. Fillingham 
declared such claims to be contemptible as well as 
dangerous. The truth was their Orders were no 
better than those of the Nonconformists. Their 
claims were preposterous. The first Archbishop of 
the Church of England was Archbishop Parker, and 
he was consecrated by Barlow. But all the evidence 
went to show that Barlow himself was never a bishop 
at all. He was appointed in 1536 to the bishopric of 
St. Asaph, and then to St. David's. But there was 
only one consecration of Bishops in that year— namely, 
on June 1 1th, and Barlow's name did not appear 
among them. Still further, Cromwell, the Vicar-General, 
addressed him as Bishop-Elect. Henry 
VIII, therefore, apparently made Barlow a Bishop 
by his mere word. Therefore, even from a sacramentarian 
point of view, Ritualism was a mere imposture. 
Priestcraft must be fought, and one of the best ways 
of fighting it was a union of Protestants of all 
denominations." 



Church federation is progressing in Great Britain. 
All the large Nonconformist bodies— all denominations 
of Protestants outside of the Episcopal 
Church— have effected a general union or co-operative 
arrangement as respects mission work, etc. This 
is supposed to be the forerunner of a still closer federation 
of interests. Local federations of Protestant 
denominations have been formed in this country, and 
seven or eight State Federations, but, so far as we 
are informed, the movement has not yet attained a 
general or national scope. Evidently the complete federation, 
which surely is to come, is still a few years 
in advance of us. The nearest approach to it, thus 
far, is represented in the "Second Annual Conference 
of the National Federation of Churches and 
Christian Workers," held in Washington City, February 
4 and 5, in Y.M.C.A. Hall. 

MADAME GUYON'S FULL SURRENDER TO THE LORD 



Madame Jeanne De La Mothe Guyon was educated 
in convents, saved at the foot of the cross in 
1668, sanctified in Notre Dame, witnessed for Jesus 
in the Court of Louis XIV., in France, Switzerland, 
and Italy, to bishops, priests, nuns and common people; 
was imprisoned for seven years, and died. 

Of her conversion day she said: "I bade farewell 
forever to assemblies which I had visited, to 
plays and diversions, dancing, unprofitable walks 



and parties of pleasure. The pleasures and amusements 
so much prized and esteemed by the world now 
appeared to me dull and insipid— so much so that I 
wondered how I ever could have enjoyed them." 
After making a full consecration she wrote: "I 
henceforth take Jesus Christ to be mine. I promise 
to receive him as a husband to me. And I give myself 
to him, unworthy though I am, to be his spouse. 
I ask of him, in this marriage of spirit, that I may be 
of the same mind with him— meek, pure, nothing in 
myself, and united in God's will. And, pledged as 
I am to be his, I accept, as a part of my marriage portion, 
the temptations and sorrows, the crosses and 
contempt which fell to him." Concerning her imprisonment, 
she wrote as follows: "I passed my 
time in great peace, content to spend the remainder 
of my life there, if such should be the will of God. I 
employed part of my time in writing religious songs. 
I and my maid, La Gautiere, who was with me in 
prison, committed them to heart as fast as I made 
them. Together we sang praises to Thee, O, our 
God! It sometimes seemed to me as if I were a little 
bird whom the Lord had placed in a cage, and that I 
had nothing to do now but to sing. The joy of my 
heart gave a brightness to the objects around me. 
The stones of my prison looked in my eyes like rubies. 
I esteemed them more than all the gaudy brilliancies 
of a vain world. My heart was full of that 
joy which thou givest to them who love Thee in the 
midst of their greatest crosses." 



R2964 : page 69 

GOD'S PROVIDENCES COOPERATE. 

-ACTS 8:29-39.-MARCH 16.- 

"With the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with 
the mouth confession is made unto salvation."— Rom. 10:10. 

DIVINE PROVIDENCES in our experiences 

as Christians should be sought for, if we 

would find them and enjoy their blessings to 

the full. But this requires faith, in a larger measure 

than we at first possess; and the increase of faith requires 

knowledge and experience. Our lesson 

illustrates God's providential care over his people 

from two standpoints: (1) His care for those who 

are seeking the light of truth; his intention that their 

earnest longings for it shall be rewarded, and his provision 

that the truth shall reach them under favorable 

conditions. (2) The Lord's willingness to use in his 

service, as instruments of his providence, those of his 

consecrated people who put themselves in the proper 



condition for his service. 

Deacon Philip, the instrument of divine providence 
in starting the Ethiopian eunuch in the narrow 
way of discipleship— and through him possibly introducing 
the good tidings into Africa— we have already 
seen was just such a man as the Lord is pleased to 
use as his mouthpiece in the service of the truth. 
Having proven himself faithful in the inferior work 
of serving tables, he had been advanced, and been 
made an ambassador for God in the preaching of the 
Gospel at Samaria; and the present lesson shows 
him still further guided and used of the Lord in his 
blessed service. There is an encouraging lesson here 
for all who have the same spirit— the same desire to 
serve the Lord and his cause. Faithfulness in little 
things is sure to bring larger opportunities. 

We are not informed by what means the Lord 
"spake to Philip," sending him to the road in which 
he would find the eunuch's chariot. We may be 
sure however, that the indication was sufficiently 
clear to Philip to be more than a mere guess or impression. 
We are to remember, too, that it was at 
a time when the Lord used miraculous means of 
communication, more than at present— doubtless for 

R2964 : page 70 

the very purpose of establishing the faith of his servants 
as well as their work. Today we walk more 
by faith, less by sight and miracle. Yet so bright is 
the light of truth now shining upon the divine plan 
and Word that we may safely say that we have much 
advantage every way, even over those of that time. 
We are to remember that up to the time of this lesson 
there were no New Testament writings; nothing, 
therefore, aside from the Law and the Prophets to 
assist and guide the apostles and early evangelists 
except the more or less miraculous interpositions of 
God's providence. 

Even after we have learned of God's particular 
care for all of his people, we are inclined to surprise 
that a solitary individual should be so particularly 
cared for as was this eunuch;— that a special messenger 
should be sent to him for his instruction in 
righteousness. Very evidently divine providence 
does not guard the going of all mankind to this same 
degree. Very evidently there was something in the 
character of this eunuch, something in his heart-attitude 
toward God, that was pleasing and acceptable 
to the Lord, and caused the working of this miracle 
on his behalf— that he might have needed instruction 
in the truth. 

The eunuch belonged to the kingdom of Meroe, 
which lay on the right bank of the Nile River, from 
its junction with the Atbara— as far south as Khartoum, 
and thence to the east of the Blue Nile to the 



mountains of Abyssinia. He was a court officer, 
evidently deeply religious, who had come in contact 
with, and been impressed by, the Jewish religion; 
and in his religious fervor he had gone up to Jerusalem 
to worship, and to gain additional knowledge of 
the true God. His case, like that of the Samaritans 
and of Cornelius, indicates that this occurrence was 
after the close of Israel's "seventy weeks," of special 
favor, for this eunuch was not a Jew in the fullest 
sense,— eunuchs not being fully accepted as proselytes, 
nor granted the privileges of the congregation. 
(Deut. 23:1.) Up to this time the eunuch, like Cornelius 
and the believing Samaritans, had been a part 
of the Lazarus class, lying at the gate of Dives, desiring 
to be fed with some of the crumbs from the 
bountiful table of blessing and promises which God 
had spread for Israel. Now the change had come. 
The house of Israel had been cast off; the end of 
Israel's special favor as respects the Gospel had 

R2965 : page 70 

come; and the time for receiving the Lazarus class 
to Abraham's bosom had arrived. Philip, as an angel 
or messenger of the Lord, was sent to carry this 
representative of the Lazarus class to the arms of 
father Abraham, as a true child of Abraham, through 
faith. 

The eunuch had been to the head centre of the 
religion which he esteemed to be the true one. He 
had come away from Jerusalem with a manuscript copy 
of one of the holy prophets— Isaiah— a treasure in 
those times, costly. That his manuscript was written 
in the Greek language, and not in the Hebrew, 
seems to be indicated by the word Esaias, which is the 
Greek form of Isaiah. He was hungering and thirsting 
for the truth, and making his best possible endeavor 
to obtain it, as is evidenced by his purchase of 
the manuscript, and his long journey, and his reading. 
That he was doing more than simply reading,— that 
he was studying, is evidenced by his language to 
Philip. Can we wonder that God's special providences 
would be manifested toward such an one— toward a 
person in such a condition of heart, hungering and 
thirsting for the truth? We cannot wonder at it. It 
is in full accord with the Lord's promise, that such 
shall be filled; that such seekers shall find; that such 
knockers shall have the door of truth opened to them. 
Let us remember that we are under the care of the 
same God, and that he changes not; and let us learn 
the lesson that he is as well able today as ever to 
assist the sincere truth-seeker. 

Another lesson connected with this matter pertains 
to times and seasons. God could have directed 
the eunuch to the meeting of the Church at Jerusalem, 
and to the instructions of the apostles there. But 



this probably would not have been so favorable for 

the eunuch. After receiving the apostolic instruction 

he might have referred the matter to the scribes 

and Pharisees, and have received in return explanations 

more or less confusing. In the Lord's providence 

he quite likely heard something of the Christians, 

and their claims that Messiah had come and 

had been crucified, and he quite probably knew the 

other side of the story, that the chief priests and 

teachers claimed that the whole matter was a fraud, 

an imposition. Possibly these very thoughts had 

led him to procure the manuscript he was reading, 

and had brought him into the attitude of mind favorable 

for the reception of the truth when Philip expounded 

it. 

Let us learn from this, not only in respect to our 
own affairs, but also in respect to the general service 
of the truth, to trust implicitly in divine wisdom and 
power— to remember that the Lord knoweth them 
that are his, and that he knoweth how best to bring 
them in contact with the truth. Properly learned, this 
lesson will not slack our hands in the divine service; 
for true servants will still be anxious and ready to 
serve, as was Philip; but it will serve to strengthen 
our hearts and to take from us that fearfulness that 
is a hindrance to the peace of many of God's children. 
Let us not fear for the Lord's Word, but remember 
his declaration, through the Prophet, "My 
word, that goeth forth out of my mouth, shall not return 
unto me void; it shall accomplish that which 
I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I 
sent it."— Isa. 55:11. 

The chariot probably overtook and passed Philip 
in the road, the eunuch driving leisurely, in order that 
he might read. He was reading aloud, after the 
custom of that time and country, and according to 
the injunctions laid upon the people by the Jewish 
teachers. Indeed, it was one of the Jewish rules that 
the faithful, in traveling, should read if they had no 
companionship. We are not informed how the spirit 
told Philip to hail the eunuch; possibly in the same 
miraculous way in which he was sent to this road, or 
possibly having been sent to this road he was on the 
look-out for the object of his mission, and hearing the 
eunuch reading from the prophecy, Philip may have 
understood at once that this was the favored person, 

R2965 : page 71 

and a favorable time for delivering the message to 
the service of which his life had been consecrated. 
This gives us a suggestion— all of the Lord's people, 
in proportion as they desire to be the servants of 
the truth, should be continually on the alert to note 
opportunities for service, and should expect to be 
guided and used of the Lord. All of the Lord's people 



are ministers, servants, of the truth; and each 

should seek to use every opportunity presenting itself, 

knowing not which may be specially prospered 

of the Lord. Wherever we see evidences of devotion 

to the Lord and to his Word, we should be on the 

alert to extend a helping hand. We should, as 

Philip did, seek an opportunity for conversing with 

such, with a view to giving them the help which they 

need, the very assistance which the Lord has extended 

to us through some channel. We are to be 

on the alert to pass along the blessing which we have 

received, and to esteem that this is the chief business 

of life with those who have consecrated themselves 

to the service of the King of kings. 

Philip's inquiry, "Understandest thou what thou 
readest?" may not always be well received; but it was 
a very direct way of approaching his errand. It is 
well to use tact, but we have the thought that many 
of the Lord's people are inclined to use rather too 
much tact, and are not sufficiently direct in their endeavors 
to present the Gospel message. Had Philip 
been too much under the control of this wrong sentiment 
respecting tact, he might have talked to the 
eunuch quite a while about the weather and the 
crops; about his home in Ethiopia; the peace and 
prosperity of that country; its exports and imports; 
and the religious status of the people; and might thus 
gradually have gotten his hearer's mind quite off the 
most important of all subjects. Considering that he 
heard him and knew the subject of his study, we cannot 
think of a better introduction to his message than 
the method and language which Philip adopted: 
"Understandest thou what thou readest?" 

This was a test question, so to speak. If the 
eunuch did have an understanding of what he was 
reading he would take no offence at this, but would 
gladly have said, "Yes, friend, I thank God that I do, 
and the knowledge is very precious to me. Do you 
also understand it?" But had he been of the wrong 
condition of heart his answer might have been, with 
more or less manifestation of offence, "What is that 
to you? Mind your own business." Or had he 
been of a hypocritical cast of mind, like the Pharisees 
to whom Jesus spoke, he would have professed 
a knowledge of the subject, and then, to cover his 
own ignorance of it, he would have made some general 
remarks and have turned the subject into another 
channel. We are not to expect those who are 
in the Pharisaical condition to receive the truth from 
us, any more than from the Lord. We are to know, 
according to the Lord's Word, that the truth is purposely 
hidden from all not in the right attitude of 
heart to receive it — it is indefinite, indistinct, unintelligible 
to them. This is one difficulty with the 
teachers of churchianity today; like the Pharisees and 
scribes and chief priests of old, they say, "Are we 



blind also?" They claim to know; but we know that 
they know that they don't know. Therefore, as our 
Lord said to their prototypes, their blindness continues; 
for no one can expect to be taught of God 
while in that self-sufficient and dishonest condition of 
mind which boasts of knowledge and the faith which 
it lacks. --John 5:40,41. 

All those to whom the Lord specially sends the 
message of his grace during this Gospel age are in 
considerable degree like this eunuch of our lesson- 
earnest, honest, truth-seekers, not afraid to acknowledge 
that they do not know, and not afraid nor 
ashamed to receive whatever assistance the Lord may 
provide. The eunuch did not stop to inquire of 
Philip, "Are you a priest? or a Pharisee? or a Doctor 
of the Law?" It was sufficient to him that he held in 
his hand what he believed to be a message from God, 
and that he knew it contained various statements, 
promises, etc., which he did not understand. He believed 
that the God who gave this prophecy was both 
able and willing to furnish an interpretation of it, 
and he was seeking that interpretation; and whoever 
could give such an interpretation as would shed light 
upon his questions would by that means be proven 
a teacher of God, a servant of the truth, a light-bearer. 

The eunuch's answer implied this, when he said, 
"How can I understand, unless some man should 
guide me?" So earnest was he in his quest of the 
truth that the bare suggestion of assistance implied 
in Philip's question was sufficient to arouse fully his 
interest; and he entreated Philip to have a seat with 
him in his chariot, and thus grant him the benefit of 
whatever information could be given. We are not 
surprised that a heart so noble, and yet so humble 
and teachable, should be specially favored of the Lord, 
and have a messenger sent specially to him for his 
instruction, while others by the million were passed 
by— not esteemed worthy. It is the same today; 
and while the Lord does not generally direct his people 
in the miraculous manner in which he directed 
Philip to the eunuch, we nevertheless have general 
instructions along the same line; viz., "Preach the 
Gospel to the meek." "He that hath an ear, let him 
hear."-Isa. 61:1; Matt. 13:9; Rev. 2:7. 

Our message, as the Prophet declares, is to bind 
up broken hearts, and not to break hearts: we are to 
preach to the meek, and not to the froward, the Gospel 
of Christ. The hard hearts, and the froward, 
God will deal with in another way. He will break 
them upon the anvil of affliction and trouble and discipline 
in his own due time and manner. Meantime, 
in this Gospel age, he is seeking for the Bride 
amongst those who are already broken, and already 
to some extent meek and teachable. We should not 
waste our time in futile efforts, contrary to this 
Scriptural rule. Let those who have not the Gospel, 



but who have merely a message of reformation, 
preach political reforms, social reforms, moral reforms. 
The Lord's Word to his consecrated servants, 
the Royal Priesthood, is, "Preach the good tidings 
to the meek, bind up the broken hearted!" 

It was evidently not of chance, but of providence 
that the eunuch had under consideration the particular 
part of Isaiah's prophecy which refers to our Lord 
as the Lamb before his shearers opening not his 

R2966 : page 72 

mouth in protest; telling about his humiliation, and 
how his life would be taken from the earth; and instituting 
a query respecting his posterity. No wonder 
the poor eunuch was mystified; no wonder the 
Jews were all mystified. Unquestionably this prophecy, 
like the majority of prophecies, could be but imperfectly 
comprehended until fulfilled— could be 
understood only in the light of its fulfilment, and then 
only by those in a proper attitude of heart and under 
the instruction, the guidance, of the holy spirit. 
We should notice in this connection, (1) that 
while the Scriptures are "the sword of the spirit, the 
Word of God," able to make wise, they cannot be 
understood until the Lord's due time. (2) They can 
only be understood under the leading and instruction 
of the holy spirit, and yet (3) the holy spirit was not 
exercised upon the truth-seeker either through the 
Scriptures nor through any mental process, but 
through the living representative of the spirit- 
through the Gospel message, delivered by a fellow-servant. 
The true child of God, the real truth-seeker, 
following the proper lines, and properly trusting 
to the Lord, according to his Word, will neither 
ignore nor reject the assistance which God has been 
pleased to render through teachers in the Church. He 
will merely seek to find such teachers as God shall 
raise up, and the distinction between these and sectarian 
teachers; and one of his best, safest and surest 
methods of knowing the teachers whom the Lord will 
raise up, will be by their ability to make simple, clear, 
plain, the Word of God,— "written aforetime for our 
admonition." This was the only credential offered 
by Philip in his ministry of the truth. He had been 
taught of God through the apostles, and was now 
able, in turn, to communicate to the hearing ear of 
the eunuch the simple story of how Christ had come 
into the world to redeem the world, had died for 
man's sins, had arisen, and ascended up to glory: that 
now, meantime, before blessing the world through 
Christ according to promise, God was calling out an 
elect "little flock" to be joint-heirs with Jesus in the 
Kingdom; and that as soon as this election should 
be completed the Messiah (Jesus, the Head, and the 
Church, his body) would be manifested in glory and 



in ruling and blessing power to the world of mankind, 
—the long looked-for Messiah, whose work had 
been foretold by all the holy prophets since the world 
began. 

Philip undoubtedly further explained to the 
eunuch, that those who accepted Christ as their 
Savior, and who desired to become his disciples, taking 
up their cross to follow him, should give their 
assent to this matter by baptism. Apparently it did 
not take the eunuch long to decide what his course 
should be, and his readiness of heart to follow the 
Lamb, whithersoever he would lead, is indicated by 
his promptness to be baptized. 

Philip was ready to receive him as a fellow-member 
of the Church of Christ, and ready to give him the 
symbol of introduction into the body of Christ— baptism 
—as soon as he gave evidence of having accepted 
the Lord, and having made consecration to him. He 
made no request that the eunuch learn the catechism, 
nor that he confess something else such as well-meaning 
but mistaken men in the dark ages promulgated 
as necessary, and as explanatory of the Bible. 
Neither did he say, "Now I will write your name, 
and you will be considered a member of the Church 
on that account, and I will procure for you some 
authority to preach the Gospel in Ethiopia." No; 
at that time the subject had not been confused and 
befogged as now. Philip preached the Gospel in its 
simplicity, and the eunuch received it in like manner; 
and with the Gospel itself went the right and authority 
to declare it. "He that hath my word let him 
speak my word." (Jer. 23:28.) All who have received 
the anointing of the spirit, the unction from 
the holy one, are thus recognized as members of the 
"royal priesthood," and fully commissioned to tell 
forth the good tidings. 

This is in full accord with our Golden Text 
which does not say, "With the mouth a creed is confessed," 
which is neither understood by the head nor 
believed in the heart, and thus a membership is 
gained in a nominal church of human establishment, 
and without divine sanction or authority as to name 
or methods. It does state, on the contrary, most 
simply and beautifully, that whatever is believed that 
has any force or weight in the Lord's estimation is 
that which is believed by the individual himself, in 
his own heart, and he can believe nothing in his heart 
that he does not to some extent comprehend. It is 
not a belief of mysteries, but a belief of facts, and 
subsequently coming to a comprehension of things 
which are still mysteries to "those that are without," 
—outside the true Church. 

The second part of the text is evidently as important 
as the first part: "With the mouth confession 
is made unto salvation." This implies that a 
dumb believer will never make his calling and his 



election sure. We do not refer to those who are naturally 
dumb; but understand the word "mouth" in 
the same sense that we speak of the "ears" of our 
heart, and the "eyes of our understanding." A heart 
that sees and hears the grace of God, and that truly 
accepts the same, must in due time become so enthused 
with the things heard and seen, that it cannot 
refrain from some outward manifestation of its joy 
and peace and hope and trust and thankfulness. As 
the apostles declared, "We cannot but speak the 
things which we have seen and heard." All Christians 
who, having received the light of truth, having 
seen the grace of God in the divine plan, having 
tasted that the Lord is gracious, having heard the 
wonders of "so great salvation, which began to be 
spoken by our Lord, and was confirmed unto us by 
them that heard him"— these must not, cannot, keep 
silence nor put their light under a bushel. If they do, 
it means the extinguishment of their light, the stoppage 
of their growth; and persevered in this would 
ultimately mean to them destruction in the Second 
Death;— for those who are ashamed of the Lord and 
of his Word, after they have discerned clearly, not 
only are not fit for the Kingdom, but of such the 
Lord would be ashamed under any and all conditions. 
-Luke 9:26. 



R2966 : page 73 

AWAKE THOU THAT SLEEPEST, AND ARISE. 

-EPH. 5:1 1-21. -MARCH 23.- 

"Be not drunk with wine, wherein is 
excess; but be filled with the spirit." 

OUR LESSON inculcates the transforming 

tendency of the truth. Like all of the New 

Testament epistles, it is addressed, not to the 

wicked, not to the worldly, but to Christians. The 

Lord's spirit, the spirit of truth and of righteousness, 

received as a result of faith in the Redeemer and consecration 

to him as a follower, a pupil, is the beginning 

of a new life, which starting in the will, should 

grow, develop, increase, until it permeates and fills 

all the avenues of life— its affections, its ambitions, 

its cravings. 

Today, as in the Apostle's day, those who have become 
the Lord's people through faith and consecration 
need to be informed respecting the possibilities 
of their new life, else they may permit it to lie comparatively 
dormant— permit it to be covered up, and 
finally to be extinguished, smothered by the old nature 
—the will of the flesh, its affections, its ambitions, 



its cravings. While, therefore, it is important 
that conversion should take place— a turning of the 
will, the intention, from sin to holiness, from self to 
God,— it is very important that conversion be not 
esteemed to be the end, but merely the beginning of 
the Christian's course. It is, of course, important 
that the begetting should be of the truth, and not of 
error, so that the new mind may be of the proper 
kind; but even when properly begotten of the truth, 
as a child of the Kingdom, it is essential that the 
new creature shall be nourished first with the "milk," 
subsequently with the "meat" of the truth, which God 
has provided for this very purpose. 

New converts, like new-born babes, are much inclined 
to sleep; but while this in nature is profitable, 
in grace it is dangerous; for the new creature to sleep 
in self-satisfaction means death; the begetting of the 
spirit has been for the very purpose of energizing; 
and hence, the Apostle here calls upon such "babes 
in Christ," fallen asleep under the spirit of the world 
and of the nominal church, and thus in danger of 
complete failure in the way of character development, 
saying,— "Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from 
the dead, and Christ shall shine upon thee." (R.V.) 
The "new creature" is to recognize the fact, that the 
whole world is dead;— not merely under a death 
sentence, nor merely figuratively dead— but in a death 
condition, as respects the highest and noblest things 
of righteousness and truth. Our begetting of the 
holy spirit of truth gives us merely a first suggestion 
of our own condition by nature, and the condition 
of the whole world, in trespasses and sin— in thought, 
word, and deed. It is necessary that the mind 
should first be awakened to seek for other things; it 
is necessary that the ear should hear the voice of him 
who now speaks unto us from above— the anointed 
Head of the anointed body; it is necessary that the 
eyes of our understanding should be opened that we 
may see the true situation of things; and all this is 
well represented in the Apostle's figure of 
awakening. 

We regret to say that the general tendency in 
Christendom is not to awaken the sleepers, but rather 
to lull them to sleep. This, however, is not always, 
nor generally, done with a view to serving the adversary, 

R2967 : page 73 

and permitting the new life to become extinct, 
just as not many nurses and mothers wilfully 
contribute to the weaknesses, diseases, and death of 
the infants under their charge. In both cases good 
intentions are often thwarted by ignorance of the 
governing laws. Those who occupy the position of 
teachers in the various denominations, while not devoid 
of good intentions as respects the babe in 



Christ, lack the theoretical and practical knowledge 
which they should inculcate— they are babes in spiritual 
matters themselves, as the Apostle wrote in one 
of his epistles,— "For when for the time ye ought to 
be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again 
which be the first principles [rudiments] of the oracles 
of God."-Heb. 5:12. 

When the believing, converted, consecrated, begotten, 
sleeping, "new creature" has been awakened 
—when the eyes and ears of his understanding have 
been opened, as above suggested, to see the true conditions 
of the world, and to realize himself as a "new 
creature" in Christ,— his next duty is to arise. His 
arising from the dead signifies the activity of the new 
mind, the new will, in directing and controlling his 
mortal body. This implies effort; the putting forth 
of all the energy of the new creature. It requires 
no effort to sleep, or to lie after one gets awake; but 
to rise requires the exercise of every muscle. Arising 
is not an instantaneous act, but a process requiring 
one movement after another, until it is fully accomplished; 
so also is the arising of the "new creature" 
from the dead conditions of sin and trespass 
against the laws of righteousness and truth and purity; 
it requires his every effort, and is a work of time. 
Indeed all experienced Christians who have followed 
the Apostle's injunction to arise from the dead, have 
found that it requires days, months, years, of energetic 
effort to rise up above, superior to the fallen 
tendencies of his own flesh,— common to the world of 
mankind. He finds that even after he has risen 
fully up, so that he does not wilfully practice sin, nor 
countenance it in any sense or degree, he still must 
be on his guard lest he be entrapped by the weaknesses 
of his mortal body; or by the allurements of 
the world; or by the temptations of the adversary; 
and thus stumble again over some of the things of 
sin and death from which he had arisen by the Lord's 
grace. 

The Apostle in the previous verses has explained 
some of these things of sin and death to which the 
Lord's people should become thoroughly awake, and 
from which they should arise completely. In verse 3, 
he mentions some evils which should be "not so much 
as named among you— as becometh saints." In vs. 4, 
he mentions "foolish talking" as among the things 
of sin and death from which the Lord's people must 
arise. While we believe that the saints will make 
most progress themselves, and be most helpful to 
others, by avoiding all kinds of light and unedifying 
conversation, and while we strongly recommend this 
course to all, nevertheless, we do not understand the 
Apostle here to refer to what might be designated as 
harmless jokes or levity. From the text we understand 
him to refer to coarse, lascivious talking, and to 



R2967 : page 74 

a more refined jesting with half-suggestions of profanity 
or vice, sometimes practiced by the educated 
and witty. 

We are to arise from all such low conditions of 
thought, word, and deed as we find prevalent about 
us; because as children of God, begotten by his spirit, 
we can have no fellowship with these things. We 
must regard them as the Apostle suggests, as "unfruitful 
works of darkness." The Apostle by this word, 
unfruitful, no doubt intended to give us the thought 
that sin is destructive instead of productive— that its 
tendency is toward death. On the contrary, the 
tendency of the new mind of Christ is toward fruit-bearing 
development, blessing, uplifting, refreshment. 
Not only is this true in the individual Christian, 
but as our Lord's words suggest, the individual 
Christian exercises a preservative influence on others; 
wherever he may live he is a shining light dispelling 
the darkness of sin; he is the salt of the earth, preserving 
the mass from corruption. The moral standing 
of the civilized world today, is unquestionably 
largely due to the indirect influence of the holy spirit 
in God's people;— which as the Apostle declares, reproves 
the world. Our reproof of sin may always 
be through the living epistles of our daily lives which, 
as bright and shining lights, should ever reprove by 
manner, look, act, and tone, everything tending 
toward darkness and sin,— "Let your light so shine 
before men that they seeing your good works may 
glorify your Father in Heaven." Occasionally it 
may be proper, and still more occasionally it may be 
duty, for us to speak or to act in opposition to darkness; 
but the light of a godly life, testifying for the 
truth and exhibiting the holy spirit, is certainly one 
of the most forceful reproofs of sin that can be 
administered. 

While passing, we might have in mind the 
Apostle's words, "unfruitful works of darkness," laying 
emphasis upon the last word. Sin is figuratively 
represented by darkness; and, additionally, it generally 
prefers literal darkness for the accomplishment of its 
purposes. The Lord's children are children of the 
light, and are to walk in the light of truth; they are 
to have their hearts enlightened and their minds so 
illuminated as to make them burning and shining 
lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, 
blinded and darkened by the Prince of Darkness. 
And all such while endeavoring to arise from 
the dead and to live separate from the world are 
recommended to walk in the light of truth; and so 
far as possible to live in the light actually,— to see 
that their homes are well lighted,— recognizing that 
even the natural light is a foe to the darkness of sin. 

The Apostle suggests the necessity of taking the 



various steps above outlined, before the Christian will 
get fully into the light himself. It is after he has 
arisen from the dead by the Lord's help, by the help 
of the brethren, by the assistance of the exceeding 
great and precious promises of the Word, by the 
indwelling spirit of the Word;— after he has arisen 
from the dead and indeed while he is arising from the 
state of sin and death, while he is attempting to bring 
his members into subjection to the new life, a new 
light is shining upon him— his light is increasing, his 
knowledge of the Lord, his knowledge of sin, his 
knowledge of righteousness, his appreciation of truth 
and righteousness "in the inward parts," as the 
prophet expresses it. The light shining upon him, 
and deep into the recesses of his heart, may sometimes 
cause distress, as he finds that his own natural 
weaknesses and imperfections are even greater than 
he had at first been aware of; nevertheless, as a child 
of the light, begotten by the Father of lights, he loves 
the right, and hates the sin; and the more clearly 
the light shines upon him and shows him the blemishes 
of his own mortal body, the more he runs for 
and strives for the perfection which the Lord assures 
him he shall attain to in the actual resurrection— of 
which the present "rising to walk in newness of life," 
is but the figure. 

The Apostle, progressing with the thought before 
us, declares that the one who thus arises from the 
dead is not even then to stand still. He must walk- 
not after or toward the flesh and its standard, but after 
and toward the spirit and its standard. And he will 
need to walk circumspectly— with careful scrutiny 
of each footstep. The Apostle suggests that any 
other course than this would be foolish. We are to 
remember that our adversary was more disposed to 
let us alone while we were asleep, but that now, when 
we are awake and seeking to walk after the spirit, 
he will be on the alert to ensnare and entrap us;— 
hence the need of our circumspection. The Lord 
gives us light, not only on our own characters, and 
upon sin and righteousness in general, but, additionally, 
he gives us light upon the road we are to 
travel. This light upon our pathway is the light 
shining from the Scriptures of which the Prophet declares, 
"Thy Word is a lamp to my feet, a lantern to 
my footsteps." He who neglects the lamp, neglects 
one of the very important means of walking circumspectly. 
And alas, how many Christian people 
today, with the Bible in their homes, are neglecting 
to trim and use it as a lamp;— if not standing in the 
dark they are walking in the darkness, stumbling, or 
in danger of stumbling, continually. Let us remember 
the importance of this lamp, and use it; to the intent 
that ours may be the "path of the just, shining more 
and more unto the perfect day." 

Thus we are to redeem the time— to purchase 



opportunities for the new creature and its interests 
and concerns, at the expense of the old nature. We as 
new creatures are to exchange the things of darkness 
for the things of light; the opportunities for sowing 
to the flesh for the opportunities of sowing to the 
spirit. The opportunities must be thus purchased 
else we will have none: if we give way to the inclinations 
of the flesh, its appetites and desires, it will consume 
all there is of time and opportunity, strength 
and influence, and leave nothing for the new 
creature,— "because the days are evil;" that is because 
they are unfavorable to spiritual progress. 
They present thousands of temptations for worldly 
pleasure and worldly ease and worldly fame and 
worldly progress;— and thus they multiply the tests 
which come upon us as "new creatures." We must 
remember that the Lord desires that these tests shall 
demonstrate the degree of our love, the degree of our 

R2967 : page 75 

sincerity, the degree of our consecration to him: the 
more our love for the Lord and for righteousness, the 
greater will be our zeal in snatching time, opportunity, 
influence from the flesh and consecrating it to spiritual 
things. In so doing we will not be unwise, but 
will display our understanding of the Lord's will.— 
Verses 16,17. Unless we are awake we cannot arise 
to present newness of life; and unless this arising to 
newness of life is accomplished we cannot share in 
the First Resurrection. 

The Golden Text of the lesson is the 18th verse; 
in it the Apostle contrasts two spirits. Under present 
conditions men naturally look for something to 
exhilarate them, to refresh, to revive— to counteract 

R2968 : page 75 

life's trials, burdens and sorrows: many of the dead 

in trespasses and sins find this stimulant and relief 

from care, in various intoxicating stimulants,— wine, 

spirituous liquors, opium, etc.; but the child of God 

is to look in a totally different direction for his stimulant, 

his exhilaration, his relief from care and trouble 

—he is to be "filled with the spirit" of the Lord. He 

is not merely to have a little of it, but is to become intoxicated 

with it to the extent that it will change the 

general appearance of all his surroundings and conditions 

in life. And cannot each advanced Christian, 

filled with the Lord's spirit testify that this is true?— 

that all things are changed from the new standpoint 

and its new hopes, new ambitions, new relationships? 

Can he not say, "Old things have passed away, all 

things have become new?" What need has he for 

the wine cup to drown his troubles, or smother his 

sorrows? He knows from observation if not from experience 



that all such exhilaration and oblivion to 

sorrow brings an after effect of pain: he knows also 

from experience and observation that to be filled 

with the Lord's spirit need not be a temporary oblivion 

to sorrow, but a permanent one— that,— "Earth 

has no sorrows that Heaven cannot cure;"— that even 

the deepest pains and sorrows of the heart are 

more than counterbalanced and cancelled by the joys 

of the Lord secured through the possession of a fullness 

of his spirit. 

The lightness of heart of the intoxicated "dead 
in trespasses and sin" often leads to bacchanalian 
revelry and song, repulsive even to the same person 
when sober; but the filling of the spirit of the Lord 
leads to songs and rejoicings, not only with the lips 
but with the heart,— refreshing, comforting, and uplifting, 
not only to the singer but also to the hearer. 
It is this "new song" in the heart that constitutes the 
Christian a separate and distinct being from all others 
about him. "Thou hast put a new song in my mouth, 
even thy loving kindness, O Lord!" Because it is in 
the heart, therefore, it must be in the mouth also, 
and must influence all the affairs of life; for we cannot 
but speak the things which have so wonderfully uplifted 
and refreshed our souls. And the speaking of 
these things is the proclamation of the Gospel, 
—"good tidings of great joy which shall be to all 
people." 

In our new attitude, figuratively risen from the 
dead and walking in newness of life with the Lord 
our Redeemer and Head, all of life's affairs have a 
new coloring. Not only can we sing,— 

"Sweet prospects, sweet birds and sweet flowers, 
Have all gained new sweetness to me. 
but we can glory in tribulation also, and give thanks 
for these, as well as life's blessings, to the Heavenly 
Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus; knowing, having 
the conviction, the assurance, that life's disciplines 
are working out for us a "far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory." And not only so, but, this 
dependence upon the Lord and filling with his spirit 
makes us humble; so that we do not think of ourselves 
above what we ought to think, but think soberly. 
It is in view of the humility of this class that 
the Apostle suggests that they submit themselves 
one to another in the reverence of the Lord. Those 
who have the Lord's spirit will have the brotherly 
kindness which is a part of it; and will be quite willing 
to defer to each other's preferences in many 
things— in all things not contrary to the principles of 
righteousness,— in all things in harmony with reverence 
to the Lord, his Word, and the principles it 
inculcates. 

It may not be amiss here to remind the brethren 
that the Scriptures show two kinds of symbolic or 
figurative intoxications: the one above described, filling 



with the spirit of the Lord and its joys, and peace, 
and comfort;— the results of the fruitage of the vine 
which the Heavenly Father planted, of which Christ 
is the central stock, and of which his followers are 
all "branches." The other wine is a counterfeit, an 
illicit wine; it is not produced by the vine of the 
Father's planting, but from the grapes of the "vine 
of the earth." It is of this wine that the Lord tells 
us Great Babylon has made all the nations drunken 
—the wine of her inconsistency, of her infidelity. 
This is the wine or spirit of the world,— of 
Churchianity. 

Looking all about us we fear that many, who 
think they are filled with the holy spirit of the truth, 
are really filled with this intoxication of Churchianity. 
Those intoxicated with this wine will shortly be 
aroused to a realization that it was sadly adulterated, 
and the effects will be painful. Those who are intoxicated 
with this wine of Churchianity are rejoicing 
not in the cup of the world and of devils, not in 
gross sins, but nevertheless not in the spiritual things. 
They glory each in the prosperity of his own sect, 
they are generally intoxicated with love for sectarianism, 
so that worldly persons, dead in trespasses 
and sins are often loved and brothered by those intoxicated 
with this adulterated spirit, while saints are 
spurned and treated as enemies because of faithfulness 
to God in rebuking sectarian Churchianity and 
its doctrinal falsities. 

Let us, dear brethren, beware of the natural wine 
and its drunkenness,— of the cup of devils, gross sins 
and immoralities; let us beware of the still more deceptive 
wine of Babylon's cup of mixture which has 
a form of godliness, in which church and world and 
lodge combinations tend to stupefy and to give illicit 
joy; let us, however, having made sure of the Lord's 
cup, drink thereof and be filled with the spirit of our 
Master and with his joys. 

page 75 

QUARTERLY REVIEW. -MARCH 30. 



Golden Text:— "Therefore let all the house of Israel know 
assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, 
both Lord and Christ."-Acts 2:36. 



R2968 : page 76 

SANCTIFIED THROUGH A KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUTH. 
-ACTS 9:l-20.-APRIL 6.- 



"Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted 

out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence 

of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before 

was preached unto you; whom the heaven must receive until 

the times of restitution of all things, which God 

hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets 

since the world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 

CONVERSION is a proper enough word 
to use respecting the change of course necessary 
for Jews to make in becoming 
Christians. The word is used in a totally different 
sense, however, today, when we refer to the conversion 
of the dissolute and unbelieving to faith and 
obedience as disciples of Christ. Any radical change 
or revolution of thought or conduct is not improperly 
called conversion. It is well that this point be 
clearly enunciated, because the misapprehension is 
so general. Paul's conversion, for instance, is likened 
to the conversion of sinners, strangers, aliens and 
foreigners from God; whereas it more nearly resembled 
the conversion of a Christian of today from 
opposition to present truth to its love and service. 
Such conversions today are quite frequent— many 
who once burned Millennial Dawn now love it, and 
are doing all in their power to spread abroad its teachings, 
its views of the divine character and plan, its 
presentation of Messiah and his work, past and future. 
The change, or conversion of such persons is acknowledged 
to be remarkable— things they once 
hated now they love— things they once loved now 
they abominate— old things are become new to them, 
from the new standpoint,— the new light upon the 
divine plan which has shined into their hearts. 
Saul of Tarsus, the bitter enemy of the Lord 
Jesus and his followers, was, at the same time, a zealous 
servant of God; and his persecutions of the truth, 
as he himself assures us, were undertaken and prosecuted 
with zeal, because he thought that thus he did 
God service. He was a good man according to his 
light— but that light was a dim one. It was because 
he was at heart honest, sincere, good, loyal to the 
Lord, that a special miracle was wrought for the opening 
of the eyes of his understanding— that he might 
see the truth. His sincerity is amply attested by the 
promptness of his obedience as soon as his mental 
eyes were opened. He changed not as respected his 
zeal for God and his cause, but merely in the direction 
in which that zeal was exercised, and in the manner of 
its exercise, after it was subjected to the mind of 
Christ through the holy spirit received. So today 
while we have the Scriptural assurance that "None 
of the wicked shall understand," we have also the 
assurance that "The wise shall understand." The 
"wise" are not the "wicked," and we esteem those 



who have manifested a bitter opposition toward present 
truth to be not "wicked" at heart, but deceived, 
blinded. 

We confidently expect that many of this class 
will yet be found amongst the "wise" to whom it shall 
be granted to understand the glorious things of the 
divine plan now being revealed through the Scriptures. 
It will be revealed to them because they are 
not of the wicked; but are like Saul of Tarsus, true 
children of God, whose zeal for him has been misdirected, 
misguided, misused. Some may kick against 
the pricks of facts, evidence, conscience, etc., longer 
than others; but eventually the Lord will grant to 
each of them some experience, or trial, the bitter experience 
of which will prepare them to see the light, 
the truth, in the right direction. Thus many of them 
sing,— "E'en though it be a cross that raiseth me." 

Saul's father was a Roman citizen; probably a 
man of wealth and influence: he was a Jew of the 
holiness sect called Pharisees— the most exact and 
rigid in respect to the divine law. His son named 
after Saul, the first king of Israel, was also given a 

R2969 : page 76 

Roman name, Paul, because of his father's Roman 

citizenship. The Apostle's reference to having suffered 

the loss of all things for Christ's sake, is understood 

to imply that he had been disinherited by his 

father because of his acceptance of Jesus as the Messiah. 

Quite evidently he was poor in the beginning 

of his ministry, as is evident from his laboring at tent-making 

while preaching. The fact that subsequently 

the record represents him as a man of considerable 

influence, and with one or more servants, is considered 

by many to justify the inference that at a later 

date he inherited property, possibly by reason of his 

father's death. In no other way can his "own hired 

house" in Rome, and his influence with officials, shipmasters, 

etc., be accounted for;— little attention and 

consideration are given to a pauper prisoner. 

As to Paul's personal appearance: An iron medal 
was recently found which purported to give a likeness. 
There is also a Roman tablet of about the fourth 
century, which shows Paul seated in a curule chair; 
both represent him as of fine appearance, somewhat 
bald, with beard, and a fine open countenance; about 
medium stature and weight. In the "Acts of Paul 
and Thecla," the first Christian romance, written about 
A.D. 150, there is a description of Paul which is 
probably the best, and a true tradition. In this he 
is described as "small in size, bald-headed, bandy-legged, 
well built, with eyebrows meeting; rather 
long nosed; with motions full of grace, for sometimes 
he seemed like a man, and sometimes like an angel. 
His manner was singularly winning." Very evidently 



his good education and contact with people in the 
higher walks of life gave him that grace and ease of 
manner and speech he manifested so conspicuously 
in the presence of the many high officials with whom 
he came in contact in various ways, as the representative 
of the Lord. 

Our lesson connects with the narrative of Philip: 
while the latter was preaching Christ, Saul was breathing 
out threatenings against all of "this way," and 
doing all that he could to stamp out Christianity. In-as-much 
as the persecution had caused the scattering 
of believers, Saul was pursuing them— going 
even outside the province of Judea in his zeal to crush 
out that which he believed to be dangerous heresy. 
Some may wonder how he could be at heart loyal to 
the Lord, and yet in mind be so bitter against the 
Lord's faithful. Let us suggest how the matter probably 
appeared to Saul's mind: Doubtless he was 
full of the Jewish sentiment respecting Messiah, respecting 
his nation, Israel; he considered it a certain 
and unquestionable fact that the Pharisees represented 
God and all the glorious prophecies and 

R2969 : page 77 

traditions of the nation; and that as Jehovah had favored 
this nation for now these many centuries, his 
favor, undoubtedly, must still be with it; so that if 
he had any further revelations to make they would 
undoubtedly come through the scribes and pharisees 
who "sit in Moses' seat"— as representatives of God 
and of the Law. He expected a Messiah of dignity 
and wealth and social standing in the nation;— if born 
in the natural way at all to be of one of the best 
families. He expected him to establish the dignity 
of Israel upon a plane similar to, but higher than that 
of Solomon;— that he would be a great leader and 
commander to his people, who would successfully 
carry them through every difficulty and opposition 
like as did Moses, Joshua, David,— but still greater, 
still grander, still more successful. 

It is surely difficult for us to imagine how absurd 
would be the claims of Jesus, to a mind filled with 
such expectations. Jesus had neither wealth nor 
social standing nor influence amongst his own people; 
he was despised and rejected by the religious 
chiefs and elders of the nation Moses represented; 
he could have no power or influence whatever with 
the Roman Emperor or others— in the way of establishing 
Israel as the chief nation of the world, 
whose laws should ultimately extend to every nation, 
carrying with them the foretold Messianic blessings. 
No, from Paul's standpoint Jesus was a fraud, a deceiver, 
a false Messiah, his disciples were crack-brained 
dupes, and their doctrines were calculated 
to bring odium upon the religious rulers, who represented 



Moses in the nation,— calculated to stir up 
strife and division amongst the people and to mislead 
them and turn their minds entirely away from Moses 
and the Law and the hopes of Israel; and thus to hinder 
the good cause of God which had been gradually 
developing for centuries. 

It was Paul's zeal for God and his cause that made 
him a persecutor, and not his love for persecution itself, 
—nor any brutal desires that gloried in the sufferings 
of others. His impulse was duty— toward 
God and toward his nation; for if the false doctrines 
spread it meant to him a spreading of opposition to 
both, and temporarily, at least, a frustration of the 
hopes of Israel— putting further off the glorious day 
of blessing for which all Israel had longed and hoped. 
Similarly we find today noble Christian people opposing 
the present truth in the very same spirit. It 
is not that they love or appreciate persecution, but 
that they believe they are doing God service,— that 
the promulgation of present truth means the shaking 
if not the overthrow of all the religious systems in 
which they trust— which they believe to be of divine 
origin, and through which they are hoping to bring 
about the Kingdom of God condition through missionary 
efforts, and the conversion of the world. 
Present truth declares all these efforts to be misdirected 
and futile; it points out the fall of Babylon and 
everything pertaining to her; it declares the establishing 
of God's Kingdom, and the exaltation of the royal 
priesthood outside of sectarian lines; ignoring sect 
membership, it acknowledges only "Israelites indeed," 
personally attached to the Redeemer. The 
revolution of thought, the conversion necessary now, 
is almost as great, and almost as difficult as was that 
which came to Paul and other sectarians of his nation. 
Let us rejoice then, if by the Lord's grace our eyes 
are opening to the truth; and let us have more of 
compassion for others who are still in the condition 
in which Saul of Tarsus was when he persecuted those 
of "this way." 

The light which shone about Saul and those who 
went with him, was evidently a supernatural one, 
because the time of the manifestation was about noon 
(Acts 22:6) and the light was far brighter than that 
of the sun which at the same time, no doubt, was 
shining with great brightness, as is general in that 
country. The phenomenon was seen by the entire 
band, but its special features were known only to 
Saul; the others saw something of the light but they 
saw not the vision which Saul saw representing the 
Son of Man in his glorified condition. The others 
heard a sound but did not distinguish the words which 
Saul heard. All fell to the ground, but all apparently 
were able to rise again and to stand wondering, except 
Saul whose eyes were seriously injured so that he was 
blind. Similarly Stephen saw a vision while those 



who were near him saw nothing: similarly John saw 
the dove descending upon Jesus while the others 
about saw nothing: similarly Jesus heard certain 
words of the Father while the multitude said it 
thundered. It is even mentioned here that the voice 
spoke in the Hebrew tongue: whereas those who 
were with Saul probably spoke in the Syriac or the 
Greek language. 

Saul's astonished answer was, "Who art thou 
Lord?" This was the entire difficulty, he did not 
know the Lord; and as our Master himself declared, 
this lack of knowledge of the Son implied a lack of 
correct knowledge of the Father. We have his 
further explanation that however others in the past 
might have known something about God, they could 
never really know him, in the sense of personal acquaintance 
and appreciation of his character and 
spirit, except through the Son— a part of whose object 
in coming was to reveal the Father. So we might 
say of all who have persecuted the body of Christ, 
even when they did it ignorantly, it was because they 
did not know Jesus— because they had not received 
of his spirit in sufficient measure. Let us beware that 
no such spirit of persecution finds any sympathy or 
lodgment in our hearts, or any expression in our 
words or deeds. This will not mean, however, that 
we shall never offer criticism either of persons or 
doctrines; nor that we shall never reprove or rebuke 
and that publicly (2 Tim. 4:2); but it surely does 
mean that our reproving and rebuking, of teachings 
and of teachers, shall be done from a Scriptural standpoint 
—giving reasons, giving them plainly but without 
bitterness, without harshness, without unkindness 
in any degree. 

The statement, "And he trembling and astonished 
said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" quite 
probably well explains Paul's condition of body and 
mind at the time; but these words are not found in the 
ancient Greek manuscripts: likewise the words, "It 
is hard for thee to kick against the pricks," are 
omitted. 

For three days Saul neither ate nor drank, and 
was totally blind. What a season for reflection! 

R2969 : page 78 

What a humiliation to think that he had fought 
against the truth! What prayers for forgiveness, and 
what pledges of consecration to Jesus, we may imagine 
filled his heart during those days! Unquestionably 
it was a time of good resolution as respected 
the future, if peradventure, the Lord would graciously 
forgive him and grant an opportunity to retrieve the 
past. He had a dream, too, and in it he beheld a man 
anointing his eyes, restoring his sight. On the 
fourth day a man, a poor and humble disciple of Jesus, 



named Ananias, came, not without fear, to visit Saul; 
—knowing him by reputation, as an enemy of all who 
believed in "this way;" knowing that he was lodged 
in the house of one who was not a friend of the truth, 
but assured of the Lord that Saul was praying and 
would welcome him, having been informed in a vision: 
Ananias when sent of the Lord courageously did his 
part. 

There is a lesson here for all of us; the Lord did 
not send one of the Apostles from Jerusalem, nor 

R2970 : page 78 

was Ananias one of the elders or deacons, as far as 

we know; but he was a plain, humble, obedient disciple, 

"A broken and emptied vessel, for the Master's 

use made meet." Let all of the Lord's dear people 

be similarly filled with the Lord's spirit, and on the 

alert; emptied of self, feeling their own brokenness 

and littleness, let them be ready and anxious to do 

God's service; that they may be used of him as opportunity 

shall occur. What a blessing must have 

come to Ananias in connection with his service! Ever 

afterward he could think how he had been a humble 

instrument in the Lord's hands in carrying a blessing 

to one who subsequently became such a noble servant 

of the cross of Christ. Likewise some of the 

Lord's faithful ones in recent times have taken the 

Lord's message either by word or tract or pamphlet, 

and have opened the eyes of some who subsequently 

have become mighty for the truth and for the pulling 

down of the strongholds of error. What a rejoicing 

such have had in the privileges of their service! 

We know not which will prosper, this or that, therefore 

let us diligently use every opportunity as it may 

come to us; praying the while for much wisdom and 

grace and many opportunities for service. 

The Lord's foreknowledge is clearly displayed 
in verses 15,16; he knew Saul— knew of his honesty 
and of his zeal;— he knew that this honesty and zeal 
as soon as they should be rightly directed would make 
just such an instrument for his service as he desired 
to use. The Apostle Paul recognized this himself, 
and even traces divine providence so far back as his 
birth, declaring that the Lord had chosen him from 
his mother's womb. He could see in the light of 
subsequent events how all of his affairs, from earliest 
childhood, had been tending in a favorable direction 
to prepare him for his work of ministry, as an 
apostle;— and even his experiences as a persecutor 
proved profitable, for they humbled his estimate of 
himself and undoubtedly gave him a larger degree of 
sympathy for those suffering from a similar blindness, 
increasing his helpfulness toward them. This 
does not signify, however, that God had predetermined 
that Paul should have a place in the Kingdom: 



that he determined for himself,— making his calling 
and election sure by faith and obedience. The Lord 
providentially guided his steps in childhood and youth, 
so that he learned certain lessons, and gained certain 
preparations which might be useful in due time; and 
in due time he opened the eyes of his understanding, 
knowing well what would be his own choice thereafter. 
Nevertheless, this same Apostle declares that 
even after having preached the gospel to others, he, 
himself, might have become a castaway;— having 
borne the Lord's name before the Gentiles and Israelites 
and kings, and having suffered great things 
for the Lord's name's sake, he might still fail to maintain, 
faithfully to the end, the character of an overcomer, 
and thus fail to become a joint-heir with his 
Lord. 

Ananias coming to Saul introduced himself beautifully 
—he had the Lord's spirit: he was glad to know 
Saul as a brother; glad to forget that he had been 
a persecutor of the Church; he did not upbraid him; 
he did not say, You deserve eternal torment; nor 
You deserve a cowhiding;— he made no unkind allusion 
to the past, but addressed him on the contrary 
in the light of the information the Lord had 
given him, saying, "Brother Saul." There is a beautiful 
lesson here for many of the Lord's people who 
seem more disposed to chide and upbraid than to 
commend and rejoice with former persecutors: this 
is one of the necessary lessons to be learned by all— 
it is an evidence of the indwelling of the spirit of 
Christ, the spirit of love, parts of which are brotherly 
kindness, gentleness, meekness. 

Great scales fell from Saul's eyes, and a measure 
of natural sight was restored; but oh, how much 
greater was the spiritual sight which he received,— 
the illumination of his heart, his mind! The darkness 
and obscurity of tradition upon the Law and the 
Prophets were now largely dissipated, because he saw 
Jesus— Jesus as the Redeemer suffering death for the 
sins of the whole world;— Jesus glorified, directing 
the election of the Church, his members, his body, his 
joint-heirs,— and who were, by and by, to be with 
Jesus the Messiah in glory and majesty to bless, to 
restore, to uplift Israel and all the families of the 
earth. True, the evidences are that Paul never fully 
recovered his eyesight; and he likewise testifies 
that his spiritual sight never reached perfection, saying, 
"Now, we see through a glass obscurely, then, 
face to face." 

Having taken his stand for Christ, he acknowledged 
him in the usual way, by baptism, and not by 
joining a sectarian system. He joined the body of 
Christ, and thus became a fellow-member with all who 
are joined to Christ, the one Head of the one body. 
Immediately he met with the Lord's people; he was 
no longer ashamed of them; he could not now do too 



much for them; any honor and dignity which were 

his by virtue of his birth, and wealth, and Roman citizenship, 

were none too good to be sacrificed for the 

Lord, and having learned that in persecuting the 

Lord's people he persecuted the Lord himself, so 

he now understood that in meeting with the Lord's 

people and honoring them, he was meeting with and 

honoring the Lord. Forthwith he preached Jesus. 

He preached him as the Son of God, the one 

in whom the prophecies of the past were being fulfilled, 

the Messiah who had redeemed, and who in 

R2970 : page 79 

God's due time would deliver Israel and the world 
from the bondage of Satan— sin and death. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT. 

This is from Peter's discourse shortly after the 
day of Pentecost; his words were doubtless in some 
degree prophecies; they point down to the second 
coming of our Lord— though Peter may not have 
comprehended how far distant that event would be. 
The exhortation to be converted to the Lord was delivered 
to the Jews who were already his typical people, 
in covenant relationship, but who needed now to 
accept the conditions of the New Covenant and to 
make a corresponding change in their lives— from 
membership in the house of servants, to membership 
in the house of sons— from being amongst those for 
whom atonement sacrifices were made year by year 
continually, which could never take away sin, to be of 
those accepting the one sacrifice of Christ and its redeeming 
merit,— to trust for a present covering for 
their sins, through faith in the precious blood, and 
to hope for an ultimate blotting out of them at the second 
coming of the Lord, as the text declares. 

So long as the believer is blemished physically, 
mentally, morally, by sin, so long he has the evidence 
that his sins are not blotted out. He may, nevertheless, 
rejoice greatly as the prophet indicates, saying 
"Blessed is the man whose sins are covered," but he 
should look forward longingly to the time when every 
evidence of the sin, every mark of guilt, will be so 
completely blotted out as to need no further covering. 
This to the saints of the gospel age will occur at the 
second coming of Christ, when they shall be 
"changed," in an instant, receiving the new spiritual 
bodies which the Lord has promised them in the 
first resurrection. To the world this blotting out of 
sins will come gradually, during the Millennial age. 
In proportion as each being comes into full harmony 
with the great Prophet, Priest and King then reigning, 
each will gradually experience the blessings of 
restitution— eliminating all traces of evil and sin, 



and restoring gradually to the original perfection lost 
in Adam, redeemed by Jesus, and restored by the 
blotting out of sins under the ministry of his 
Kingdom. 



R2970 : page 79 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Dear Editor:— 

For some time I have been somewhat puzzled over the 
present and future problem of the Children of Ham. Our 
progenitors paid but little or no attention to the study 
of the "Times of Restitution of all Things" and a "Ransom 
for all to be testified in due time." And looking at the 
matter as I do, past, present and future, I must with sorrow 
confess that the problem, as it now stands, presents 
one of the darkest pictures known to the Children of Ham. 
The sons of Japheth have sent out their pilgrim sons all 
over the United States and in portions of Great Britain. 
But the poor African race of the United States takes no 
part in that precious work of trying to set forth or send 
out her colored pilgrims to work among their own race. 

What would be the chance of putting a few colored 
pilgrims in the field to travel in Texas and other states? 
It is the opinion of several of my colored brethren of Texas 
that such a plan, if rightly carried into effect, would 
do much good in opening the blinded eyes of our colored 
brethren and friends. 

Now Brother, I do not wish to be misunderstood in 
my request as advocating a division or color line between 
the white and colored brethren: we want no color division; 
but, what we do want is to stand together to work 
up some plan that they may be an aid in this good work 
of harvest and present truth. 

My Dear Brother, I have read the five volumes of Millennial 
Dawn, and have been studying them for nearly three 
years with their charts, etc. I have been a minister many 
years. Pray for us all. 

Yours in Christian love, 

J. J. H. Dozier.— Texas. 

[We are not aware that there are many groups of 
negro brethren, interested in present truth, altho we 
have had four offers like the above quite recently. If there 
are such, they are as welcome as the whites— proportionately 
to their numbers and intelligent interest— and they 
should send the Pilgrim-request postal cards mentioned 
in Jan. 15 issue, page 2, stating that they are colored. 
Thus we will know and be able to judge.— Ed.] 



Dear Friends:— Enclosed you will find order. I wish 
I could do more, but the dear Lord knows all about it. 
The Dawns have been such a help to me that I long to 
have others receive the light on God's word. It is 
truly a Lamp unto my feet and a Light unto my path, 
and the path is shining more and more unto the perfect 
day. The last two years have been wonderful years to 
me. For years I had a great longing in my heart to have 
the "eyes of my understanding enlightened," that things 
which were such a mystery to me might be made plain; 
and I praise God for answering prayer, through dear Bro. 
Russell. I would not trespass upon your valuable time in 
telling in detail how I came into present truth. Suffice it 
to say, it was through a minister from your own city denouncing 
the Watch Tower Society. Very soon after a 
friend asked me if I had ever read the Dawns. I said, 
"No." As soon as I saw the title, I said, "I want to read 
them." Oh, how I praise my God for his wonderful leadings! 
I am reading them over the tenth time, and every 
time I understand God's words better! and if he needs me 
I trust by and by to give out some at least of the precious 
meat now due. 

May you increase more and more until the door is 
shut, is my prayer. I long for the other volumes, but perhaps 
I have enough to feed upon a little while longer. 
Yours for Jesus. 

Mrs. J. M. Smith. -Pa. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

I cannot tell how much I am indebted to you for the 
marvelous light I have received from reading your publications. 
The whole system of the Christian religion has 
been transformed to my view, so much so that the common 
manner of preaching is neither interesting nor helpful. 
And I feel to pity the ministers because they don't understand 
and are not willing to learn the truth. I do not condemn 
them, for my own life is not what I would it should 
be, either in faith, knowledge, or works; and yet I praise 
God that through your instrumentality, he has helped me 
to see some of the riches of his grace toward fallen humanity. 
I pray that you and your co-workers may be supplied 
with every needed good, spiritual and temporal, and continue 
to make you a blessing to as many as may be privileged 
to hear or read your doctrine, restraining you from 
every error and unveiling to you every truth. 
Yours for the truth, 

H. R. Clarke.-Pa. 



page 81 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 



VOL. XXIII. MARCH 15, 1902. No. 6. 



CONTENTS. 

Truth "Wounded in the House of 

its Friends" 83 

The Parousia of our Lord Jesus and 

His Subsequent Apokalupsis and 

Epiphania at His Second Advent 85 

For What are We Watching? 85 

Proofs of His Presence 88 

Israel's Experiences were Prophetic 90 

The Jubilee Prophecy 90 

"Behold the Bridegroom" 91 

Presence Gradually Revealed 92 

"Cometh not with Observation" 93 

"Knew not the Time of Their 

Visitation" 94 

page 82 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



OUR NEW LINEAR BIBLE, with wide margins and extra 
references to Dawns and Towers, we hope to begin to ship to 
purchasers in a few days. But it will require some weeks to 
bind and send out so many. 

A WORD TO INTERESTED READERS. 

We are preparing a very large edition of this issue, and 
tender free to each reader as many copies for his friends as 



he may see fit to order. We trust that as a result of your 
efforts and ours, under the Lord's guidance, many will read 
this paper carefully and prayerfully, and receive therefrom a 
blessing. All such will surely feel a hunger and thirst for 
more, and we are glad to announce that we have more spiritual 
food for them; prepared, we trust, under the divine 
direction and out of divinely prepared ingredients— "meat in 
due season for the household of faith." We will be glad to 
have all such as subscribers to this journal,— free, if unable to 
pay; but we urge upon all as of still greater importance, the 
reading of the five volumes of the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
series; "The Plan of the Ages," "The Time Is at Hand," 
"Thy Kingdom Come," "The Day of Vengeance," "The 
At-one-ment Between God and Man." These are advertised in 
the adjoining column. The prices are extremely low— 25c per 
volume, postpaid. No other books of the kind are sold at 
the price. Nevertheless, for those who hunger for the truth, 
and who have not the wherewithal to purchase, we are glad 
to offer the loan of these books free, one volume at a time, 
on application. Do not delay! Write to us at once, for our 
encouragement and for your profit. 

METHODS OF SERVICE. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 
than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the Dawns at 25 cents 
each, cannot be for money -making; that it is merely another 
way of preaching the truth. No other religious books are 
sold at any such price. Indeed few subscription books sell 
for less than two to three dollars each. Any who can serve 
in this work are invited to write to us for "Hints to 
Colporteurs." 



MILLENNIAL DAWN 
-THIS IS- 
THE GENERAL TITLE OF A SERIES OF BOOKS BY THE EDITOR OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

VOL. I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 358 
pages, paper bound 25c. (Is.), postpaid; in embossed cloth 35c. (ls.6d.), 
plus postage 10c. (4d.). 

VOL. II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of the 
Lord's second coming, considering the Bible testimony on this subject: 
370 pages, paper bound 25c. (Is.), postpaid; in embossed cloth 35c. 
(ls.6d.), postage 10c. (4d.). 

VOL. III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 



dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, paper bound 25c. 
(Is.), postpaid; in embossed cloth 35c. (ls.6d.), plus postage 10c. (4d.). 

VOL. IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered are 
valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the fulfilment 
of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of Matt. 24, 
and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pp., paper 25c, postpaid; in embossed cloth 
35c. (ls.6d.), plus postage 10c. (4d.). 

VOL. V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject,— the hub, the center around which all the features of 
divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and prayerful 
consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, paper bound 
25c. (Is.) postpaid; in embossed cloth 35c. (ls.6d.), postage 10c. (4d.). 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (5 vols.) $5.00 (L.l), 
plus postage 50c. (10d.). 

MILLENNIAL DAWN is published in foreign languages as follows: in 
German, four vols.; in Swedish, three vols.; in Dano-Norwegian, two 
vols.; in French, one vol.; bound in cloth and paper, uniform with the 
English edition, prices the same. 

WHOLESALE RATES TO WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIBERS 

IN CLOTH, 25c. (Is. Id.) per vol.; in LEATHER, $3.00 (lis.) per 
set— delivered. 

IN PAPER, 12-l/2c. (6d.) per copy, by express or freight at your 
charges; ten or more copies in one package, 10c. (5d.) per copy. If by 
mail, add 8c. per copy for postage. (In Great Britain, add 3d. for one 
copy, and Id. for each additional copy included in one parcel.) 

TO OBTAIN THE WHOLESALE RATE, MENTION THAT YOU ARE A SUBSCRIBER. 



R2971 : page 83 

TRUTH "WOUNDED IN THE HOUSE OF ITS FRIENDS." 

"My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your plans my plans, 
saith the Lord; for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my 
plans higher than your plans, and my thoughts 
than your thoughts."— Isa. 55:8,9. 

THOSE who claim that the second advent of Christ 

means the end of probation, the burning up of this 

world, and the death-knell of hope for poor, fallen 

humanity, are responsible in a very large degree for the intense 

prejudice which exists on this subject. Amongst those 

who thus hold, are some who are thoroughly conscientious and 

are, after a fashion at least, Bible students, but study not according 

to knowledge. They love the Lord, not because of 

his character, exemplified in his plans, but in spite of their 

misconception of his plans and, therefore, of his character. 

They have looked at certain passages of Scripture from the 

wrong standpoint, and have failed to discern which are its 

symbolical and which are its literal statements. We hope 

that this paper will come to the attention of many of this 



kind, and that it will come also to the attention of many of 
those who, because of these misrepresentations of the divine 
plan, are thoroughly out of sympathy with the promises of the 
second coming of the Lord, but desirous, rather, that he 
should not come at all, and especially that he should not come 
soon. We hope that all of this class who are earnest, honest, 
and spiritually minded, will, with the presentation we are 
about to make, be able to see the Lord's character and plan 
from a different standpoint, and thenceforth to long for it and 
to pray in the language of the Apostle, "Even so, come, Lord 
Jesus!" realizing the blessings that are due to come with that 
blessed presence— flooding the world with the light of the 
knowledge of the goodness of God as it shines in the face 
of Jesus Christ our Lord, and bringing to mankind in general 
all the blessing which divine grace has prearranged, and which 
divine mercy and truth have declared for the consolation and 
encouragement of God's people. 

"THE EARTH ABIDETH FOREVER." 

Notwithstanding the Scriptural statement that "The earth 
abideth forever" (Eccl. 1:4), all the creeds of Christendom 
take the same view of this subject that is entertained by our 
Second Adventist friends; except that the latter expect the 
burning of the world soon, while the majority of Christendom 
presume that it will be in the remote future. We do not 
charge intentional misrepresentation of the divine plan upon 
any of our Christian brethren. Rather, we say, in the language 
of our text, that their conceptions are not God's conceptions, 
and their plans are not the divine plans— they have 
misunderstood, unintentionally, to their own detriment, the testimony 
of God's Word on this subject. They have read of the 
burning of the world, and have remembered in the same connection 
the account in the Lord's parable, of the burning of 
the "tares," and have entirely overlooked the fact that these 
fires are figurative and symbolical, as are the fiery trials which 
now try us, as God's people, and the furnaces of affliction in 
which, by divine permission, we have sometimes been refined. 
(I Pet. 4:12. Isa. 48:10.) In the brief space at our command 
we cannot take up this subject thoroughly and discuss every 
text of Scripture bearing upon it, but we will briefly call 
attention to one, which will serve as a key to others. 

We quote from the Prophet (Zeph. 3:8): "Wait ye upon 
me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for 
my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble 
the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all 
my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the 
fire of my jealousy." This is certainly as graphic a picture 
of the burning day as could be asked for, even by the most 
zealous advocates of that theory; and they consider that it is 
quite sufficient to overbalance the other statements of Scripture, 
to the effect that the "earth abideth forever." They 
assume, of course, that this burning day will incinerate not 
only the earth itself, but all of its inhabitants. But a careful 
reading of the Prophet's succeeding words will make clear 
to us that this is not the case; but that after the burning day 



has passed a population will still remain in the earth, and that 
for a blessing. We read (verse 9): "Then will I turn to the 
people [not consumed, but alive and capable] a pure language, 
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve 
him with one consent." Who could question, in the light of 
this further statement by the Prophet, that the fire and devastation 
previously mentioned are figurative— not, however, unreal, 
but real in another sense, in a figurative sense, instead of 
in a literal sense. 

This burning day, so frequently referred to in the Scriptures, 
will, to our understanding, be more than a twenty-four-hour 
day— the day of wrath will be a period of several years' 
duration, so far as the intensity of its burning is concerned;— 
a period whose burning will not entirely cease until the close 
of the Millennial age, by which time it shall have destroyed, 
root and branch, everything that is evil— everything contrary 
to righteousness, truth and goodness. This fire of God's jealousy 
or zeal for righteousness will, we understand, burn in a 
very natural manner as regards humanity and its affairs. In 

R2971 : page 84 

the present time God is letting the light of truth shine in the 
world marvelously; not that light only which is shining upon 
the path of the just, leading God's people onward to the perfect 
day, but a light is also being reflected now upon the path 
of the world, opening its eyes to human rights and prerogatives, 
liberties and privileges, to which formerly it was blinded 
through ignorance and superstition. As the light now comes 
in, the result is unrest; and thus the Lord seems to purpose, 
that the very blessings of this time, the end of this Gospel 
age, the very condition of things which, rightly received, 
should be bringing men happiness, is bringing more and more 
of discontent, and thus leading them step by step into the great 
period of anarchy which the Scriptures distinctly show will 
be the fire of trouble in the end of this age, which will consume 
church and state, religious, political and financial institutions, 
and reduce the whole world to a general level— "a 
time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation." 
-Dan. 12:1. 

This trouble is coming as the direct result of the blessings 
of our day, the increased enlightenment which we enjoy, 
and which selfishness does not permit to take its proper course 
and to bring proportional blessing for the world as a whole; 
but, rather, attempts to corral and to apportion merely to the 
great, the wise, the efficient, allowing the burdens of life to 
fall with disproportionate weight upon the masses, until the 
groaning creation shall not only cry out in despair, but will 
also arise in despair, bringing in the anarchy and disarrangement 
foretold,— the fire of God's jealousy, which shall consume 
the whole earth (society in general, in its every department). 
After this symbolical fire shall have consumed present 
institutions, on their ruins shall arise the triumphant Kingdom 
of God, so long foretold— the same for which the Master himself 
taught us to pray, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven." The Prophet, as we have 



seen, declares that then the Lord will turn unto the people "a 
pure language"— literally, a pure word. In the past and at 
present the people as a whole have been unable to discern the 
pure Word of God. They have heard various creeds and 
theories, more or less reasonable, and the effect of so many 
"voices" has been to them as a Babel in which they were unable 
to discern the voice of God. But when the promised day 
shall have come, and present institutions, religious as well as 
secular, shall have succumbed to the fierce burning wrath of 
the people, with all of its attendant miseries and injustices, 
the mists and fogs of prejudice and superstition will clear 
away, and the bright orb of truth will shine forth to give mankind 
a clearer and a better comprehension, not only of the 
divine character and the divine plan, but of the rights of 
men, and of the proper course of action and dealing one with 
another. The results will be blessed, however awful will be 
the cup of divine wrath which the world will have drunk to 
its dregs previously; figuratively called "the fire of God's 
jealousy." 

Altho, as thus seen, the fire of God's jealousy will burn 
itself out quickly in the close of this age, other Scriptures give 
us to understand that it will not entirely cease until the close 
of the Millennial age— that it will burn against everything that 
is contrary to the pure, the good, the true, the right, the just. 
Evil of every kind shall be burned up root and branch, so that 
ultimately "all the proud, yea, all that do wickedly, shall 
[figuratively] be as stubble and as ashes under the feet," in 
full subjection to the righteous, who shall then have been 
brought into full accord with the Lord, and have his blessing 
unto eternal life. 

THE REAL OBJECT OF OUR LORD'S RETURN. 

If the real object of our Lord's return could be clearly 
understood by all of his true people, unquestionably every sincere 
Christian would be longing and waiting for that event, 
as the glorious realization of their best hopes and desires, the 
one without which all others would be valueless, meaningless. 
The second coming of our Lord is closely related to the 
first advent as respects the divine plan of salvation. The entrance 
of sin into our world six thousand years ago (commonly 
called "original sin") brought to us as a race mental, 

R2972 : page 84 

moral and physical degeneracy (commonly called "the fall"), 
the culmination of which is death. According to the Scriptures 
this death would have been an interminable one, an everlasting 
one, had God not, in his mercy, provided for our succor- 
provided a ransom-price in the Lord Jesus and his sacrifice. 
This redemption provision was accomplished by our Lord at 
his first advent. We were "redeemed with the precious blood 
of Christ." 

But there is a difference between our redemption and our 
deliverance, as there is a difference between the purchase of 
any article and the delivery of it. The world has been purchased 



with the precious blood; but the world has not been 

delivered; it is still laboring and heavy laden, under the curse, 

under original sin, under its weights and difficulties and disadvantages 

of every kind. What is necessary now? We answer, 

with the Apostle, that "the whole creation groaneth and 

travaileth in pain together until now, waiting for the manifestation 

of the sons of God"— through whom the deliverance is 

yet to be accomplished. (Rom. 8:19-22.) And when will 

these sons of God be manifested? The answer is that these 

sons of God are the elect Church of this Gospel age, who in 

the present time are being tried and tested; not according to 

the flesh, but according to the spirit, according to their will, 

their desires of heart. These sons of God are such as, after 

the Lord's disciplines and chastenings are passed, will be 

found in heart "copies of God's dear Son," however imperfect 

they may still be respecting their flesh. These are to be the 

first who will experience deliverance at the second coming of 

the Lord. They are variously designated in the Scriptures as 

"the royal priesthood," under the great high priest; as the 

members of the body of Christ, under Jesus, as their Head; as 

the "Bride, the Lamb's Wife." These are the "Jewels," whose 

number the Lord is to make up in the first resurrection, who 

shall be his, and joint-heirs with him in the Kingdom. It is 

for the manifestation of these that the world is waiting, as the 

Apostle declares,— "waiting for the manifestation of the sons 

of God," and they will not be manifested until the second 

advent of their Master. "When he shall appear, we also shall 

appear with him in glory." We see, then, that so far as the 

Church is concerned she is waiting for the completion of the 

elect number which constitutes her membership— in all, "a 

little flock," to whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give 

the Kingdom. (Luke 12:32.) We see also that the world of 

mankind, altho redeemed, must wait still longer— a little 

longer; for it will not be long after the elect Church shall have 

been glorified with their Lord, and become his joint-heirs in 

his Kingdom, until they, with him, as the Sun of Righteousness, 

shall shine forth with healing in his beams, to bless the 

world, to scatter its night, to dispel its fogs of superstition 

and its miasms of error. 

From this standpoint it will be seen that the second coming 
of Christ means, not only the blessing of the Lord's faithful 
in the First Resurrection, but the blessing of all the families 
of the earth, even as the Lord promised to father Abraham, 
saying, "In thy seed shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed." The great mass of mankind have gone down 
into the prison-house of death unblessed— ignorant of God 
and of the only name given under heaven or amongst men 
whereby they must be saved. Even of those who are now living, 
only a small fraction have ever heard of the great Redeemer 
and of the great redemption which he has already 
accomplished in the sacrifice of himself, and of the great deliverance 
which he is about to effect, through the establishment 
of his Kingdom of righteousness, and the subjugation 
of evil and sin, and the binding of Satan. Not only the living 
nations, to earth's remotest bound, must all know, that the 
Year of Jubilee has come, returning ransomed sinners home, 



but all those who have gone down into death, the great prison-house 

which now contains approximately fifty thousand millions 

of our race— all these also must hear the good tidings, 

for it is to be, according to the angel's promise, "Good tidings 

of great joy which shall be to all people." It is to be, 

according to the promise made to Abraham, a blessing "to all 

the families of the earth." Thank God for the redemptive 

feature of his plan; and thanks also to him for the deliverance 

feature, shortly to be effected, even tho the introduction of that 

deliverance be accompanied by a time of trouble such as was 

not since there was a nation— a time of fiery indignation which 

shall eventually devour all the adversaries of righteousness, 

and bring in that blessed condition respecting which we are 

assured that every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess, 

to the glory of God— the disobedient and unwilling being destroyed 

in the Second Death, from which there will be no recovery. 

-Isa. 45:23; Phil. 2:10; Acts 3:19-23; 2 Thess. 1:9. 



R2972 : page 85 

THE PAROUS I A OF OUR LORD JESUS 

AND HIS 

SUBSEQUENT APOKALUPSIS AND EPIPHANIA 

-AT HIS SECOND ADVENT.- 

"Watch, therefore; for ye know not the day* your Lord doth come.' 
What I say unto you, I say unto all [believers], Watch." 
-Matt. 24:42; Mark 13:37. 

WHATEVER the character of the watching, and whatever 
the thing to be looked for, there can be no question 
that the exhortation to watch for an event whose 
precise time is not stated, implies that when the event does take 
place, the watching ones will know it. Watch, because ye know 
not, in order that at the proper time ye may know, is the thought; 
and the intimation clearly is, that those who do not watch will 
not know: that the events which are to be known in due time 
to the Watchers, will be recognized by them, and not recognized 
by others, at the time of accomplishment. 

This, the only logical interpretation of our Lord's exhortation, 
is fully corroborated by several of the apostles. The 
Apostle Paul urges us, saying: "Yourselves know perfectly 
that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night; for 
when they [the world, unbelievers] shall say, Peace and 
safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon them as travail 
upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape. But ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake 
you as a thief" (I Thes. 5:2-4); because, being children of the 
light ye, brethren, will be watching and be enlightened and 
taught of the Lord. The Apostle Peter suggests the means 
by which the Lord will teach us, and informs us respecting our 



location upon the path of "the just which shineth more and 
more unto the perfect day." He shows that it will not be by 
miraculous revelations, nor by dreams; but through the Word 
of testimony, the Bible. He says, "We have a more sure word 
of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto 
a light which shineth in a dark place, until the Day dawn, and 
the Day-star arise in your hearts."— 2 Pet. 1:19. 

The united testimony of these Scriptures teaches us that, 
altho it was neither proper nor possible for the Lord's people 
to know in advance, anything definite, respecting the exact time 
of the second presence of the Lord Jesus, and the establishment 
of his Kingdom, yet when the due time would come the faithful 
ones, the watchers, would be informed,— would not be left 
in darkness with the world. It is vain to urge, as contradicting 
this, our Lord's statement, "Of that day and hour knoweth 
no man; no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the 
Son, but the Father." (Mark 13:32.) Those who use this 
Scripture to prove to themselves and to others that no man 
will ever know anything respecting the time of the second advent, 
find it to prove too much, and thus spoil their own argument; 
for if it means that no man will ever know, it must 
similarly mean that no angel will ever know, and that the Son 
himself will never know. This, evidently, would be an absurd 
construction to place upon the passage. The Son did not know 
at the time he uttered this statement; the angels did not know 
then; and no man knew then; but the Son certainly must know 
of the time of his own second advent, at least a little while before 
it takes place; the angels also, must know a little while before it 
takes place; and the true children of God, the "watchers," as 
we have seen above, are to watch in order that they, too, may 
know at the proper season and not be in darkness, in ignorance, 
with the world; and that their watching shall be rewarded is 
guaranteed:— "None of the wicked shall understand; but the 
wise [in heavenly wisdom] shall understand."— Dan. 12:10. 

FOR WHAT ARE WE WATCHING? 



This is an important question. Many of God's people have 
been offended, "stumbled," as respects the doctrine of the 
second coming of our dear Redeemer, by reason of peculiar, 
extravagant, unreasonable, illogical and unscriptural views on 
the subject, presented by some, who professedly love the 
Lord's appearing, known as Second Adventists. But this is all 
wrong; we are not to reject one of the grandest and most 
prominent doctrines of the Scripture, simply because some fellow-Christians 
have erred egregiously respecting the matter, 
and brought a certain amount of worldlywise contempt upon 
everything connected with this subject. On the contrary, this 
doctrine, as a glorious gem, should be given the first place 



*Thus read the oldest Greek MSS. 



R2973 : page 85 

among the precious jewels of divine truth, where it can cast its 
halo and splendor and brilliancy over all connected and 
related promises and blessings. It should not be left in 
the imperfect setting which hides its glory and beauty, but 
should be recovered, remounted, set in its true place, to the 
glory of God and to the blessing of all who are sincerely and 
truly his people. 

We need offer no apology for the interest which we feel 
in this grand subject, which is the center upon which all the 
testimony of divine grace, through all the holy prophets, is 
focused. Rather do they need to apologize who, knowing that 
next to the doctrine of the atonement for sin, the second coming 
of the Lord and the resurrection of the dead hold the 
most important places in the Scriptures, have nevertheless 
neglected this, while they have quarreled, skirmished, fought 
and bled over trifling things of no real importance, doctrinally 
or otherwise. 

Our watching is to be for the second coming of him who 
redeemed us; who said, "If I go, I will come again and receive 
you unto myself." The watching is to be specially with the 
thought that our Lord Jesus comes at his second advent, in 
the majesty and glory of the Father, King of kings and Lord 
of lords. The watching includes not only the thought of the 
second presence of our Lord, as King, but it has attached to 
it the wonderful results which are promised to flow from the 
coming of the King; for the coming of the King means the 
coming of the Kingdom for which he taught us to pray, "Thy 
Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 
And the coming of our Master, the King, and the establishment 
of this glorious Kingdom mean the fulfilment of the long-waited-for 
promise made to the seed of Abraham; the promise 
which Israel after the flesh was not found worthy to inherit; 
the promise for which God has been selecting the members of 
the Bride of Christ during this Gospel age, to be with the Lord 
Jesus, and his joint-heir in carrying out his beneficent provisions; 
the promise which is sure, but which has never yet 
had, in any sense of the word, a fulfilment; the promise which 
reads, "In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." 

Watching implies hoping, and it also implies waiting. We 
are waiting for what the Apostle terms "that blessed hope, 
the glorious appearing of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ," 
who shall transform his Church to his own spiritual image 
and likeness, in order that we ("changed") may be like him, 
see him as he is, and share his glory, and be associated with 
him in his great work of bringing in the Millennial blessings to 
the world of mankind. Nevertheless, this waiting time and 
hoping time is a time of more or less tribulation, not only 
on the world, which still lies under the yoke of sin, and under 
the blinding influences of Satan, but also to the waiting, hoping 
and watching Church, of whom the Apostle says, "We ourselves 
groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to 
wit, the deliverance [from death] of our body"— the body of 
Christ, of which we are members in particular.— Rom. 8:23. 



HOW ARE WE TO WATCH? 



Our watching consists not in looking up into the sky,— 
"stargazing;" for those who study the Lord's Word to any 
purpose soon learn that "the day of the Lord so cometh as 
[like] a thief in the night," and that its dawning cannot be 
discerned with the natural eye. If the Lord's people could discern 
anything by watching the sky with their natural eyes, 
could not the world discern the same thing? If the second 
advent of our Lord were to be an open, outward manifestation, 
would not the world know of it just as soon as the saints, the 
watchers? In such event it could not be true that the day of 
the Lord should come as a thief, as a snare, unawares, upon 
the world, while the Church would have foreknowledge thereof 
—not be left in darkness.— I Thes. 5:2-4. 

We are to watch the signs of the times, in the light of 
the Lord's Word, our lamp; as the apostle declares, "We have 
a more sure Word of prophecy,... as a light shining in a dark 
place,— until the Day dawn." The Gospel age has been a 

R2973 : page 86 

night-time; and the Lord's people have been waiting for the 
dawn of the Millennial morning, with the promise ringing in 
their ears, "God will help her [the Church], and that right 
early [in the morning]." (Psa. 46:5.) The Word of the Lord, 
through the prophets, has been the lamplight all through this 
Gospel age, upon the Church's pathway; as the Lord expressed 
it through the Prophet David, "Thy word is a lamp unto my 
feet, a lantern unto my footsteps." (Psa. 119:105.) The lamp 
of the truth of revelation has guided all the faithful, watchful 
pilgrims in their journey toward the Celestial City— the Heavenly 
Kingdom. Oh, what a comfort it has been, and how 
dreary would have been our pilgrimage without it! 

"Looking back, we praise the way 
God has led us, day by day!" 

Those who have taken heed to the landmarks, pointed 
out by the Lord through Daniel and Isaiah and Jeremiah and 
all the holy prophets, realize that we have come already a 
much longer journey than was expected by the Church when 
first she started out; but we realize also from these landmarks, 
that we have approached very close to the end of the 
journey; very near to the time when the great blessing, for 
which God's people have so long waited and prayed, is at hand. 
For instance, the Watchers have noted the Lord's testimony 
through the Prophet Daniel that "the time of the end" would 
be a period of time (more than a century), and that in this 
"time of the end" there would be a great increase of travel, 
running to and fro throughout the earth, and a great increase 
of general intelligence, increased knowledge, as it is written, "in 
the time of the end many shall run to and fro, and knowledge 



shall be increased."— Dan. 12:4. 

Watching carefully respecting our whereabouts, hopeful 
and solicitous respecting the gracious things which God has 
promised, none of the Watchers is indifferent to these fulfilments 
of prophecy, which are to be seen on every hand today. 
All men discern these things, but not all alike: the faithful, the 
Watchers, discern them not only as facts, but also as fulfilments 
of prophecy; as proofs that we are already in the period termed 
"the time of the end." Further investigations and applications 
of the prophetic measurements prove to the watchers that we 
have been in "the time of the end" since 1799, and that it is 
also termed "the day of his [Jehovah's] preparation." Looking 
about them, they see the preparation that Jehovah God is 
making for the Kingdom of his dear Son. They see the lifting 
of the curtain of ignorance, and the letting in of the light, and 
that thus God is using mankind at the present time to make 
ready, in a natural way, the mechanical and other arrangements 
and conveniences which ultimately shall be so great 
blessings to the world;— when the Sun of Righteousness shall 
arise with healing in his beams, and the Millennial Day shall 
be ushered in, with all its multiplied blessings and mercies 
and opportunities;— "the times of restitution of all things, 
which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets 
since the world began."— Acts 3:21. 

Watching intently, earnestly, interestedly, because they 
know of the good things God hath in reservation (I Cor. 2:9-13; 
I Pet. 1:4), the Watchers note that Daniel's prophecy further 
points out that, as the increase of travel brings the increase 
of knowledge, so the increase of knowledge will bring 
an increase of discontent to the world of mankind in general; 
and the result will be, as prophetically stated, that "there shall 
be a time of trouble such as never was since there was a nation." 
The Watchers, seeking to note whether these things 
have yet had a fulfilment or not, look about them and behold 
on every hand discontent, unhappiness; much more than when 
the world enjoyed far fewer of the mercies and blessings of 
heaven. These latter day gifts of Providence (preparations 
for the Millennial age), instead of provoking thankfulness, 
gratitude and love to God, and generosity to man, produce in 
unregenerate hearts ambition, greater avarice, selfishness, envy, 
hatred, strife, and other works of the flesh and of the devil. 
Yes; the Watchers can clearly discern the approach of the 
great climax of human trouble, in which the Scriptures distinctly 
declare that all the present human institutions shall 
go down in anarchy, in confusion, in chaos. But the Watchers 
do not lose sight of God and his providence. They see that the 
approaching social and ecclesiastical catastrophe will be the 
natural result of the operation of selfishness under highly favored 
conditions; nevertheless, they remember that God is at 
the helm, and that he is able to cause the wrath of man to 
praise him, and the remainder of man's wrath (which would 
not praise him) he will restrain.— Psa. 76:10. 

The Watchers look not merely at the outward signs, 
as seen in the world. They scrutinize carefully and repeatedly 
their "chart," the Bible's prophetic outline of the world's history 
furnished by the King himself. It is because they see the time 



of trouble outlined in the prophetic chart that they know that 
it is sure to come, and are able in advance of others to "discern 
the signs of the times," and not to be in darkness respecting 
the "things to come." It was in respect to this that the 
Lord promised the Watchers that the holy spirit should guide 
them into all truth, as each feature became due, and would 
show them things to come— future things— in advance of the 
world's knowledge, and in advance of the facts themselves. 
(John 16:13.) But the same chart which shows the downfall 
of all earthly institutions, political, social and ecclesiastical, 
shows also that their fall is so timed in the great plan of 
Jehovah that it shall be the very hour in which he will establish 
his kingdom in the hands of the elect Church (who then 
shall be a royal priesthood glorified,— priests upon their 

R2974 : page 86 

thrones,— the religious as well as the civil rulers of the world), 
whose exaltation shall be to the glory of God and to the blessing 
of every creature. 

The Watchers remember well that the King gave them 
an outline of the history of the Gospel age at the very time 
that he told them to watch; intimating to them that they were to 
watch for the things which he therein noted. The Watchers 
are those who are in harmony with the King, and who have 
respect to his promise, and they, therefore, do not neglect the 
words which he spoke. And as they note this very prophecy 
in connection with which he tells them to watch, they see in 
it clearly that the day of the Lord will be ushered in at the 
close of this Gospel age, secretly, quietly, unobtrusively, "as 
a thief in the night,"— unawares to the world, and known only 
to the Watchers. 

PAROUSIA VS. EPIPHANIA, APOKALUPSIS. 



Because not heedless, careless, indifferent servants of the 
King, but faithful and earnest ones, the Watchers have scrutinized 
every little particular which fell from the lips of him 
who spake as never man spake; and all the messages which he 
has sent them through his faithful apostles and prophets. 
And discriminating carefully, they discern that there are three 
words of distinctly different signification, used in respect 
to the Lord's second advent; namely, parousia and epiphania 
and apokalupsis. Parousia is used in respect to the earliest 
stage of the second advent, while apokalupsis relates to the 
same advent later;— not that apokalupsis and epiphania relate 
to another, or a third advent, but merely to a later feature of the 
second advent. These Greek words, it is true, are somewhat 
obscure or hidden in the Common Version of the Bible, and 
undoubtedly for a purpose. The Lord's purpose evidently 
was to keep the world and the wicked in ignorance of his 
gracious plan until his due time; nor did he wish the particulars 
to be understood by the Watchers until near the time of 
the fulfilment. But now we are "in the time of the end," in 



"the day of his preparation," in the time in which it was foretold 

that then "the wise [not the worldlywise, but the humble 

Watchers who are wise enough to take heed to the Word of 

the Lord] shall understand." (Dan. 12:10.) And hence, since 

many of the Watchers are not Greek scholars, God has made 

gracious provision through valuable helps (such as Young's 

Analytical Concordance and the Emphatic Diaglott), so that 

the very humblest of his people may have a clear and discriminate 

understanding of the meaning of certain features 

of his Word which, hitherto, have been kept hidden under imperfect 

translations; and these matters God himself has been 

bringing to the attention of his people, through MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and the OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 

The Watchers all over the world are being reached by these 

"Helping Hands for Bible Students," which the Lord himself 

is extending to them. 

By these helps, the Watchers are rapidly coming to see 
that the word "parousia," in our Common Version translated 
"coming," does not mean what our English word signifies; 
namely, to be on the way, approaching; but that on the contrary 
it signifies presence, as of one who has already arrived. 
The Watchers note also that the Scriptures predicate certain 
things respecting the Lord, and respecting his parousia 

R2974 : page 87 

(his presence) which clearly intimate that he will be present 
and doing his work, his great work (of setting up his Kingdom 
and smiting the nations with the sword of his mouth) 
wholly unknown to the world,— as a thief in the night. The 
Watchers also notice that the Scriptures clearly indicate that 
after the Lord has done certain things during his presence 
(parousia) and unknown to the world, he will later make a 
manifestation of his presence;— a manifestation which will be 
discerned by all mankind: and this outward manifestation is 
designated his "epiphania" which signifies "shining forth" or 
"bright shining." 

The Watchers keep separate these two thoughts (presence 
and manifestation) respecting the Lord's second coming; that 
altho really present a spirit being (like the angels who, we are 
told, encamp round about them that fear God and deliver them, 
and who are "all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to 
those who shall be heirs of salvation," and whose ministry is 
an invisible one) our Lord, now a glorious spirit being, of the 
divine nature, will not be manifest to the natural eye during 
his presence— his parousia.— Psa. 34:7; Heb. 1:14. Hence 
the necessity that the Lord's faithful ones shall "watch," because 
they, no more than the world, can discern a spirit being 
with their natural eyes. The Watchers in due time are to 
discern the presence (parousia) of their Lord by the eye of 
faith. The sleepless eye of faith will in due time take note 
of the "sign of the Son of Man,"— the indications of the 
presence of the King. 

During the period of the parousia (presence) preceding 
the epiphania (shining forth) a certain work will be accomplished, 
unknown to the world, unknown to the nominal 



Church, known only to the Watchers. Ah, how important to 
us the words of our Master, exhorting us to be Watchers! 
And, by the way, this watching includes a watching of our 
own hearts as well as of the Lord's Word and the outward 
signs— to insure our worthiness to be continued in the light, 
and under the instructions of the great Teacher. "If any man 
have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his;" therefore if 
any man lose the spirit of Christ he ceases to be his; and hence 
we all need to "watch" that we may, as the Scriptures direct, 
"Keep our garments unspotted from the world;" and "keep 
ourselves in the love of God, while looking for the grace [aid] 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is able to keep us from falling 
and to present us faultless in the presence of his glory with 
exceeding joy." (Jude 21,24). For whoever has the spirit 
of Christ may be a Watcher, and as a Watcher may know of 
the gracious things connected with the great "salvation which 
shall be brought unto us at the revelation of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ;" but whoever ceases to have the spirit 
of Christ must, of necessity, cease also to be a Watcher, and 
shall be in ignorance of the things of the day of the Lord, like 
the world, of which he would then probably be a part. 

As the light by which the eye of faith may discern the 
parousia, we have the "more sure word of prophecy to which 
we do well to take heed." It has shone upon the pathway of 
the Watchers all along through this night; but now its various 
prophetic rays have focussed and clearly indicate that we are 
already living "in the days of the Son of Man," while, as he expressly 
foretold, the world in general goes on as usual, in utter 
ignorance of his presence and of his harvest work and of the 
beginning of the Day of the Lord; it continues as usual— eating 
and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, planting 
and building. It is a mistake to suppose that our Lord, in 
giving this information respecting the events of the time of 
his presence, meant us to understand that it would be wicked 
for the world to eat, drink, plant, build and marry; these are 
not improper things, and any such interpretation is strained and 
faulty, and results from an utter misconception of the subject. 
Our Lord wished merely to show that the world would 
be in ignorance of his presence "in the days of the Son of 
Man," and in utter ignorance of the great time of trouble, or 
"Day of Vengeance" which the inauguration of his Kingdom 
will signify to the kingdoms of this world, which are to be 
dashed to pieces as potters' vessels. The ignorance of the impending 
trouble here will be similar to that of the people who 
lived in the days of Noah. "As it was in the days of Noah, 
so also shall it be in the days of the Son of Man."— 
Luke 17:26. 

As "the days of Noah" were not days before Noah's time, 
neither are "the days of the Son of Man" days before the Son 
of Man's presence. The days of the Son of Man are the days 
of his parousia, or presence,— invisible and unknown to the 
world; known only to the Watchers and seen by them only with 
the eye of faith. "As in the days that were before the flood 
they were eating, drinking, marrying,... and knew not,... 
so shall also the [parousia] (presence) of the Son of Man be:"— 
the world will simply go on about its usual affairs, and know 



not of the Lord's presence.— Matt. 24:38. 

But why should our Lord be thus present? What will be 
his work during the period of presence preceding his epiphania 
or manifestation to the world? 

THE LORD'S WORK FORESHOWN IN HIS PARABLES. 

His work is clearly outlined in various of his parables, 
which were given that the Watchers might know— might not 
be in darkness. The parable of the wheat and the tares shows 
this period of the parousia (presence) preceding the epiphania 
(manifestation), and represents it as the "harvest" time of 
this age. The Son of Man sowed the good seed, and his 
servants followed, doing work in the field down through the 
age; finally the end of the age comes when the full crop of 
wheat is ripe, and then the harvest is reaped. The parable 
shows the separation of the two classes of the nominal church 
during the "harvest." For be it noted that the wheat-field is 
not the entire world, but merely the professedly Christian part 
of the world— Christendom: much of the field is not yet sown. 
And the parable relates only to the wheat-field, and particularly 
to the wheat. The tares (spurious Christians) are dealt with 
only incidentally. The tares choke the wheat, yet, nevertheless, 
the Master will obtain a sufficiently large crop, for— "All his 
purposes shall be accomplished." 

The separation of the tares from the wheat, and the gathering 
of the wheat into the garner of heavenly conditions, precedes 
the work of cleansing the wheat-field of its symbolic tares 

R2975 : page 87 

by symbolic "fire;" and this entire harvest work is to take place 
during the parousia (presence) of our Lord, before his epiphania 
(manifestation). He is the Chief-Reaper, and all the 
under-reapers will work under his direction and eye; and 
every kernel of true symbolic "wheat" will be gathered into the 
glorious symbolic "garner" by resurrection and "change." 

The sickle of truth will be the separating medium; and 
not until the separation is nearly complete and the "wheat" 
nearly all garnered into the glory of the heavenly nature, will 
the "fire," the great time of trouble mentioned by the Prophet 
and by our Lord, burn and consume, symbolically, all the 
"tares:" so that thereafter none will make false professions 
of being Christians while really of the world, and possessed 
of its spirit. 

The parables of the Pounds and of the Talents cover 
this same period of time. In both of these the Lord represents 
himself as a great householder and heir to a throne, who has 
gone into a far country to be invested with kingly powers, and 
to return to use those powers. Departing, he left with his 
servants various riches of grace and privilege, "to every man 
according to his several ability," saying to them, "Occupy till 
I come." The return of the nobleman of the parables, unquestionably, 
represents the second coming of our Lord and Master. 
Now note the work due first to take place upon his return 
as King, as shown by these parables. He does not first 



deal with the rebellious world,— those who would not have him 
to rule over them; but, first calls "his own servants," and 
reckons with them— rejecting some from further service because 
of unfaithfulness, and accepting others to a participation in 
the joys of the Kingdom, which he at once establishes. 

This reckoning with the servants signifies a reckoning 
with the Church first, after his return; and corresponds to the 
separating of the wheat and tares, in the other parable. It is 
comparatively easy for anyone to realize that this part of the 
Lord's work at his second advent is the work which precedes 
the epiphania or manifestation to the world. It is during this 
period that the Watchers are to be aware of the presence (parousia) 
of the Lord, and of his scrutiny, or judgment of them, 
which will then be in progress. Only the faithful will know, 
however;— only they will be "accounted worthy to stand before 
the Son of Man" in that judgment;— all found unworthy 
shall "stumble." "The wicked [and slothful servants] shall 
not stand in the assembly of the righteous." (See Psa. 1:5.) 
It is of this period of Christ's presence, and this feature of his 
work, that the world is to be in total ignorance, and "know 
not," until, having finished reckoning with his servants, and 
having glorified the faithful, the judgment of the world shall 

R2975 : page 88 

begin with "a time of trouble such as was not since there was 
a nation." That trouble is symbolically pictured as a fire, 
and we are told by the Apostle that our Lord shall be revealed 
(apokalupto— uncovered, disclosed, made manifest) in flaming 
fire (judgments), taking vengeance. 

All who are Watchers, all who have taken heed to "the 
more sure word of prophecy," including the Master's description 
of the events of "the days of the Son of Man," can readily 
discern that the world would not go on in its usual routine- 
eating, drinking, planting, building, marrying, etc.— if they 
knew of the Lord's presence, and the progress of the "harvest" 
of the Gospel age. If they knew of the Lord's presence, and 
that the reckoning with the servants had commenced, and that 
the next thing in order would be judgments upon themselves, 
they would change their usual order of affairs considerably; 
they would be in great trepidation; because only those who 
are in sympathy with the Lord and the righteous government 
which he is about to establish, when he shall lay judgment to 
the line, and justice to the plummet— only these can in any degree 
be ready to welcome him: all others have the spirit of 
fear, and are under the blinding influences and misrepresentations 
of Satan. "The god of this world hath blinded the minds 
of them that believe not, lest the glorious light of the gospel 
of Christ... should shine unto them." Because of ignorance, 
therefore, the world would be in great fear, if they knew the 
fact of the beginning of the day of the Lord, which is to be 
to them the "day of vengeance."* Very evidently, therefore, 
this reckoning with the Church and the reward of the faithful 
will precede our Lord's apokalupsis, or revealing. To use one 
of his own figures, we might say that his day or time of presence 
—"the day of the Lord"— will come "as a thief in the 



night;" and in this time he will gather his virgin Church, discriminatingly, 

and take her as his Bride to himself,— changing 

her from earthly nature and conditions to spiritual or heavenly 

conditions, to be like him, see him as he is, and share his 

glory. And since the saints have always been "the salt of the 

earth," we may readily discern that the taking away of the salt 

of the earth would leave mankind proportionately in a 

deplorable condition, in which corruption would spread rapidly: 

and this is exactly what the Scriptures indicate. 

We are not, however, to understand that the Lord will 
take the Church away to heaven, and then come back again, 
and make his epiphania or apokalupsis; for that would be a 
third advent, which is nowhere even hinted in Scripture. The 
"change" of the Church from earthly conditions and nature 
to heavenly, spirit conditions and nature, will be first in order; 
and then they twain, the Bridegroom, Christ, and the Church, his 
bride, thus made one in nature and in heavenly, or spirit power, 
will commence the work of putting down all rule and authority 
contrary to the divine rule;— bringing all things into subjection 
to the heavenly Kingdom, the Millennial Kingdom. Our Lord 
and his Church will not be absent from the earth during the 
period of the world's tribulation; but, on the contrary, will 
continue present, but invisible, bringing upon the world the 
tribulation foretold in the Scriptures, which will result in the 
humbling of the hearts of mankind, that they may say, eventually, 
"Come, let us go up to the mountain [Kingdom] of the 
house of the Lord, that he may teach us of his ways, that we 
may walk in his paths."— Isa. 2:3. 

This fact is abundantly proved by the Lord's statement 
of what shall be the reward to the overcomers, a part of which 
is, "He that overcometh, and keepeth my words to the end, 
to him will I give power over the nations: and he shall rule 
them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they 
be broken in pieces: even as I have received of my Father." 
(Rev. 2:26,27.) Again, the same matter is mentioned by the 
Prophet David, saying, "This honor have all his saints,— to 
execute the judgments written." 

This, however, need not be understood to mean that none 
of the faithful members of the body of Christ will be in the 
flesh during the trouble. The majority will have gone beyond 
the vail— by First Resurrection change to spirit conditions; 
but others may remain in the flesh for a time, to serve further 
on this side the vail. True, our Lord has said, "Watch ye; 
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things 
that shall come to pass" (Luke 21:36); but we may not be too 
certain which way he meant we should escape; and we well 
know that there are two ways. We might escape by avoidance 
of the trouble, or by being kept from feeling its poignancy, by 
"grace sufficient" to enable us to rejoice in tribulation. In 
which ever way it may be the Father's pleasure the Lord will 
keep his own— out of the furnace of affliction, or in the furnace 
heated seven times.— Dan. 3:27. 

THE TIME OF THE PAROUSIA. 



It will doubtless surprise many to learn that there is 
much Scripture proof that we are already in the time of the 
presence (parousia) of the Son of Man,— that we are already 
living "in the days of the Son of Man." At first some will 
be inclined to say, "Where is the promise of his (parousia) 
presence, while all things continue as they were from the beginning?" 
Peter foretold that some would thus question, 
being surprised at the information that we are living in the 
days of the Son of Man, while there is as yet no outward manifestation 
of his presence, but the affairs of the world continue 
in their ordinary channels. (2 Pet. 3:4.) The answer to the 
question is, as we have already pointed out, our Lord's own 
declaration that in the days of his presence the world would 
be eating, drinking, planting and building, and know not. 
That is "the promise of his presence" while "all things continue 
as they were." Could it be more explicit? A totally different 
question, however, is— 

WHAT ARE THE PROOFS OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE? 



This is a reasonable inquiry. We would not be justified 
in believing upon any slight evidence that the Lord is present; 
even tho we know in advance that he is a spirit being, whose 
presence would be invisible without a miracle;— and even 
tho we know in advance, from the parables, that he will be 
present, but invisible, in the harvest time of this age, in the 
time of reckoning with his servants preparatory to their glorification. 
We have a right to expect clear, reasonable ground 
for faith, before accepting any matter which implies so much. 
We are not, however, to ask or to expect evidences to natural 
sight: if we are of the Watchers, who have "the eyes of their 
understanding" opened to see wonderful things in the 
divine Word, then these eyes of our understanding must also 
be the eyes of our faith. Hence, the true Watchers are to 
expect reasonable, satisfactory evidence for faith, and not ocular 
demonstrations of an invisible parousia. As the Apostle 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., "The Day of Vengeance." 

R2976 : page 88 

explains, "We walk by faith, not by sight."— Eph. 1:18; 
2 Cor. 5:7. 

To our understanding there are strong proofs that our 
Lord's parousia began in the Autumn of 1874. We have seen 
nothing with our natural eyes; only with the eyes of the understanding 
only in the light of "the more sure word of 
prophecy," do we know this, which we sincerely believe and 
affirm, and which is important news to all who claim to be 
Watchers. The fact that any Watcher should have remained 
in ignorance of this important event for now more than twenty-seven 



years, would seem of itself to be an indication that he 
had not been properly awake to the use of his privileges and 
opportunities— that he had not been sufficiently watchful of 
the sure word of prophecy to which he was instructed to take 
heed; and that therefore he had been left at least partially 
ignorant of the important things transpiring throughout the 
world during these years. To this extent, many of the Lord's 
people have been with the world and are similarly ignorant; 
and yet we may reasonably assume that the Lord did not expect 
all of his watching servants to discern the matter at the 
same instant of time. True, those who saw early have had 
special blessing for the longer time; but, as we saw above, 
the preparation for the knowledge of the time lies largely in 
the right attitude of heart— in its humility and possession 
of the various graces of the spirit of Christ. 

Lest we should get a misapprehension respecting this matter 
of the discerning the Lord's parousia, we do well to take 
heed to the parable of the ten virgins, which evidently was 
given to throw special light upon this point. That parable 
shows a false announcement of the arrival of the Bridegroom 
in 1844, which brought to the subject considerable reproach, 
but which, nevertheless, was of great advantage, as stirring up 
the "virgin" class (the pure, the consecrated) to fresh trimming 
of the lamp of truth— investigating the sure word of 
prophecy. The parable shows, also, that the "virgins" in 
general fell asleep; yet, nevertheless, in due time all would be 
reawakened by the prophetic knocking, and the knocking of 
the signs of the times, which would indicate the Bridegroom's 

R2976 : page 89 

presence. And the parable shows that the result will depend 
upon how much oil (holy spirit) the "virgins" may have in 
their vessels (in their own hearts), as well as in their lamps 
(the Scriptures). Applying this parable, then, we may reasonably 
suppose that some of the Lord's true people have 
temporarily fallen asleep on this subject of his second coming: 
and that the sleeping ones will include some who have his 
spirit in their hearts, and who will be fully ready to welcome 
the Master when they shall awake; and whose lamps will be 
duly trimmed and burning and ready to enable them to discern 
the signs of his parousia, when once their attention 
is brought to the subject. In harmony with this we find that 
many who now get awake on this subject, come into the clear 
light of present truth much more rapidly than did some in the 
past: doubtless partly because present truth can now be presented 
to them through the printed page more concretely than 
ever before. It is in the interest of this true "virgin" class 
that we now write: we have no desire to awaken the worldly; 
this knocking of the prophecies announcing the parousia is 
not for them;— besides, the worldly are so sound asleep that 
it will require the terrific crashing of present institutions, and 
the earthquake shakings of social revolution to awaken them 
thoroughly to a realization of the presence of the great Judge 
— Immanuel. The true Watchers, on the contrary, if they 
slumber at all, sleep lightly, being on the qui vive of expectancy 



and hope for the long-waited-for Bridegroom. We would 
merely whisper in the ears of this class the one word, "Parousia!" 
assured that all true Watchers (and the Lord alone 
knoweth them that are his) will be aroused by that word, and 
trim their lamps on the subject. 

Is the question asked,— What portions of the sure word of 
prophecy indicate that the presence of our Lord began in the 
Autumn of 1874? We answer that there are several lines of 
prophecy which interlace and corroborate each other in this 
testimony; but, as might be expected, since the entire matter 
was to be hidden from the world, and "none of the wicked," 
but only the "wise" were to understand (Dan. 12:10), and 
these wise only to understand when the due time would 
come,— it must be evident to all that these prophecies, while 
clear and forcible and positive, are nevertheless somewhat 
under cover. We cannot here attempt to give a complete and 
comprehensive statement of these prophecies; that has already 
been done in five volumes aggregating twenty-three hundred 
pages.* Here we can only give a very brief resume, leaving it 
for the true Watchers to seek that they may find; to knock if 
they would have the door of divine revelation opened to them; 
to use the keys which God has provided, if they are interested 
in penetrating into "the deep things" of the divine Word, now 
due to be understood; to eat of the meat of present truth, 
"things new and old," if they hunger and thirst after righteousness 
and true knowledge. 

"IN THE DAYS OF THESE KINGS." 



(1) We have a number of general prophecies, indicating 
that we are living in about the time of the Master's second 
presence. We have already referred to Daniel's testimony respecting 
"the time of the end," in which many will run to and 
fro, and knowledge will be increased, and the wise understand; 
and later, and as a result, will follow the great time of trouble 
foretold. Then we have the inspired dream of Nebuchadnezzar, 
and its inspired interpretation by Daniel, showing the earthly 
governments which would bear rule over the earth;— during 
the interim between the overthrow of the typical Kingdom of 
God, whose last king to sit upon the throne of David was 
Zedekiah, and the installation of the true King, Immanuel, in 
his Millennial Kingdom glory. These different governments 
of earth are there pictured as a great image; Nebuchadnezzar's 
government, the first universal empire of earth, being represented 
by the head of gold; the Medo-Persian Empire, which, 
according to history, was the second universal empire, is there 
shown as the breast and arms of silver; the Grecian empire, 
which overthrew the Persian and became the third universal 
empire, is represented by the belly and thighs of brass; the 
Roman empire, which succeeded the Grecian and constituted 
itself the fourth universal empire of earth, was represented in 
the image by the legs of iron— strong exceedingly; and the 
later development of the same Roman empire, with the intermixture 
of papal influence, is represented in the image by the 



feet, which were partly iron (civil government), and partly of 
clay (ecclesiastical government— Papacy). These were to 
constitute the sum total of Gentile dominion; and "in the days 
of these kings" (represented by the ten toes of the image), 
Jehovah God himself would establish his Kingdom— the very 
Kingdom for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come!" 

We are all witnesses that the heavenly Kingdom has not 
yet come,— that we are still under the dominion of "the prince 
of this world"— the prince of darkness. All the efforts to 
prove to us that the greedy and bloody governments of Christendom, 
so-called, are the Kingdom for which we pray, and 
were taught to pray, could not prevail; we could never recognize 
these as Immanuel's Kingdom; they are only the kingdoms 
established by Antichrist, and recognized by Antichrist, 
and named by Antichrist "Christendom." The true 
Kingdom waits for establishment at the hands of him whose 
right it is; and he has promised that, when he sits upon his 
throne, all his faithful ones, the "little flock" of the Gospel 
age, shall sit in that throne with him, and be associates in the 
work and in the honor of blessing the world. 

The Church is not neglected in the picture of earthly dominion 
given to Nebuchadnezzar, and interpreted by the 
Prophet Daniel. She is shown therein as a stone taken out of 
the mountain without hands (by divine power). This stone 
represents God's Kingdom (Christ and the Church); and the 
inspired dream and explanation show that the disaster which 
shall come to the kingdoms of this world, represented in the 
image and in the toes of its feet, would come through the impact, 
or smiting of the image by the stone. Daniel says: "A 
stone was cut out, which, without being in hands, smote the 
image upon his feet.... Then was the iron, the clay, the 
brass, the silver and the gold broken to pieces together, and 
became like the chaff of the summer threshing floors, and the 
wind carried them away, that no place was found for them: 
and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain 
[kingdom], and filled the whole earth." Dan. 2:34,35. 

The explanation is that— "The great God hath made 
known to the king [and indirectly more particularly to the 
Watchers] what shall come to pass hereafter." "In the days 
of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom which 
shall never be destroyed, and the kingdom shall not be left 
to other people [it shall have no successors, for the others 
will all be destroyed]; it shall break in pieces and consume 
all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever." Here is a 
prophecy which gives a full delineation of the empires of 
earth, to which God granted dominion during the interim 
between the removal of the typical crown from his typical 
kingdom, and the institution of the crown of righteousness 
and glory upon the true King, in the inauguration of the 
Kingdom of Heaven. 

Even the surface evidences are that human empire has 
nearly run its course, and that heavenly empire is needed to 
deliver the world from its own selfishness. But the sure 
word of prophecy, if carefully scrutinized by the Watcher, 
reveals still more. It shows that the next universal empire 
will be the Kingdom of God's dear Son; and further the interesting 



R2977 : page 89 

fact that the total lease of power to the Gentiles is 
in the Scriptures known as "the times of the Gentiles;" and 
that these "times" are seven times, and that each of the seven 
times is a period of three hundred and sixty years, and that 
consequently the complete period of the seven times is 2520 
years. Hence the Watchers may reckon that Gentile rule will 
terminate and Immanuel's rule be fully set up in 2520 years 
from the time the Lord removed the diadem from Zedekiah, 
saying: "Oh thou profane and wicked prince,. ..take off the 
diadem, remove the crown; I will overturn, overturn, overturn 
it, until he comes whose right it is, and I will give it unto him." 
— Ezek. 21:25-27. The period of overturning of the Lord's 
typical Kingdom and the removal of the crown must correspond 
to the period of the lease of empire to the Gentiles 
and be 2520 years. And measuring this period, we find that 
2520 years will expire with the close of the year 1914, A.D. 
and consequently that by that time Gentile rule will be no 
more, while God's Kingdom will then hold sway. 

But the scrutinizing Watcher will readily perceive that it 
is one thing to know the time when earthly dominion shall 
cease, and give place to the completed Kingdom of God, while 
it would be a totally different matter to know when the "stone" 
Kingdom would begin to smite the image upon its feet, preparatory 
to its destruction. This period of smiting of the image, 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. I-V. 

R2977 : page 90 

which precedes its destruction, must also precede the 
full establishment of God's Kingdom to fill the whole earth. 
This smiting period is the period of the parousia; the period 
in which Christ is present, gathering his "jewels," his "elect," 
and in which he will smite the nations with the rod of iron 
and with the two-edged sword of his mouth, dashing them 
in pieces as a potter's vessel, and preparing mankind for the 
royal majesty of the heavens. Let the Watchers note critically 
the Prophet Daniel's explanation that it will be "in the days 
of these kings" (the kingdom represented in the feet and toes 
of the image— the divisions of Papal Rome) that the God of 
heaven will set up his Kingdom. God began the selection of 
his Kingdom class in the days of Civil Rome— represented by 
the legs of iron: he has continued the selection ever since, 
and the setting up or bringing of his Church (Kingdom) into 
power comes toward the close of Gentile power, but before it 
ends; for it is to be "in the days of these kings" and not after 
their days. Now note the similarity of the expressions "in the 
days of the Son of Man" and "in the days of these kings," 
and give both the same significance and remember that, as we 
have proven, they will be the same days— days before the lease 
of Gentile power expires, in which the Son of Man will be 



present to "set up" his Kingdom, which shall a little later 
destroy all these Gentile Kingdoms. 

TYPICAL ISRAEL'S EXPERIENCES WERE PROPHETIC. 



(2) Take another line of prophecy, concealed, and 
yet very simple and easy of appreciation when once the mind 
grasps it. The Scriptures show us that the fleshly house of 
Israel and all of its institutions and affairs were typical fore-shadowings 
of the spiritual house of Israel and its higher institutions, 
better sacrifices, etc. It need not, therefore, surprise 
us to find that the length of the Jewish age— the length of 
the divine favor to fleshly Israel,— was typical also, and that 
it gives us the exact measurement of the Gospel age,— God's 
dealings with, and favor toward spiritual Israel. 

Jacob's name was changed to Israel, which signifies "A 
Prince with God," and his descendants were therefore termed 
Israelites— the people of the Prince with God. But the antitype 
of Jacob is Christ, the true Prince with God; not after the 
flesh, but after the spirit; and his house is spiritual Israel. 
Jacob's twelve sons first inherited his name and blessing, and 
through them it descended to all the fleshly house of Israel; 
Christ's twelve Apostles inherited his name and blessing, and 
through them it has descended to all the spiritual house of 
Israel. As the typical house had a high priest, Aaron, so the 
antitypical house has a greater high priest, Christ Jesus our 
Lord, the high priest of our profession. As the fleshly house 
had a priesthood under Aaron, so the spiritual house has "a 
royal priesthood" under Christ, to whom the promise is made 
that they shall be kings and priests unto God, who shall 
reign on the earth, after their present time of sacrificing is 
ended. So we might proceed with everything that fleshly 
Israel had and find its duplicate on a higher plane, in spiritual 
Israel, but we will not go into details here: suffice it to notice 
further that the Jewish age or period of fleshly Israel's favor 
ended with a "harvest" period of forty years. This began with 
our Lord's baptism, lasted three and a half years, as a national 
test, and when that nation was rejected at the time of our 
Lord's crucifixion, the harvest work proper began— a separation 
of the wheat from the chaff— a time of gathering out of 
that rejected nation such as were "Israelites indeed," previous 
to the great time of trouble which came upon the 
nation, and which utterly destroyed their national polity 
A.D. 70. All of this is likened to a "harvest" season, and its 
first garnering of the wheat, and subsequent burning of the 
chaff. And our Lord gives instructions to us (Matt. 13) that 
this Gospel age of spiritual Israel's favor will likewise end 
with a time of harvest, gathering the wheat together, and 
ultimately destroying the tares. In the harvesting of the fleshly 
house our Lord, in the flesh, was the Chief-Reaper, and his 
Apostles were co-laborers; in the harvesting of the spiritual 
house our Lord, a spirit being, is to be present as the Chief-Reaper, 
and members of the spiritual house are also to be 
reapers,— some on each side of the vail. 



ISRAEL'S PARALLELS. 

Now note the time correspondencies. The Jewish age, 
from the death of Jacob to the death of Christ, was 1845 years 
long— to the beginning of our Lord's ministry 1841-1/2 years 
long, and to the time of the utter destruction of their nation, 
in A.D. 70, 1881-1/2 years long. Notice how the Gospel 
age corresponds to this. The Gospel age did not begin with 
our Lord's birth: it began after our Lord's death and resurrection, 
when he commissioned his disciples to "preach the 
Gospel to every creature." (Our Lord's previous work during 
the three and a half years of his ministry was the offering 
of the Kingdom to the fleshly house, to test them, and to prove 
that they were unready to receive the true Kingdom.) Applying 
the foregoing measurements of the Jewish age to the 
Gospel age, beginning at the time of our Lord's death and 
resurrection and the Pentecostal blessing, in the Spring of A.D. 
33, we find that the period of 1841-1/2 years from the death of 
Jacob to the beginning of our Lord's ministry, would measure 
from the Spring of A.D. 33 to the Autumn of 1874; and the 
1845 years of the Jewish age, from the death of Jacob to the 
rejection of fleshly Israel, applied here, measuring from the 
Spring of A.D. 33, would reach to the Spring of 1878; and the 
1881-1/2 years from the death of Jacob to the full destruction 
of Israel's polity in A.D. 70, finds its correspondency in this 
Gospel age, by measuring 1881-1/2 years from the Spring of A.D. 
33, which would bring us exactly to (Autumn) 1914 A.D.— 
the very year and time shown us by Daniel's prophecy to be 
the full end and limit of the "Gentile times." Can this be 
accidental? Nay; it is design. What stronger testimony could 
be asked by the eye and ear of faith? Surely, anything plainer 
or clearer would be sight, and leave no room for faith. 

THE JUBILEE PROPHECY. 



(3) Note another prophecy, similarly hidden in type in 
the Mosaic law,— Israel's Jubilee Year. No one is prepared 
to understand this line of prophecy who has not first learned 
that the second coming of our Lord is not for the purpose of 
destroying the world, but for the purpose of blessing it according 
to the promise made to Abraham, "in thy Seed shall 
all the families of the earth be blessed,"— with the favors lost 
in Adam. These will be offered to all and will be made perpetual 
to those who will accept them on the terms of the New 
Covenant. None can see any beauty or typical significance in 
Israel's Jubilee, who have not learned that God has provided 
"times of restitution of all things" which are to begin in 
connection with the second advent of the Redeemer.— See 
Acts 3:19-23. 

We find that Israel's Jubilee year, in which every person 
and family had every lost possession and all personal liberties 
restored to them, was intended to be a type of the coming time 
of restitution, when a full opportunity for attaining freedom 



from sin and from Satan, and from the hereditary weakness of 
the flesh, shall be presented to all, and when the earth shall 
again revert to the human family in general, for whom it was 
created, and for whom, after being lost through Adam's transgression, 
it was redeemed by Christ. We find that the Scriptures 
indicate, in connection with these jubilees, a system of 
counting by multiples; and that a Jubilee of Jubilees, or fifty 
times fifty years (2500 years) constitutes a Great Jubilee cycle 
and that such a cycle began to count after fleshly Israel had 
observed her last typical Jubilee. We find from the Scriptures 
that Israel's nineteenth Jubilee year,— in the year B.C. 626,— 
was her last. Knowing that the Jubilee was a part of the Law, 
and that no feature of that Law, not one jot or tittle, can pass 
away without reaching a fulfilment, or antitype, we measure 
the cycle of the Great Jubilee 2500 years from the date when 
the last typical Jubilee was kept (626 B.C.), and find accordingly 
that the antitypical Jubilee or Great Jubilee of Jubilees should 
have begun in October, 1874. Thus,— 625 years B.C. plus 1875 
years A.D. are 2500 years, which would include the Jubilee 
year: consequently, with the end of the year 1874 (Jewish 
time, October), the antitypical Jubilee of 1,000 years, instead 

R2978 : page 90 

of another typical one year, was due to begin. 

Watchers will note carefully the correspondency of this 
date, and the character of the event to be expected, with the 
finding of our previous examinations (1 and 2), which showed 
us this very same date, October, 1 874, was the time when the 
"harvest" of this age was due to begin, and when the Lord 
himself, as the Chief Reaper, was due to be present. The only 
thing necessary to connect this Jubilee prophecy with the 
others, is the statement of the Apostle Peter in Acts 3:21, 
which shows that our Lord must be present (at his second 
advent) at the beginning of the times of restitution of all 

R2978 : page 91 

things, and as already seen, these restitution times are the 
Antitypical Jubilee times typified by Israel's Jubilees. Thus 
we have two very simple but clear and very important lines of 
Scripture testimony which indicate clearly that the parousia 
of our Lord was due to begin in October, 1874, and both show 
us the character of the work which we should expect would 
be in progress during the time of his presence, preceding his 
open manifestation to the world, his epiphania, his apokalupsis. 

THE DAYS OF WAITING ARE FULFILLED. 



(4) Take another line of prophecy: we find that the 1260 
days, and the 1290 days, and the 1335 days, so particularly set 
forth in Daniel's prophecy, and corroborated in Revelation, 
have had fulfilments;— the 1260 days ending in 1799, the 1290 
days ending in 1829 and the 1335 days ending in 1874. Our 



friends known as "Second Adventists" were wont to use these 
"days of Daniel," and once applied them as we do here: but 
they abandoned them after 1 874 passed and they failed to see 
Jesus with their natural eyesight, in a body of flesh and with 
Calvary's scars. They have dropped these "days of Daniel" 
entirely, because they find no way of applying them which 
would prolong them beyond 1874. The fault is not with the 
days nor with their application as above; but with the wrong 
things expected. They, in common with others who look for 
the Second Advent, err in expecting that the Gospel age, 
which has been a spirit and faith epoch, will end with a flesh 
and sight deterioration;— in expecting that the spiritual kingdom 
of Satan will be followed by a fleshly kingdom of Christ. 
But the Watchers amongst the Adventists as well as in other 
denominations are getting the eyes of their understanding 
opened by the anointing of the promised eyesalve.— Rev. 3:18. 

It was concerning this last period that the angel declared 
to the Prophet, "Oh, the blessedness of him that waiteth, and 
cometh to the 1335 days. ...Thou shaltrest, and stand in 
thy lot at the end of the days." What blessedness? We 
answer, a joy of heart and rejoicing to the Watchers is what 
is here intimated. It is since this date, October, 1874, where 
Daniel's 1335 days intimated that a great blessing would begin; 
where the Jubilee types indicated that the restitution of all 
things would begin (which implies the second presence of the 
Great Redeemer), and where the parallelism of the two houses 
of Israel shows that the second presence of our Lord as the 
Great Reaper is due;— from this date a great blessing has 
come to the Watchers. Since then the Word of God has 
opened before us in a most marvelous manner. Since then 
the sure word of prophecy as a lamp to our feet has shown us 
many evidences that we are in the end of the age. Since then 
the day-star has been rising in the hearts of the Watchers, 
and has illuminated our minds, releasing us from the terrible 
nightmare of error respecting eternal torment, revealing to 
us the true character of our heavenly Father, making plain to 
us the necessity for the great atonement for sin, and showing 
us distinctly the object of the permission of evil, and revealing, 
one by one, various features of the divine plan,— the high 
calling of the Church to the divine nature, and to joint-heirship 
with Christ in his Millennial Kingdom, and the resulting 
blessing of restitution to human perfection for the world of 
mankind in general. Ah, yes! all who have been brought "out 
of darkness into this marvelous light" can appreciate the words 
of the angel, and heartily say, Blessed are our ears, for they 
hear, and our eyes, for they see, for many prophets and many 
righteous persons have desired to know these things, and have 
not known them. 

(5) We might refer to other prophecies and types in the 
Scriptures, which show that we are living in the "harvest" 
times of this age, in the parousia of the Son of Man, but our 
space forbids. The fact that this world, as he predicted, continues 
in its usual course, eating, drinking, planting and building, 
etc., and knows not of his presence, so far from being an 
evidence against these prophetic testimonies, quite to the contrary, 
shows us that the fulfilment is coming, just as the 



Master predicted: that the day of the Lord, the day of his 
presence, has come upon the world as a thief in the night, 
secretly, quietly, stealthily, unknown;— the only ones favored 
with a knowledge of events transpiring on the other side of 
the vail being the Watchers who, if they have slumbered at 
all, have, nevertheless, maintained a waiting attitude of readiness 
for the announcement,— 

"BEHOLD THE BRIDEGROOM!" 



This is the announcement which we are now giving— 
Not, Behold, the Bridegroom cometh, but "Behold the Bridegroom!" 
already here, present, knocking gently with the prophecies 
to arouse the Virgins, but not to arouse the world. 
(Rev. 3:20.) This is the reading of the oldest Greek Manuscripts, 
which omit "cometh." Our Lord says, "If any man 
hear my voice [knock] and open the door, I will come in to 
him, and sup with him." This message to the present Laodicean 
phase of the Church, intimates very clearly (1) that 
the "knock" and "voice" will be inaudible to natural ears, 
and heard only by the ears of the understanding, the hearing 
of faith; (2) that it will not be a denominational knock or 
call (as to Adventists, Presbyterians, etc.), but (3) that it 
will be a knock that must be heard individually, and responded 
to individually,— "any man" who hears the "knock" or "voice," 
if he so wills, may exercise faith, open the door of his understanding, 
and realize his Lord's second presence. 

The man who never hears the "knock" is evidently not 
counted worthy to hear it. But those who hear are just as 
evidently not compelled to respond and to accept the present, 
knocking King: hence he says, if the hearing one open the 
door, I will come in. However, only those who recognize the 
"knock," and who respond and by faith open to the Lord and 
receive him as their present King— only these are to have the 
great blessing of spiritual nourishment— the feast of "meat in 
due season," "things new and old," which the Master promised 
to provide at that time to strengthen the faithful for the judgments, 
trials, testings and siftings which must "begin with the 
house of God." "I will come in to him, and sup with him, 
and he with me."— Compare Rev. 3:20, and Luke 12:37. 

As, therefore, we softly whisper— "Behold the Bridegroom!" 
it is not with any hope of arousing the world to faith in the 
Lord's presence, etc. They are not worthy to know and would 
only misuse the knowledge now. By and by, in the Lord's due 
time, they shall know— in the period of the epiphania and 
apokalupsis of the Son of Man. They will be awakened by the 
great crash of the day of trouble. We do, however, promulgate 
the message, "Behold the Bridegroom [present]!" with 
the confident expectation that all who are of the "Virgin" 
class (the pure, the justified and consecrated), will be permitted 
to hear the message, will be aroused by it, and will 
trim their lamps (examine the Scriptures, investigate the subject), 
and find the message true, before the "door is shut" and 
the great trouble begun. We well know, however, from the 



Lord's prophetic parable, that among those who will be aroused 
to investigation, there will be two classes, because there are 
both wise and foolish "Virgins." The wise are those who have 
not only consecrated their all to the Lord, but who are living 
accordingly,— not unto sin, nor unto self, nor unto sectarianism, 
but unto the Lord: these, as intimated in the parable, 
will find no difficulty in trimming their lamps and recognizing 
the presence of the Bridegroom. But the foolish Virgins, 
overcharged with the cares of this life, or the deceitfulness of 
riches (wealth, reputation, influence, etc.), will not have within 
themselves ("in their vessels") a sufficiency of the oil (holy 
spirit); and consequently they will be unable to get the light 
in time to go in with the wise virgins before the elect number 
shall be completed, and the door of opportunity to become 
part of the Bride of Christ shall forever close. True, 
they will later obtain the oil, as is shown in the parable, but 
too late to be of the "little flock" who shall be accounted 
worthy to share the Kingdom, and to escape the great time of 
trouble coming upon the world: the foolish virgins will be 
obliged to pass through the trouble with the world, and will 
share thus in its distress, represented in the parable by the 
words, "wailing and gnashing of teeth." 

PAROUSIA IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



The word parousia occurs in the following texts of the 
New Testament in each of which it should be properly translated 
"presence:"— 

"What shall be the sign of thy presence?"— 
Matt. 24:3. 

"So shall also the presence of the Son of Man be."— 
Matt. 24:27,37,39. 

"They that are Christ's at his presence."— I Cor. 15:23. 

"What is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are 

R2979 : page 92 

not even ye, presented before our Lord Jesus Christ at his 
presence?"— I Thes. 2:19. 

That "he may establish your hearts unblamable in holiness 
before God, even our Father, at the presence of our Lord 
Jesus Christ."— I Thes. 3:13. 

"We which are alive and remain unto the presence of the 
Lord shall not precede them which are asleep."— I Thes. 4:15. 

"Be preserved blameless unto the presence of our Lord 
Jesus Christ."— I Thes. 5:23. 

"Now we beseech you, brethren, by [respecting] the presence 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto 
him."— 2 Thes. 2:1. 

"Then shall be revealed the lawless one, whom the Lord 
Jesus shall slay with the breath of his mouth, and bring to 
nought by the manifestation [epiphania] of his presence."— 
2 Thes. 2:8. See R.V. 

"Be patient, therefore, brethren, unto the presence of the 



Lord."— James 5:7. 

"Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts; for the presence 
of the Lord draweth nigh."— James 5:8. 

"There shall come in the last days scoffers [in the Church] 
walking after their own lusts [desires], and saying, Where is 
the promise of his presence?"— 2 Pet. 3:3,4. 

The word parousia is properly translated ("presence") in 
2 Cor. 10:10, and Phil. 2:12. 

EPIPHANIA IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



The Greek word epiphania signifies bright shining or manifestation. 
It is rendered "appearing" and "brightness," and 
occurs as follows:— 

"Keep this commandment without spot unrebukable until 
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which in his times he 
shall show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King 
of kings and Lord of lords."— I Tim. 6:14,15. 

"I charge thee, therefore, before God and the Lord Jesus 
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing 
and his Kingdom."— 2 Tim. 4:1. 

"There is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which 
the Lord, the righteous judge shall give me at that day; and 
not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing." 
-2 Tim. 4:8. 

"Looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing 
of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ."— Titus 2:13. 

"Then shall the Wicked One be exposed, whom the Lord 
shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy 
with the brightness [epiphania— bright shining] of his coming 
[parousia— presence]."— 2 Thes. 2:8. 

APOKALUPSIS IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



The Greek words apokalupsis and apokalupto signify revealment, 
uncovering, unveiling (as of a thing previously present 
but hidden). The name of the last book of the Bible is 
from the same root— Apocalypse or Revelation. Apokalupsis 
is rendered revealed, revelation, appearing, coming and manifestation, 
in the following texts which relate to the Lord's 
second presence and power and glory, as these shall be made 
known,— uncovered or revealed to the world. Many of these 
texts also show that when he shall thus be revealed, his Church 
will be with the Lord and be revealed or manifested at the 
same time and in the same manner. 

"The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be 
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us."— 
Rom. 8:18. 

"Rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; 
that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also 
with exceeding joy."— I Pet. 4:13. 

"An inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that 



fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by 
the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be 
revealed in the last time."— I Pet. 1:4,5. 

"A partaker of the glory that shall be revealed."— 
I Pet. 5:1. 

"Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day 
shall declare it; because it shall be revealed by fire." (I Cor. 3:13.) 
Here the reference evidently is to the testings of the 
Lord's people during the period of his presence in the end of 
the age. The Apostle's words thus agree with our Lord's prophecy 
of the same testings, saying that "there is nothing covered 
that shall not be revealed"— uncovered.— Luke 12:2. 

"Hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto 
you at the revelation of Jesus Christ."— I Pet. 1:13. 

"The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven... 
in flaming fire [judgments against all unrighteousness], taking 
vengeance."— 2 Thes. 1:7,8. 

"So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming 
[apokalupsis— revealment] of our Lord Jesus Christ."— I Cor. 1:7. 
[The Lord's people will need to keep active, watching 
and waiting for the great blessing until the manifestation or 
revealment of the Lord; but if Watchers, they shall be made 
aware of his presence (parousia) and the work of "harvest" 
beforehand, and shall share in the revealment.] 

"That the trial of your faith. ..might be found unto 
praise and honor and glory at the appearing [apokalupsis— revealment] 
of Jesus Christ."-I Pet. 1:7. 

"For the earnest expectation of the creature [mankind] 
waiteth for the manifestation [apokalupsis— revealing] of the 
sons of God [the Church]."— Rom. 8:19. 

"The same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire 
and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even 
thus shall it be in the day when the Son of Man is revealed 
[apokalupsis]." (Luke 17:29,30.) That is to say, the judgments 
of the coming "time of trouble" as predicted, will begin 
as soon as the "salt of the earth," the saints, have all been 
changed; and thus the Son of Man will be revealed a present 
Judge, who already had for some time been present sealing 
and gathering his "elect." 

PRESENCE GRADUALLY REVEALED. 



Foregoing we drew the line of distinction between the 
parousia and the epiphania or apokalupsis of our Lord, quite 
sharply, to assist the reader in noting their difference of signification. 
As a matter of fact, however, the bright shining of 
the present One is due to begin shortly after the parousia begins; 
and again as at the first advent it will be true that "the 
Light shineth in the darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth 
it not." The revealing of the Lord's presence begins with the 
faithful of the Church speedily, and gradually extends to the 
world in general. Up to the time when the strength of the 
trouble breaks forth, only the faithful Watchers discern the 
parousia, and only by them can the bright-shining of the Lord's 



presence be appreciated. To these the bright-shining of the 
Lord's presence, the increased brilliancy of the light of 
truth respecting the Word and character and plan of God, is 
an ever increasing joy and pleasure: thus it is that "ye, brethren, 
are not in darkness," respecting the events of the day of 
the Lord, but know in advance that its tribulation will come 
upon the world as travail upon a woman.— I Thes. 5:3,4. 

While the revealment of our Lord's presence thus illuminates 
the hearts of his faithful ones as the Day-star (2 Pet. 1:19) 
and causes them to understand, and not be in darkness 
with the world in respect to his plans, present and future, the 
bright-shining of the Lord's presence shall affect nominal 
Christians, and the civilized world in general, also, but in a totally 
different manner; for the character of Christ's "harvest" 
work, during this period of his presence, is such as to cause a 
general opening of eyes along the lines of justice and injustice, 
righteousness and sin, the rights of mankind and the wrongs of 
mankind. The light which has been shining out for the past 
twenty years is awakening the world to a realization of its 
rights and its wrongs; to a realization that the earth belongs 
to mankind in general and not exclusively to a few who have 
seized it and fenced it. This same light is exposing the corruption 
and falsity of many long-venerated theories and institutions, 
religious, political, social and financial. It 

was in reference to this light of his presence at the second advent 
that our Lord declared that this day of his presence would 
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest 
the secret counsels of the heart,— for there is nothing 
hidden that shall not be uncovered. (Luke 8:17.) And in 
this connection let it not be overlooked that the Apostle declares 
that Satan's power to deceive the world through Antichrist 
is to be consumed by "the bright-shining [epiphania] 
of his presence [parousia]."— 2 Thes. 2:8. 

Thus seen, the bright-shining of the present One is causing 
great joy to the hearts of the faithful, who wait patiently 
for him and for the deliverance which he has promised; but 
the bright-shining, as it affects the worldly, has the effect of 
quickening their selfish propensities, producing discontent, and 
is thus preparing the world for the great climax of catastrophe, 
predicted in the Word of the Lord, as the consummation 

R2979 : page 93 

of this age;— the overthrow of all the governments and institutions 
of this present order of things, in anarchy,— "a time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a nation." 

We noticed that it was predicted 2500 years ago through 
the Prophet Daniel, that "in the days of these kings" the representatives 
of the fourth universal empire, Rome (ecclesiastically 
conglomerated, shown in the feet and toes of the image), 
the God of heaven would cause the Kingdom of God to smite 
the image upon its feet,— to utterly crush it; and that it would 
be after smiting the image that God's Kingdom, represented 
by the stone, would wax great and fill the whole earth. As we 
have just shown, we are now in this time in which the Kingdom 
of God is exerting its force against the kingdoms of this 



world: the King himself is present, must be present before he 
could destroy present kingdoms and take their power; he is 
already exerting the influences which will eventuate in their 

R2980 : page 93 

destruction; and he is prepared, backed by all the power of 
God, quickly to establish upon their ruins his own glorious 
Kingdom, consisting of himself the King, and his faithful ones 
of the Gospel Church as his Bride and joint-heir. 

The influence exerted by our present Lord, the Light, the 
Truth, is already breaking the power of ignorance and superstition, 
which for long centuries has held the masses of mankind 
in subserviency to Papacy; and the same bright-shining 
is likewise dissolving the lighter shackles of ignorance and 
error forged for their faithful by the various sects of Protestantism. 
Ultimately, all superstition and false reverence 
will be dissolved, and false institutions will fall; then will be 
manifest the fact that error and falsehood and fear never 
truly sanctify the heart,— and the world of mankind being released 
from its servility to fear will speedily manifest its true 
character of selfishness and ungodliness, and will speedily 
precipitate the great trouble predicted. 

But it would be a mistake to suppose that the parousia 
of our Lord is merely or chiefly in connection with the world 
and its preparation for the chaos of the present order of things. 
On the contrary, the chief work of the Lord during this 
period of his parousia is for and in connection with his Church. 
As we saw above, he foretold that on his return he will reckon 
with his servants, to whom he entrusted the pounds and talents, 
before manifesting his wrath against evil-doers in the trouble 
of this "day of vengeance,"— in the slaughter of all who would 
not have him to reign over them. That slaughter time, in 
which all who will not accept the reign of righteousness will 
be destroyed from among the people (Acts 3:23), begins with 
the burning of the "tares" in the end of this age, when there 
shall be great trouble, "weeping and gnashing of teeth;" and 
to some extent it will continue throughout the Millennial age, 
for all the way to the very last (Isa. 65:20; Acts 3:23; Rev. 20:8,9) 
all who wilfully oppose the Lord will perish. 

The Kingdom which we are expecting, and which we believe 
is now in process of establishment, and is soon to smite 
the kingdoms of this world and to supplant them, is not an 
earthly kingdom, but a heavenly one; not a fleshly kingdom, 
but a spiritual one; not a kingdom which will 

be visible to the natural eye, but an invisible yet powerful kingdom. 
We find nothing in the Scriptures to corroborate the 
thought entertained by some that this Gospel age having begun 
in the spirit, is to culminate in a reign of Christ and his 
Church in the flesh with an earthly throne, etc. Quite to the 
contrary, the King and his joint-heirs, the Church, as spirit 
beings, will have a spiritual empire, tho their subjects, to 
whom they will offer the blessings of the restitution purchased 
at Calvary, will be men in the flesh, whose highest hope and 
ambition will be restitution to the grand perfection of the 
human nature lost in Eden, redeemed at Calvary,— an earthly 



image of the Heavenly Father. We hold that Christ and his 
saints during the Millennial age will be no more visible to 
mankind than is the Prince of this world, Satan, whose associates 
in the misrule of the present evil world, the fallen 
angels, are likewise invisible. 

"THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN COMETH NOT WITH 
OBSERVATION." 



The Pharisees at the first advent made the mistake of 
supposing that the Kingdom which Christ proclaimed would 
be a visible kingdom, composed of himself and his followers 
in the flesh; and seeing no army or other evidences of temporal 
power for the establishment of an earthly kingdom, they 
thought to expose the hollowness of our Lord's claims before 
his followers, by asking him the question;— When will your 
Kingdom of God appear?— when will we see it? Mark well 
our Lord's reply, which, if the Pharisees had understood it, 
might have been a great revelation to them. He answered: "The 
Kingdom of God cometh not with observation." How 
strange they must have thought this answer! The Kingdom 
of God, then, would be a Kingdom which could not 
be observed or seen;— an invisible kingdom. But our Lord 
continued the explanation and increased their perplexity by 
adding, "Neither shall ye say, Lo here! or, Lo there!" (Luke 17:21.) 
Then our Lord gave the key to the matter by adding, 
"Because the Kingdom of Heaven is [to be] in the midst of 
you." That is to say, when the Kingdom of Heaven shall come 
it will be amongst mankind, everywhere present, but wholly invisible; 
so that they cannot observe it with the natural eye, 
nor can they point it out or locate it, altho it will be everywhere 
present amongst men; an omnipresent and omnipotent rule, 
or reign of righteousness. In our Common Version the true 
thought is obscured by the words "within you," which would 
better be "among you." Anyone, however, can see that it 
could not have been our Lord's intention to say that the Kingdom 
of God was then or ever would be within the hearts of 
the class addressed, which elsewhere he styled "hypocrites, 
whited walls and sepulchers, full of all manner of corruption." 

"THAT WHICH IS BORN OF THE SPIRIT IS SPIRIT." 



We call to mind also our Lord's explanation of spiritual 
things to Nicodemus, in which he declared plainly that only 
those who are born again can either enter into, or see the Kingdom 
of God. (John 3:3,6.) Nor does this refer merely to 
the begetting of the spirit, as at consecration; it includes also 
the birth of the spirit in resurrection— "born from the dead." 
The Apostle Paul gives the same assurance, saying, "Flesh and 
blood [human nature] cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." 
Hence he informs us that all those who shall be sharers of 
that heavenly Kingdom must be "changed" from human, or 



flesh conditions to spirit conditions, from weakness to power, 
from animal to spiritual conditions.— I Cor. 15:42-44. 

One matter which more than any other seems to hinder 
the Lord's people from grasping this subject clearly is, the 
prevalent but mistaken view which is entertained respecting the 
resurrection of the dead. We shall not attempt to discuss this 
subject at length here, and we shall omit entirely reference to 
the world's resurrection, which will be to human conditions, 
nature, etc.; but it is necessary that we notice something respecting 
"the first [chief, best, highest] resurrection, which 
pertains only to Christ Jesus and the Church, which is his 
body— the Kingdom class. These all are sacrificers, who "present 
their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God." 
In view of this sacrifice of the human nature, the gift of God in 
exchange is, to these, a spiritual nature,— and hence they are 
termed "new creatures." Their exaltation in nature is very 
high: lifted out of the human nature, which is a little lower 
than that of angels (the lowest order of spirit beings), they 
are to be exalted to the nature and likeness of their Lord, 
"far above angels, principalities and powers;" and to be 
made partakers of the highest form of the spirit nature; namely, 
the divine nature, with its wonderful peculiarity,— immortality, 
or inherent life.*— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

The one point which more than any other seems to confuse 
the student of this subject, is our Lord's resurrection. 
They note the fact that he appeared in a body of flesh and 
bones, after his resurrection, and they therefore conclude that 
he still has a body of flesh and bones bearing all the scars of 
Calvary; hence, in thinking of his second advent they invariably 
expect it to be another advent as a human being (in 
flesh and bones), "a little lower than the angels." These 
expectations are wrong, as we shall show from the Scriptures. 
Our Lord after his resurrection was a spirit being, and his 
manifestations of himself to his disciples in various fleshly 
bodies then, were similar exactly to manifestations made 
before he became the man Christ Jesus, while he still possessed 
the glory which he had with the Father before the world was,— the glory 
of a spirit being. For instance, are we not particularly told 
that the Lord and two angels appeared as men in bodies of 
flesh and blood and bones, and in ordinary human garb, to 
Abraham and Sarah? And the record is that "they did eat and 
talk with Abraham." On another occasion the Lord appeared 
to Moses, not in a body of flesh, but "as a flame of fire" in 
a bush which apparently burned, and from which he spoke to 



*Send for our tract, "The Hope of Immortality,"— samples free. 

R2980 : page 94 

Moses. We contend that such a power to appear in any kind 
of a body is a power which in the past was considerably used 
in communicating the divine will to mankind, and that it is 
discontinued now, only because the canon of divine revelation 
is complete, so that in it the man of God is thoroughly furnished 



unto every good word and work, and needs no special 
message or revelations.— 2 Tim. 3:17. 

In reading the narrative of our Lord's appearance to his 
disciples after his resurrection, the fact seems generally to 
be overlooked that he appeared only a few times, in all, and 
that these visits were always brief, and that between these 
visits, after the day of his resurrection, there were long periods 
of days and weeks in which the disciples saw nothing of him. 
It is generally overlooked, also, that he appeared in various 
forms, one of which was identical with the body that was 
crucified, because Thomas had said he would not believe unless 
he could have such a demonstration. Even then our Lord 
rather upbraided Thomas, assuring him that there was a still 
greater blessing in store for those who ask not for such ocular 
demonstration. It is generally forgotten that none of the 
world ever saw our Lord after his resurrection, but merely 
his disciples, to whom, it is said, he "showed himself." This 
was in harmony with his statement made before his death, 
"Yet a little while and the world seeth me no more."— 
John 14:19. 

R2981 : page 94 

The change of nature which our Lord experienced in his 
resurrection was no less a step upward from the earthly to 
the heavenly condition, than was the change of nature which 
he experienced at his birth a step downward from the heavenly 
to the earthly condition, called "humbling himself," laying 
aside his glory. As he laid aside the glory of his spirit being 
to become a man, so he, in turn, laid aside his humanity in 
death in order to assume the glory and dignity of the divine 
nature, "far above." Concerning the change which he experienced 
at his resurrection, the Apostle declares, "God hath 
highly exalted him." It should be manifest to all that, since 
our Lord left his rich condition as a spirit being, and humbled 
himself and became comparatively poor in the taking of the 
human nature, that this was for some particular reason and 
object, and that, when that object would be accomplished, the 
riches of the spiritual condition would be fully restored to 
him. But instead, the general thought is that our Lord Jesus 
is not only encumbered in heaven with a body of flesh, wholly 
unsuitable to heavenly conditions, but that, in addition to this, 
that body of flesh has all the marks of mental and physical suffering 
which it received through contact with sin and sinners 
as our ransom price. 

Such a view is dishonoring to the Heavenly Father; for 
it should not be supposed that he would tolerate a loss to all 
eternity on the part of his well beloved One, because of his 
faithfulness and obedience to the divine will. The Scripture 
declaration is to the contrary; namely, that our Lord was 
"made flesh," took upon him our nature "for the suffering of 
death;" and not to be encumbered with fleshly conditions to all 
eternity. Besides, if our Lord must bear the scars of his 
wounds to all eternity, the implication would be that his people 
would also bear all their blemishes and scars to all eternity. 
Surely, if such were the divine arrangement, that which is 



perfect would never come,— we should be encumbered with the 
imperfect forever.— I Cor. 13:10. 

When we get the correct view of this matter, every difficulty 
and objection ceases. As the Scriptures declare, so it 
was: "He was put to death in flesh, he was quickened in 
spirit." "Tho we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now 
henceforth know we him no more [so]." (2 Cor. 5:16; I Pet. 3:18.) 
It was at his resurrection that he became the second 
Adam— "the last Adam, a quickening spirit." (I Cor. 15:45.) 
"Now the Lord is that spirit." (2 Cor. 3:17.) After appearing 
to his disciples under various peculiar conditions 
after his resurrection, and in various bodies, the Lord 
invariably vanished,— as soon as he had communicated to 
them the appropriate lessons, causing, as they declared, their 
hearts to burn within them. He appeared in these various 
forms for two reasons:— 

(1) They could best receive his instructions under such 
conditions, for, if he had appeared to them in the glory of 
his spirit being, and had performed a miracle upon their eyes 
by which they could have discerned his spiritual glory, they 
would have been too much affrighted to have benefited by what 
he would have said. 

(2) They were still natural men, not fully begotten of 

the holy spirit, because Pentecost was not yet come (John 7:39; 
Acts 2:1-4), and hence they were unprepared to understand 
spiritual things; "for the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the spirit of God, neither can he know [appreciate] 
them, because they are spiritually discerned."— I Cor. 2:14. 

The Apostle Paul was the only one of the disciples who 
saw the Lord "as he is." He tells us that the Lord's real 
spiritual presence, so far from being fleshly, or human-like, 
shone with a brightness "above the brightness of the sun at 
noonday." The effect upon Paul's eyes was serious; and, we 
may readily believe the effects remained with him to his dying 
day, notwithstanding the miraculous removal of the callous 
scales, which permitted him to see, tho indistinctly. Very 
evidently our Lord's design was to educate his apostles up to 
the thought of his resurrection; and, also, to the thought 
of his resurrection being not to former conditions, limited 
by the flesh, but to new conditions, in which he (as he 
had already explained to Nicodemus) could come and go like 
the wind, and none could know whence he came nor whither 
he went; he could appear in one body or in another body, or be 
present with them without their being aware of it, just as 
"the angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear 
him," yet is invisible to them, because he is a spirit being. 

"WE SHALL BE LIKE HIM FOR WE SHALL SEE HIM 
AS HE IS." 



When the right conception of our Lord in his glorified 
condition is gained, and when the Apostle's statement is remembered, 
that his Church shall be like him, and "see him as 
he is," it is comparatively easy to understand that the entire 



glorified Church will be as invisible to the world as the 

Heavenly Father is, and as our Lord Jesus was after his resurrection; 

and when it is remembered that this Church constitutes 

the Kingdom of God, the "royal priesthood," which is 

to rule and bless the world during the Millennial age, our 

Lord's words to the Pharisees are quite intelligible,— "The 

Kingdom of God cometh not with observation— neither shall 

ye say, Lo here! or, Lo there! for behold, the Kingdom of God 

is in the midst of you"— a present but invisible authority, government, 

rule of righteousness.— Luke 17:21. 

THEY KNEW NOT THE TIME OF THEIR VISITATION. 
-LUKE 19:44.- 



Our Lord reproved the teachers of Israel because they did 
not discern the signs of the times; because they "knew not 
the time of their visitation." His words imply that their ignorance 
was a mark of carelessness and unworthiness, and 
of divine disfavor. He said: "Ye can discern the face of the 
sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times?" There 
was a reason, and the realization of that reason might have 
meant, to some at least, a correction of it— a drawing near to 
God to be taught of him. So now in the time of our Lord's 
second presence we find the world largely increasing in wisdom 
along various lines, and many hearts in perplexity and wonderment 
looking for those things which are coming upon the 
world, their hearts failing them for fear of the impending dissolution 
of the social structure in anarchy, and yet none are 
so blind respecting the times in which we live and the great 
changes impending, as the leaders of religious thought. 

They are blinded by their false theories. They have declared 
that the Lord's commission to his Church is that she 
should convert the world into a Kingdom of God, and thus 
bring about the reign of righteousness; and they are so determined 
that their theories must not fail that they cannot see 
what is rapidly becoming apparent even to the worldly; namely, 
that the numbers even nominally converted every year are 
increasing far less, proportionately, than the natural increase 
of the world's population: so that if they had millions of 
years before them, the conversion could never be hoped for; 
but at the end of millions of years, true Christianity could not 
expect to claim as large a percentage as at present. Their 
theory also blinds them to the fact that much of the increase 
of Church membership in civilized lands is merely for popularity's 
sake, and for the sake of worldly prosperity, social 
standing, etc., and not the result of love for God and righteousness, 
nor significant of a consecration to walk in the "narrow 
way" of self-denial, self-sacrifice, etc. 

The worldly, therefore, are really in a better condition to 
discern the signs of the times than many prejudiced nominal 
Christians. But none can see these things from the true standpoint 
except as they take that standpoint, and it is only granted 

R2981 : page 95 



to those who are fully consecrated to the Lord and who hearken 
to his Word. These shall not be in darkness, the Lord will 
not hide from them either his good purposes as respects the 
blessing of the Church and, subsequently, of the world, or his 
purposes respecting the chastisement of the world in a great 
time of trouble, preparatory to its blessing, which will come 
after it has been humbled. 

"THE DEAD IN CHRIST SHALL RISE FIRST." 



The chief work of our Lord during this "harvest" time, 
and especially in the forepart of it (when he calls his faithful 
servants of the Gospel age and reckons with them and rewards 
them), respects his Church as a whole, and not merely its living 
members. And here we should note the Apostle's statement 
respecting this time and work. He informs us that the 
Lord's dealings during this harvest will be first with "the dead 
in Christ," saying, "We which are alive and remain to the 
coming [presence] of the Lord, shall not prevent [precede] 
them which are asleep [those of the Church already dead],... 
for the dead in Christ shall rise first." (I Thes. 4:15,16). 
Taking this statement in connection with our Lord's parable, 
it means that the faithful sleeping in death will be resurrected, 
reckoned with, rewarded, before the reckoning with and rewarding 
of the living members of the Church begins. Accordingly, 
if it be true, as we have briefly presented it, foregoing,— 
that we are now living "in the days of the Son of Man," and 
that his presence began in the Autumn of 1874, then we should 
also believe that the resurrection of the saints which "were 
asleep" was due, and took place at some period not long after 
our Lord's parousia began. And we are able to fix upon a date 
for this with comparative certainty, altho the entire matter is 
invisible to natural eyes and can be discerned only with the 
eye of faith and by the light of our lamp, the Scriptures. 

Our lamp, as we have already seen, shows us that the 
Jewish age was in every particular a pattern, or illustration of 
this Gospel age; and keeping this in mind, we can judge something 
respecting the order of the divine arrangement in the 

R2982 : page 95 

"harvest" of this age, from the order of the divine arrangement 
in the "harvest" of the Jewish age. Observing the Jewish age, 
we find that the first three and a half years of their "harvest" 
were devoted to the simple announcement of the Master's presence, 
and an offer to the nominal Church then living; and that 
they ended by the rejection of the nominal Church at the time 
of our Lord's death; and that afterward while their nominal 
system, or Church was ignored, the Israelites indeed were 
called out of it into fellowship with the Lord, through his 
spirit. We note also, that it was at the very time of the rejection 
of the Jewish house that our Lord assumed before 
them, typically, his office of King, and rode upon the ass as the 



King of the Jews: and looking for the time when our Lord, in 

the end of the age, should assume his full regal power and authority 

as the King of kings, we find it should be at the corresponding 

date in this "harvest;" namely, in the Spring of 

1878. And as the first work of our Lord, after taking the 

kingly office, in the typical "harvest," was to reject the nominal 

house of Israel, that he might begin the work of gathering 

out of it the Israelites indeed, so we understand that in 

the present harvest time the first work of our King is the rejection 

of the nominal Gospel house of Sons,— to the intent 

that he may gather out of it the "wheat," his "elect," from one 

end of the ecclesiastical heavens to the other. (Matt. 24:31.) 

This rejection of the nominal Church, and the call to his people 

to "Come out of her," we understand to be symbolically 

styled the fall of Babylon, and the spewing out of Laodicea. 

See Rev. 3:16; 18:2-4. 

Here, then, we have an indication of the time when the 
judgment of the Lord's servants was due to begin, represented 
in the parable by the king's calling to himself his own servants 
to hear their reports; and in the light of the Apostle's statement 
just noticed, namely, that the living will not precede 
those that are asleep, it is clear that at that time, and before 
the reckoning with the living began, "them that sleep," "the 
dead in Christ," were awakened, granted a part in the first 
resurrection— raised in glory, honor, power, spiritual bodies, 
invisible to mankind. Nor would the resurrection of the spirit 
bodies necessitate any disturbance of graveyards or tombstones, 
or anything earthly. "That which is born of the spirit is 
spirit," and as our Lord after his resurrection was invisible to 
the world, and invisible also to his Church (except as he miraculously 
manifested himself), so with these: they are invisible; 
there is no necessity for miraculous manifestation; none has 
been made, neither is any expected. "We walk by faith, and 
not by sight." 

To all who understand the necessity for the sleep of the 
saints (namely, that it was because the call of the Church took 
place before the time divinely arranged for the establishment 
of the Kingdom), it will seem eminently proper that the King 
should, immediately on taking office as King, liberate from 
the prisonhouse of death his faithful followers, who during 
his absence manifested their faithfulness, and for whom crowns 
of righteousness have been set aside, to be given them at his 
return in power and great glory. Indeed, it would be unreasonable 
to suppose any prolonged delay of their resurrection, after 
our Lord takes to himself his great power and begins his reign. 
We hold, therefore, that the resurrection of the dead in Christ 
was due to take place in the Spring of 1878. 

"BLESSED THE DEAD WHO DIE." 



Furthermore, we note a beautiful analogy here; for, thus 
considered, our Lord's resurrection a few days after his taking 
of office as King in typical Israel, corresponds to, or parallels 
the resurrection of the Church, "the body of Christ" a few days 



after his taking to himself honor and glory and power as the 
King of nations, in the Spring of 1878. Not only so, but the 
Book of Revelation, in a scene which belongs to that particular 
time, and in a description of the opening of the "harvest" 
of this Gospel age, shows "one like unto the Son of Man, 
having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp 
sickle," beginning the work of reaping the harvest of this age: 
and there we find the significant statement, "Blessed are the 
dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, saith the 
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, for their works follow 
them. "--Rev. 14:13,14,16. 

This text has been so frequently misapplied by theologians 
that its true significance will be apt to elude all who have not 
their senses exercised by reason of use, and who do not closely 
discriminate. It signifies that from the time of the beginning 
of the reaping of the "harvest" of this age by the crowned 
reaper (the Spring of 1878), there will be a wonderful blessing 
not previously possible, upon the certain class described. From 
this particular date onward those of this particular class who 
die will be favored or blessed in a manner in which none of 
the preceding members of this same class were blessed; namely, 
in that their death will not interrupt their works, which will 
continue right along, the labor and weariness alone ceasing, 
the work itself continuing under more glorious and more favorable 
conditions. 

This means that since 1878 the fully consecrated of the 
Lord's people, those who are completely "dead with him," will 
not sleep in death, as has been necessary with all the preceding 
members of the body of Christ throughout the Gospel age; it 
means that from 1878, onward, the dead, who die in the Lord, 
will in the moment of dying experience their "change," or 
share in the first resurrection— in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye, pass from mortality to immortality; from weakness 
to power; from dishonor to glory; from natural to spiritual 
condition. 

It is to this that the Apostle referred when he said, "Behold, 
I show you a mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we shall 
all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at 
the last trump." To our understanding, the last trump, the 
seventh of the series of symbolical trumpets, began in 1874, 
just before our Lord took to himself his great power and began 
its exercise— began his reign: its sound is to continue until 
the close of the Millennial age, a thousand years. This 
"change" "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," that is to 
occur to the living members of the body of Christ, will indeed 
be a momentary change as respects each individual after he 
shall have rendered his accounts before the great King, and 
been accepted of him as a joint-heir in the Kingdom; but it 
does not imply that all of these will be changed in the same 
moment. Quite to the contrary, the judging of the living members 
of the Church, the going in of the wise virgins in the 
end of this age, will be a gradual work; it has already been 
in progress for over twenty years, and is not yet finished. It 
will include the rejection of the "foolish virgins," and the utter 
casting out of any who may take off the "wedding garment" 
of Christ's righteousness, as shown in one of the parables. 



Thus we see that immediately after this taking of the crown 
in the Spring of 1878, our Lord gathered to himself those of his 
saints, "his jewels," who had already been polished and fitted 
and prepared, and who slept, awaiting the time for the establishment 

R2982 : page 96 

of the Kingdom; and that since then, one by one, his 
faithful saints of the same class of "jewels" are being gathered 
to himself, as they finish their course. But as it was necessary 
that our Redeemer should not only consecrate his life to death, 
but that he should actually die, so it is necessary that every 
member of the body of Christ shall not only consecrate himself 
to be dead with him, but that each also shall actually die. They 
are already reckoned dead, but this is not sufficient; our Lord's 
words are, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee 
a crown of life;" and again, "Blessed are the dead in the Lord 
[reckonedly dead, consecrated unto death], dying from henceforth." 
So also it had been foretold in other Scriptures, that 
all who would be of the body of Christ must, like the Head, 
pass through the portals of death; thus it is written, "I have 
said, Ye are gods [mighty ones], all of you sons of the Most 
High; ye shall ALL DIE like men, and fall like one of the 
princes." The two princes of our race were Adam and Christ 
Jesus. Adam went into death because of disobedience; Christ 
as a sacrifice for the sins of others, entered death in obedience; 
and the Church, the body of Christ, his "brethren," being justified 
out of the Adamic death by faith in his sacrifice, are 
reckoned as joint-sacrificers with him in his death of obedience, 
that they may be accounted also sharers in "his resurrection" 
—the first resurrection, to the divine nature and glory 
andjoint-heirship.-Psa. 82:6,7; Rom. 5:12,17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 
We have given here only the briefest possible summary 
of the Scriptural evidences that we are living in the parousia, 
the presence, "the days of the Son of Man," in the "harvest" 
time of this age, and that the work which he, directly and 
through his apostles, instructed us to expect, is now in progress; 
namely, the "sealing" of the saints of the Most High 
God in their foreheads (Eph. 1: 13,14), and giving them a 
mental appreciation of the divine plan and its times and seasons, 
together with a judgment, or testing of all who have 
covenanted themselves to be the Lord's and to lay down their 
lives in his service. And all who refuse to live up to their 
covenant, even tho sealed and blessed, and enlightened with 
present truth, will, we understand, be rejected from it, and 
cast again "into outer darkness" with the world, to share in the 
great time of trouble coming upon it. We understand also, 
that the elect number will soon be completed, and the last one 
of the class who shall be blessed by the glorious "change" from 
mortality to immortality, in a moment, in the twinkling of an 

R2983 : page 96 

eye, shall soon obtain that blessing, and that then the great 
time of trouble will fully burst upon the world, and speedily 
bring down the high, the lofty, and the proud, and prepare the 



world for the reign of the Prince of Peace. 

Here we have consistency, at least, and harmony of Scriptures 
which have never been harmonized in the past, and which 
cannot now be harmonized from any other standpoint or with 
any other interpretation. Here we have the spiritual Kingdom 
of Messiah, with all power, displacing the spiritual kingdom of 
Satan, and establishing order and righteousness through earthly 
agents of its own, and overthrowing the earthly agents of 
the prince of darkness, many of whom are his servants merely 
because "the god of this world [age] has blinded the minds of 
them that believe not." 

"THEY WITHOUT US SHALL NOT BE MADE PERFECT." 
--HEB. 11:40.- 



We remark, incidentally, that following the gathering of 
the Church to glory, as above outlined, will come the resurrection 
of the holy ones of the past,— "Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, 
and all the holy prophets," whose resurrection will be to perfect 
earthly conditions, and who shall be the "princes in all the 
earth," seen of men, and representatives of the invisible but all-powerful 
spiritual Kingdom— the glorified Christ. Thus, chosen 
representatives of fleshly Israel will indeed rule the world, and 
bless it, as the representatives and agencies of the Spiritual 
Israel, and the nation of Israel will be first to respond to the 
standard of the Lord thus set up.— Psa. 45:16; Rom. 11:25-31; 
Zech. 12:10. 

Our Lord's parousia (presence in the world) begun in 
1874, will continue till the end of the Millennial age. The word 
is not applicable merely to a little period of presence at the beginning 
of the Millennial age: Christ's parousia and that of his 
Church will continue throughout the age. Nor will the epiphania 
and apokalupsis be a sudden burst of glorious light; nor 
do these words signify a visible showing to mankind of the 
Lord's person, or of the persons of his Church. Let us remember 
his words, "Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no 
more." Let us remember also that, as his Church is to be in 
his likeness, so his likeness is declared to be an "express image 
of the Father's person;" it is written that he is the King eternal, 
immortal, invisible. (I Tim. 1:17.) Nor will it be any 
more necessary that the world should see with their natural 
eyes the Lord and his glorified ones, than that they should 
see the Heavenly Father: the world will see the earthly representatives 
of God and of Christ and of the Church, when they 
"see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the holy prophets," for 
they will be samples of perfect manhood, which is the earthly 
image of the invisible God. 

Our Lord's epiphania (bright shining) and his apokalupsis 
(unveiling) began shortly after his parousia began; the bright 
shining of his presence is now visible to those who are walking 
"in the light"— to those who "are not in darkness with the 
world." It is a mental illumination, an illumination to the eyes 
of our understanding, and not to our natural eyes. The eyes 
of our understanding have been opened to see him that is invisible 



to the natural sight. The epiphania of our Lord is 
already affecting the world also, tho not through the eyes of 
the understanding; for they have no eyes for such spiritual 
things: nevertheless, the bright shining of the Lord's presence 
is influencing and affecting the whole course of the world, 
through an increase of knowledge on every subject— specially 
noticeable since 1878. Eventually, all the blinded shall have 
opened eyes of understanding, and 

"EVERY EYE SHALL SEE HIM." 



Many even who are not of the Watchers are noting the 
signs of our times and are startled, and led to exclaim, What 
do these things mean?— this remarkable latter-day advance in 
science, art and mechanical invention?— this latter-day discontent 
in the midst of plenty and luxury?— this latter-day 
growth of millionaires and paupers?— this growth of giant 
corporations of world-wide power and influence?— Why are 
national policies and public men and their utterances and doings 
criticized (judged) by the masses as never before?— And what 
means it that with an apparent growth in wealth and numbers 
in all denominations of Christians, there is a growing dissatisfaction, 
discontent in them all: a growing tendency to criticize 
the creeds and the preaching and everything?— How comes it 
that nine-tenths of the preachers in all denominations know 
that their hearers desire a change, and would gladly "move 
on," if they knew how to better themselves even at smaller 
salaries? 

The Scriptural answer is, The hour of God's judgment is 
come; the time when "Christendom," political, financial, social 
and ecclesiastical is being judged— being tried in the divine 
balances. And the Scriptures declare that she will be found 
wanting, and will be adjudged unworthy to further administer 
the affairs of earth, which will be turned over to the elect 
"little flock," according to the divine promise.— Luke 12:32. 

The secret of the matter now is the same as in the Jewish 
"harvest," which John explained, saying, 

"THERE STANDETH ONE AMONG YOU WHOM YOU KNOW 
NOT. "-JOHN 1:26. 



"Mine eyes can see the glory of the presence of the Lord; 
He is trampling out the winepress where the grapes of wrath 

are stored; 
I see the flaming tempest of his swift descending sword: 
Our King is marching on. 

"I can see his coming judgments, as they circle all the earth, 
The signs and groanings promised, to precede a second birth; 
I read his righteous sentence, in the crumbling thrones of 
earth: 

Our King is marching on. 



"The 'Gentile Times' are closing, for their kings have had 

their day; 
And with them sin and sorrow will forever pass away; 
For the tribe of Judah's Lion now comes to hold the sway: 
Our King is marching on." 



"Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man hear 
my voice [knock], and open the door, I will come in to him and 
sup with him, and he with me."— Rev. 3:20. 



page 97 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. APRIL 1, 1902. No. 7. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 99 

A Presbyterian Minister's 

Longings 99 

Absurdities of the Higher Critics 100 

God First— His Appointments 100 

Visiting with Peter, the Primitive 

Saints 103 

"The Saints which Dwelt in Lydda" 104 

God is no Respecter of Persons 107 

"Words Whereby Thou Shalt 

be Saved" 108 

Judgment of the Quick and Dead 109 

Questions and Answers 110 

The Memorial Supper Ill 

page 98 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



SPECIAL EDITION OF THE LINEAR BIBLE. 

We are glad to announce the completion of the printing of 
our new Bibles, with wide margins and references thereon to 
the five volumes of Millennial Dawn, and Tabernacle Shadows, 
and Zion's Watch Tower, 1895 to 1901. The binding and shipping 



will probably require some six weeks more. We regret 
the delay, but the time as well as the labor and expense were 
much more than contemplated at first. Its Topical Index alone 
will be of great value to us all as an aid in studying the divine 
Word. We trust that under the Lord's blessing this Bible will 
prove of inestimable value in the "perfecting of the saints for 
the work of ministry." 

The total edition will be 5000 copies; and the interest felt 
in the work by our readers is manifest from the fact that nearly 
all of these books are already bespoken, and more than half of 
them paid for in advance. There will not be nearly enough to 
fill orders as soon as the books are seen and their value realized; 
but we see no prospect of getting out another edition. 

ABOUT ORDERING DAWNS IN QUANTITIES. 

We entertain but slight hope of a revision of the Postoffice 
rulings;— granting us the second class rates of postage on the 
Dawns, clearly our right under the law. We suggest to the 
friends, therefore, that in every little group one be chosen to 
act as agent for all, to procure the desired books and tracts by 
freight. Thus ordered the paper bound volumes would cost 
but ten cents, plus perhaps one or two cents per copy by freight. 



R2983 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



A PRESBYTERIAN MINISTER'S LONGINGS. 



REV. HENRY VAN DYKE, one of the prominent 

ministers of the Presbyterian denomination, 

has felt constrained to give utterance 

to his conception of the needs of his church for a 

better and clearer statement of its present belief. We 

clip the below quotations:— 

"There is a twofold need for revision of the Westminster 
Confession of Faith. In the first place, the 
church has been studying her supreme standard, the 
Bible, for two hundred and fifty years since the Confession 
was written. She has been educated by Christ 
for one hundred years in the great work of missions. 
It is reasonable to suppose that she has learned something. 
Why should she not express it in her creed? 

"Another reason for revision arises out of the 
fact that the Westminster Confession was made in a 
time of fierce conflict and controversy. It was natural 
that certain things should be stated then with 
greater emphasis than they would have otherwise received; 
that the metaphysics of the seventeenth century 



should creep into certain chapters; and that certain 

points should represent a judgment of that age 

rather than a permanent truth. For example, the 

Westminster Confession speaks of the Pope of Rome 

as the Antichrist. Presbyterians today do not generally 

believe this. Again, by expressly mentioning 

'elect infants,' the Westminster Confession leaves 

open the supposition that there may be 'non-elect infants.' 

Presbyterians today believe that all who die 

in infancy are saved by Jesus Christ. The Westminster 

Confession has a long metaphysical chapter 

on God's eternal decree, which at least seems to teach 

that some men are created to be saved and others 

created to be damned. The Presbyterian Church today 

does not believe this, and to guard against misapprehension 

on the subject it wishes to say clearly 

and unmistakably that God has not put any barrier 

between any human soul and salvation. 

"Moreover, the Westminster Confession has no 
chapter on the love of God for all men, on the Holy 
Spirit, on the Gospel, or on missions. Now the Presbyterian 
Church has come to believe in these things 
with all its heart; and it wishes to put its belief into 
words. 

"Therefore revision is needed, not because of a 
conflict in the church, nor because of a lack of liberty, 
but because faith, deepening and broadening through 
the study of God's Word, craves an utterance in the 
language of living men. 



"Finally, this revision movement should give us 
a stronger emphasis on the truth that God is love. 

"Sovereignty and grace have always been the two 
great pillars of the Reformed faith. Sovereignty 

R2984 : page 99 

means that God is supreme. Grace means that God 
alone can save. 

"Take these two words separately, emphasize 
the sovereignty, limit the grace, and you have a hard 
creed. But take them together, believe in the sovereignty 
of grace and the grace of sovereignty and 
you have a creed that is infinitely sweet and glorious. 

"No man can be saved without God. There is 
no man whom God is not willing to save. 

"That is the whole of it. That is the creed which 
is incarnate in Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world. 
That is the creed which our faith longs to utter." 

We rejoice that this gentleman, and others of the 
Presbyterian connection, realize the situation thus, if 
not more intensely. We hope they may soon secure 
all the relief they so earnestly and so properly crave. 
At the same time we cannot avoid a few reflective 



questions:— 

(1) Have these learned men, who have been 
posing for years as ambassadors for God, only now 
awakened to thought upon so important a subject?— 
only now begun to feel uncomfortable in respect 

to their creed? Their answer would probably generally 
be,— No; we have long been troubled,— long 
felt our bondage. 

(2) Why, brethren, did you not end your difficulties 
long ago by asserting your moral and religious 

R2984 : page 100 

stamina, and withdrawing from the denomination 
whose creed, you admit, has not been the creed 
of your heart for many years,— possibly was not such 
even when you subscribed to it and took your present 
ministerial vows to uphold and teach it? Was 
it because you supposed that creed inspired? Was 
it because you believed that our Lord and the twelve 
Apostles established the Presbyterian system?— 
Surely not; surely as educated men you made no such 
mistake, but knew that it was instituted nearly fifteen 
centuries after the death of the founders of the 
Lord's one true Church.— What can have held you, 
fettered you, in thought and word and act so long 
and so thoroughly? The answer should doubtless be; 
—No good opportunity presented itself, until now. 
We could not think of withdrawing from the system 
on so slight an account as that of a defilement of our 
consciences and a misrepresentation of the divine 
character and plan. We, therefore, bore the burden 
without much inconvenience until now popular 
thought favors a change;— yes, we might almost say 
demands it. No, we hope to carry the denomination 
for a creedal restatement. 

(3) Another query, friends:— Since you knew 

that the Presbyterian system was no more the church 
which our Lord and his Apostles founded than others 
of the sects,— Methodist, Roman Catholic, Lutherans, 
Episcopalians, etc., etc., and since that idea did not 
hold you all these years, and still,— was it not the 
honor, the salary, the good name, the social standing 
you had in Presbyterianism that fettered you? 
And, if so, instead of praising and lauding your present 
belated movement, which you hope will bring you 
some "honor of men," should we not rather pity you 
and sympathize with you, not to say despise you, for 
your supineness?— for having failed to break your 
creedal fetters long ago? Should we not fear for you 
that for years you have been willing to sell God's character 
and your own consciences for earthly considerations? 
Indeed, since you now admit that your present 
action is because you believe it the more popular, 
can we give you any credit at all, or see cause to believe 
you one whit more honest or noble than you 



were in previous years? Their answer to this would 
doubtless be,— We all stand or fall together, and we 
do not believe that the world or the nominal churches 
take a higher plane of thought or action than we have 
taken. And their estimate is probably a correct one; 
alas, that Christian conscience in general is not on a 
higher plane! 

THE ABSURDITIES OF THE HIGHER CRITICS. 



Dr. Eaton, editor of The Western Recorder takes 
firm ground against the absurdities of the methods 
and logic of the so-called higher critics of our time. 
As illustrating their fallacies he furnishes the following 
incidents:— 

"At the Baptist Congress in Detroit (1894) Dr. 
Howard Osgood— the greatest Hebrew scholar in 
America— in the presence of men who were well informed 
on the subject and who were quite favorable 
to the alleged 'results of the higher criticism,' stated 
what those 'results' are, as told by their advocates. 
He asked to be corrected if in any particular he erred; 
but no correction was offered. From slips of paper 
he read statements of these 'results,' and when all 
present had assented to the correctness of the presentation, 
Dr. Osgood startled them by saying that all 
his quotations were from Thomas Morgan, a Deist 
of the early part of the eighteenth century, and from 
Tom Paine, the well-known infidel of the latter part 
of that century." 

"Not long ago two leading ministers in the North 
united in writing an account of a great religious 
gathering, and they sent their combined article to a 
number of 'higher critics,' requesting that they separate 
it into the two documents, giving to each of 
the two authors his portion. Their failures were 
most egregious, and no two of them agreed, because 
they worked independently. And yet these men, utterly 
unable to resolve an article, avowedly written 
by two men, in plain English, and written in their 
own time and country, into its original documents; 
these men are cock-sure they can correctly divide a 
book, written in Hebrew thousands of years ago, with 
no evidence of composite authorship, so as to give 
each supposed author his exact portion! And they 
claim to do this so accurately that they divide a single 
sentence among three authors, with perfect 
confidence!" 



R2984 : page 100 

GOD FIRST-HIS APPOINTMENTS. 



"Giving thanks unto the Father... who hath delivered us from 

the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the Kingdom of 

his dear Son. ..He is the Head of the body the Church: 

who is the beginning, the first born from the dead; 

that in all things he might have the preeminence."— Col. 1:12-18. 

SCARCELY could we hope to find a more 
suitable motto for the Lord's people during 
the present year, than, the words, "God 
First." A thorough devotion to him, a full recognition 
of all his appointments, acknowledges our Lord 
Jesus: as our text declares, he has the preeminences- 
he is Lord of all. This motto was adopted by the 
Allegheny Church for the present year: assuredly 
all who shall endeavor to live up to this motto to the 
best of their ability will enjoy much of divine favor, 
and make considerable progress in the narrow way. 

The text suggests the thought that the divine 
government is an autocratic one— the reverse of a 
democratic government, "of the people, by the people, 
for the people." As we look over the governments 
of civilized nations, we find that the more autocratic 
the government the less intelligent the people 
who will support it. For instance, the Russian government 
is autocratic; the authority, the power, being 
very largely held by the Czar, without responsibility 
to a parliament or Congress representing the 
people. As an example of a liberal monarchy, Great 
Britain is perhaps best, for there the powers of the 
sovereign are quite limited; the aristocracy being 
represented in the House of Lords, and the populace 
in the House of Commons; these two representative 
bodies share with the monarch the responsibilities of 
the government. The government of the United 
States, in which all the citizens are ostensibly on an 
equality, and in which the Citizen President, as their 

R2984:page 101 

choice, is the chief executive, is recognized as the 
highest type of civil government, most favorable to 
the masses— a republic, a democracy. 

It may at first seem strange to some that the 
type of earthly government least favorable, least esteemed 
by the intelligent,— the autocratic form, should 
most nearly represent the form of government which 
the Almighty has instituted for the entire realm of 
creation. If an autocratic form of government has 
proven itself so unfavorable to human liberty and 
progress amongst men now, can it be possible that 
this form of government is the very best for the universe 
in general, and forever? If so, wherein lies the 
difference? By what process of reasoning shall we 
demonstrate that that which experimentally amongst 
men has proven itself to be bad, should ultimately 



prove itself to be best? We answer that the difference 

is because all men are fallen and imperfect; 

hence are under the dominion of sin and selfishness 

to a greater or less degree; and additionally, all are 

imperfect in knowledge and in judgment, even if their 

hearts were fully disposed for righteousness. On 

the contrary, the Almighty is perfect in his attributes, 

and in his knowledge; and the law of his being as 

well as the law of his empire is— the reverse of selfishness 

—the law of Love. It is indeed dangerous 

to be fully under the power of any fallen imperfect 

being, however well intentioned; but it is a most 

desirable thing to be under the guidance and control 

of a perfect being, possessed of all knowledge, wisdom, 

justice, love, power. This is the situation: Jehovah, 

our God, is a dictator, his laws are perfect, 

just and good, and all of his creatures subject to those 

laws are blessed. Under these conditions, the autocratic, 

theocratic government which now obtains 

in heaven, is the most desirable one of all; hence, as 

our Lord suggests, we pray that this same government 

may ere long come to earth; saying,— "Thy 

Kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it is 

done in Heaven." 

Altho Jehovah God, our Creator, is not elected to 
his position, and does not hold it through the consent 

R2985 :page 101 

of his creatures; yet all of his creatures who are 
in harmony with the principles of righteousness delight 
to hold him as their King and Lord,— their Dictator, 
whose every wish it is their pleasure to obey. 
As a Dictator he has appointed Christ Jesus to be 
"Head of the body, the Church." But although we 
are not asked to vote, as to whether or not Christ 
shall be the head of the Church, God, nevertheless, 
respects our free moral agency, to the extent that we 
are not compelled to accept his arrangement in this 
matter. But, if we object, it means that we are not 
of the body, the Church; for the Almighty proceeds 
with his own plans, and those who do not fall in with 
those plans merely fail to that extent to secure to 
themselves the proffered blessings. 

Similarly the Almighty did not inquire of the angels 
whether or not they would accept the glorified Jesus 
as their Lord: he autocratically elevated our Lord 
Jesus, because of his implicit obedience even unto 
death, even the death of the cross, as the Apostle declares, 
"Wherefore [on account of his obedience unto 
death] God also hath highly exalted him, and given 
him a name which is above every name; that at the 
name of Jesus every knee should bow. ..and 
every tongue confess. ..to the glory of God 
the Father." Similarly, our context declares, that in 
his prehuman condition our Lord Jesus was from the 



beginning the head, the chief of all his Father's creatures, 
works, arrangements. "For by him were all 
things created, that are in heaven and that are in 
earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, 
or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things 
were created by him, and for him: and he is before all 
things, and by him all things consist." (Col. 1:16,17.) 
This agrees also with the statement of John's Gospel (1:1), 
"In the beginning was the Logos, and 
the Logos was with the God, and the Logos was a 
God: the same was in the beginning with the God. 
All things were made by him; and without him was 
not one thing made that was made." 

It appears from this, that the Heavenly Father 
has exercised his autocratic government from the 
beginning; choosing his first-born Son to be his representative 
in the entire work of creation. It appears 
further that it was to this first-born Son that 
the privilege or opportunity of becoming man's Redeemer 
was first proffered— as a privilege; because 
the Almighty autocratically intended that this matter 
of man's redemption should not only display his Justice 
and Love, his Wisdom and his Power, in respect 
to mankind, but it should additionally be a test, a 
manifestation, of the loyalty of his First-begotten; 
and that such loyalty, being fully demonstrated, would 
properly become the occasion for the still further 
advancement of his First-begotten One,— to the divine 
nature, "glory, honor, immortality,"— demonstrating 
his worthiness in all things to be preeminent. 

It is not, of course, the Apostle's thought that 
the Father made the Lord Jesus preeminent above 
himself, Jehovah. We are continually to remember 
the Apostle's suggestion of I Cor. 15:27, where, after 
declaring that the Father hath put all things under 
the Son, he adds, "It is manifest [need not be stated] 
that he [Jehovah] is excepted, which did put all 
things under him [Jesus]." So, gathering the 
proper thought of our text, we are still to remember 
that God is first: and that our Lord Jesus is first to us, 
as the Head of the Church, because God has given 
him this preeminence. In recognizing Jesus' 
full authority and headship of the Church, we are 
honoring him who appointed him, and thus we keep 
God first: as our Lord declares, "All men should 
honor the Son, even as they honor the Father." 
(John 5:23.) They are not to confound the two, but 
are to worship and reverence and obey both the 
Father and the Son; for the latter seeks not, and 
does not his own will, but the will of the Father who 
sent him, and who exalted him to his position of preeminence 
over all his creatures. The Apostle explains 
this relationship fully and emphatically when he declares 
that,— The head of the woman is the man; and 
the head of the man is Christ; and the head of Christ 
is God— Jehovah.— I Cor. 11:3. 



While rejoicing in liberal governments amongst 
men, and esteeming popular governments the most 
desirable under present conditions, we, nevertheless, 
recognize that this is so merely because present conditions 
are evil ones; because selfishness is the reigning 

R2985 : page 102 

law amongst men: the selfish interests and instincts 

of the masses may be trusted as safer for the 

whole population than the selfish instincts of one individual 

or one class. Consequently, while rejoicing 

in the government of this land, and in the favor which 

comes to us under this government, we are still praying 

for the glorious Kingdom which God has promised, 

in which his will alone shall be the law, and his 

representative, the King over all the earth. 

In the Church the divine law or theocracy is 
already to some extent established. We do not refer 
to the human institutions called churches, but to the 
Church "whose names are written in heaven," and 
whose leadership and membership as a body are directed 
by the Lord Jesus, their appointed Head. As 
for religious systems amongst men, we believe that 
on account of the weaknesses of the race and the 
fact that even the best are more or less contaminated 
by selfish impulses, the despotic forms of church government 
are most evil, and the democratic forms of 
church government proportionately the less evil, after 
the same manner as in civil governments. And here 
we note the Lord's arrangement for his Church to 
be a combination of the two forms of government. 
(1) It is democratic, inasmuch as the choice of the 
leaders is to be determined by the judgment of the 
members. (2) It is theocratic in the sense that the 
members are not to exercise their own preferences 
in respect to their choice (votes), but are to use their 
best intelligence in ascertaining the will of the Lord, 
their Head, in the matter; and hence are to express 
by their votes so far as they are able, not their own 
wills, but the will of the Lord. Here is the most 
harmonious and simple and beneficent arrangement 
imaginable under present conditions. Each individual, 
or unit of the Church, member in the "body" of 
Christ, is to say within his own heart, "God first," and 
God's appointment of Christ as a Bishop or Shepherd 
of his flock makes him and his will preeminent 
in our thoughts, in our hearts, in our words, in our 
deeds. We must, so far as we can discern his will, 
follow the same; so far as we can understand his 
Word, we are to speak his Word; and in our choice 
of leaders his will and not our own is to control. 
Thus in the Church, in the "body," in all of its associated 
interests and affairs, God first and Christ, 
his representative, preeminent, is to be the order,— 
in proportion as each member grows in grace and in 



the knowledge of the divine will. Thus God, through 
his faithful, still sets in the Church the various members, 
according as it pleases him. (I Cor. 12:18.) 
But this applies to each little group of the Lord's 
people, and to the whole church in general, only in 
proportion as they conform to his will and Word,— 
making God first and Christ, the Head, preeminent. 

This same principle is to be carried beyond the 
Church into the homes of the Lord's people. There, 
also, God is to be first and his representative, Christ, 
to be preeminent. If the head of the family be a 
member of the body of Christ, and recognizes him 
to be his Head, he must recognize his laws in the 
family as well as in the Church. And recognizing his 
law he must oppose every thing approximating anarchy 
—lawlessness; he must hold up before the 
family as well as before himself, Jehovah the autocratic 
governor and law-giver; and Christ Jesus his 
autocratic representative; and the perfect law of Love, 
which he sets forth, to be the law of all those who 
are members of his body;— to rule in their hearts perfectly, 
and in their mortal flesh as far as lieth in them, 
—to the extent of their ability. The reign of law 
in every family should be enforced both by precept 
and example; but it must never be forgotten that it 
is the law of Love— prompted by love, executed in 
love, accompanied by every kind and helpful influence 
possible. 

This will mean that so far as possible each member 
of the Church recognizing Christ as his Head, will 
seek to do the will of God in his family; and this will 
mean that if he has not already established the 
Family Altar of prayer, he will immediately do so,— 
to the extent that this is possible. If on account of 
work or business it is impossible to have family devotions 
daily, he can probably have them weekly, and 
we presume that the Lord will accept the good intentions 
and best endeavors thus evidenced. If the 
man, the divinely appointed head of the family, is not 
a member of the body of Christ, the wife, though a 
Christian, is to recognize the divine law upon this 
subject, that the man is the head of the woman and of 
the family, and she is not to establish family worship 
in any manner in conflict with the expressed will of 
her husband. She should seek the Lord's blessing 
and guidance and over-ruling providences, that her 
husband may be agreeable to the arrangement, and 
should await the results. The husband who is not 
a Christian but is, nevertheless, morally and religiously 
disposed, will under these conditions feel 
all the more the responsibilities of his position; and 
the wise and moderate and noble conduct of the wife 
will have the greater weight with him because of her 
moderation in this matter, and the evidence he has 
that she is subject to a higher law and lawgiver, to 
whom he also should be subject. 



Putting God first, and Christ preeminent as his 
representative, should have an influence also upon our 
business dealings in which we come in contact with 
the world: so that in our buying or selling, or whatsoever 
we do, we should remember continually to seek 
to do those things pleasing in the sight of the one 
whom we desire to please, and who is preeminent in 
our hearts. This will mean a decrease of selfishness 
and an increase of love, and a decrease of meanness 

R2986 : page 102 

and an increase of nobility of character toward all; 
and the result will be as our Master suggested, saying, 
"Let your light so shine before men that they 
seeing your good works shall glorify your Father 
which is in heaven." 

But while this matter of putting God first, and 
recognizing his appointments, laws and will in all of 
life's affairs, will exercise the foregoing influences in 
matters of the Church, matters of the home and 
family and matters of business and contact with the 
world, yet the chief influence of all will surely be 
found in our own hearts and lives. The thought of 
the will of Christ preeminent, connecting with all the 
doings of life in public and in private,— the thought 
that we wish God to have the first place in our affections, 
and his blessing in respect to our influence, 
our joys, our pleasures, our hopes, our aims,— what 

R2986 : page 103 

a blessing this will bring!— what godliness, what 
growth in the fruits and graces of the spirit! Very 
quickly this preeminence of Christ will expand beyond 
the actions of life and attach itself to our words. The 
true Christian will seek not only to act gently, as he 
believes the Lord would be pleased to have him act, 
but additionally, he will seek to speak gently, kindly, 
moderately, modestly,— and thus to show forth the 
praises of him who hath called us out of darkness into 
his marvelous light. No better homage and worship 
can we offer to the Lord, and no greater honor can we 
do to his name amongst men, than by exemplifying his 
teachings in the words and acts of our lives. 

But now we come to the most important point 
of all; for behind all our doings and teachings, in public 
and in private, are our thoughts. It is of paramount 
importance that in seeking to have God first 
in life's affairs, we shall see to it that he is first in our 
thoughts;— that Jesus there has the preeminence 
which God intends he should have;— that our affections 
should be preeminently set upon him more 
than upon husband, wife, or children; more than upon 
houses or lands; more than upon honors of men. 
Christ is to be enthroned in our hearts preeminent 



over all things,— yea, preeminent over self, and with 

many this submission of self is the most difficult proposition. 

This is exactly what our Lord taught, 

saying,— "If any man come to me, and hate not [love 

not less] his father, and mother, and wife and children, 

and brethren, and sisters, yea, his own life, 

[being] also, he cannot be my disciple."— Luke 14:26. 

Recurring to the illustration of our text— that 
of the human body, of which Christ is the head and 
all we are members: let us notice how intimate is the 
connection between the head and the members in a 
healthy, properly constituted body. Each member 
is in direct communication with the head by means 
of the nerves (however rapidly it is effected); in case 
of trouble, accident, pain,— the matter is at once reported 
to the head, and immediately a member of the 
body, perhaps a hand, is prompt to give service. The 
head has full direction because the spirit of the head 
pervades all the members of the body; so that,— "If 
one member suffer, all suffer with it;" and every 
member, in proportion as it is in harmony with the 
head and its spirit of love for the members, will be 
prompt to act. Sometimes in our human bodies the 
hand may stretch forth assistance to the injured member 
so quickly that it seems impossible to conceive 
that the message first went to the head, and that our 
hand was subsequently directed by the head to assist; 
and so it is with the members of the body of 
Christ; those who are in full touch and sympathy with 
the Head, the Lord, are to so large an extent of "one 
spirit" with him, so anxious to do his will, and so well 
informed in respect to what his will is, that they sometimes 
seem to act almost automatically, in respect to 
rendering help by word, or deed, or otherwise to 
those with whom they are in contact. 

Let us, dear brethren and sisters, during the year 
dating from the Memorial Supper, have for the watchword 
of our hearts, "God First"— and Christ "preeminent" 
by divine appointment;— remembering that 
it is out of the abundance of the heart that the mouth 
speaketh, and the general conduct of life proceeds. 
"Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are 
the issues of life."— Prov. 4:23. 



R2986 : page 103 

VISITING, WITH PETER, THE PRIMITIVE SAINTS. 

-ACTS 9:3 1-43. -APRIL 13.- 

"Jesus Christ maketh thee whole." 

THE PERSECUTION which scattered the disciples 
from Jerusalem throughout all Judea, 



and of which Paul was one of the leaders, 
subsided shortly after his conversion; and was followed 
by a period of rest, recuperation, edification, 
etc., as mentioned in the first verse of our lesson. 
Paul's conversion may have had something to do with 
this, but in all probability a trouble which arose about 
this time between the Jews and their Roman rulers 
had more to do with it. 

About the year A.D. 38 the Emperor, Caligula 
Caesar, who had but recently come into his office, 
promulgated an order that his statue should be set 
up in various quarters of the empire, and should be 
worshipped. When the Jews learned of this order, 
and that it was the intention to put these statues in 
Jerusalem, and even in the Temple itself, as well as 
elsewhere, their indignation and trouble knew no 
bounds. They gathered in great masses, young and 
old, to entreat the local governor to intercede for 
them that such a desecration of their holy temple and 
holy city and holy land should not be permitted. 
Speaking of one of these protest-gatherings, the historian 
says: "A vast throng, arranged in six 
columns of (1) old women, (2) matrons, (3) maids, (4) 
old men, (5) men in their strength, and (6) boys, 
gathered before the palace of the procurator, and 
threw themselves on the earth, with wild and piteous 
cries of despair, when he showed himself on the balcony. 
They declared they would die, but never give 
way. Petronius [the governor] made every effort 
to have the Emperor change the edict, but the most 
he could arrange was a command to leave the Temple 
untouched. But many altars were raised to the Emperor 
outside of its gates; and news came that all the 
synagogues in Alexandria had been turned into 
temples to Caesar. These things lasted till January, 
A.D. 41, on the 24th day of which Caligula was 
murdered." 

It is not surprising that such outside persecution 
and interference with their own religious rites and 
liberties caused the Jews to relax their persecutions 
of the Christians, and thus brought about the period 
of rest mentioned. Persecutors never like persecution 
for themselves. Those who have the mind of 
Christ are never persecutors; they feel it to be their 
bounden duty not to cooperate, not to assist, things 
which they believe to be wrong; they may even find it 
necessary or expedient to denounce the wrong, and 
to show up its inconsistencies; and in some instances 
to name the active agents in these wrong teachings 
and wrong doings— as the apostles have done on 
several occasions in their writings. But as for persecuting 
others, the Lord's people can take no part 

R2986 : page 104 

in this: we are hindered by the spirit of love, the 



mind of Christ, which directs that we should do unto 
others as we would they should do unto us— our 
Golden Rule, our "perfect law of liberty." 

The record says that the churches were edified. 
This word edified carries in it the thought of construction 
or building. We get the thought, therefore, 
that this time of peace was a time of upbuilding 
amongst the little groups of the Lord's people in 
Palestine. There is a two-fold sense in which the 
Church may be built up or edified— in numbers, and 
also in the graces of the spirit. Apparently the infant 
Church was edified both ways. It was growing 
in numbers, and growing in grace. That the latter is 
included is shown by the following declaration, that 
the believers walked in the fear of the Lord and in 
the comfort of the holy spirit. 

The Scriptures declare that the fear of the Lord 
is the beginning of wisdom (Psa. 111:10)— not a selfish 
fear; but a reverential fear; not a fear that the 
Lord is evil instead of good; not a fear that he will 
eternally torment or otherwise unjustly deal with his 
enemies; but a reverence of the Lord which recognizes 
his greatness and his goodness, appreciates the 
same, and fears to do aught that would be displeasing 
to him or that would separate from his love and 
favor. This proper kind of fear, which is the beginning 
of wisdom will never be lost, so long as the wisdom 
is maintained. We creatures of the dust, "by 
nature children of wrath, even as others," and transformed 
and renewed only by the Lord's grace and 
power and truth, must never lose sight of our own 
littleness and insufficiency, and of our complete dependence 
upon the Lord's mercy and favor. To lose 
sight of this would surely mean our fall. Hence, 
altho the Apostle declares that perfect love casteth 
out fear, we esteem his meaning in this passage to 
be the dread fear rather than reverential fear. Perfect 
love will cast out dread and slavish fear, but it 
will cultivate and stimulate and increase our reverence 
for the Lord; so that, as the Apostle again declares, 
even the advanced Christian who has lost his 
slavish fear, will, from love of God, and from a desire 
to please him and to attain the end which he has indicated 
for us, "fear, lest a promise being left us... 
any should seem to come short of it."— I John 4:18; 
Heb. 4:1. 

But reverence of God was not the only grace developed 
in the primitive church. To it was added 

R2987 : page 104 

the comfort of the holy spirit. (The use of the word 
"ghost" as a translation of the Greek word pneuma 
is very unfortunate, and confusing to the English 
reader. The word should never be used. Pneuma 
should invariably be translated "spirit."*) The holy 



spirit is the spirit, mind or disposition of God; and the 

primitive Church was cultivating this, developing it 

in their hearts, walking in it, that is, living it. The 

word comfort signifies united, cemented or strengthened 

together; and the thought of the passage as a 

whole, therefore, would be that the Church was not 

only multiplying in numbers, and being edified or 

built up together as God's holy Church or temple, 

but that the various "living stones" were being cemented 

or bound together by the holy spirit. This 

is a forcible and graphic description of a glorious condition 

in the primitive Church. It is what should be 

striven for by the Lord's dear people everywhere today 

as well; indeed it is as true of the true Church of 

Christ now as it was then. 

The thought of building together, building up, 
etc., when applied to the individual, signifies his own 
faith structure, which the Apostle tells us is to be 
composed of gold, silver and precious stones— divine 
truth and character— from which should be excluded 
all wood, hay and stubble of error, sin and hypocrisy. 
The same thought may be applied to the Church assemblies 
in a slightly different way; for each little congregation 
of the Church may be considered as a temporary 
temple, or abiding place of God in the world, 
as represented by his holy spirit indwelling. In a 
still larger sense the whole Church in any period may 
be considered as God's temple, in which he representatively 
resides, and through which he speaks to 
such as have an ear to hear. It is in this sense of 
the word that the seven churches of Revelation represent 
the one Church of the Lord throughout the 
world, in seven different epochs of its history. But 
let it be distinctly borne in mind that none of these 
proper enough uses of the word "temple," etc., interfere 
at all with the still larger, and still more exact 
thought respecting the divine Temple, the Church. 

This still more exact thought is with reference 
to the Church glorified, which has not been under 
construction, upbuilding, during the Gospel age, but 
is to be constructed speedily at the second advent 
of the Lord and the gathering together of his saints 
unto him. In this last view, be it noticed, each of 
the Lord's followers is symbolically a "living stone," 
now being chiseled, fitted, polished, prepared, for a 
place in the glorious Temple, whose construction was 
delayed until the end of the age, when, as typified by 
Solomon's Temple, each part will come together with 
exactness, "without the sound of a hammer,"— without 
the slightest need of trimming or altering any of 
those perfected ones, all of whom together will constitute 
the glorious Temple of God, which will be filled 
with his presence in the fullest and most complete 
sense, and constitute the center of his blessing and instruction 
to all the families of the earth during the 
Millennium;— "the New Jerusalem, which cometh 



down from God out of heaven."— I Pet. 2:4-7; Rev. 21:27,10; 
I Kings 6:7. 

"THE SAINTS WHICH DWELT AT LYDDA" 



We see from this narrative that altho the Apostles 
made Jerusalem the headquarters for their work 
they, nevertheless, went hither and thither throughout 
Judea, meeting with the Lord's people scattered 
by the previous persecution, etc., and forming nuclei 
of little congregations in every direction. In these 
travels Peter came to Lydda, the chief city in the 
Plain of Sharon (Saron), about midway between Jerusalem 
and Joppa— about ten miles from each; and 
his special mission, we are told, was the visiting of the 
saints. We like this word "saints." It signifies 
holy, set apart, sanctified believers in Christ. There 
is much opposition to the use of the word today, attributable, 
we believe, to two reasons. One is that 
the vast majority of professing Christians know that 
they are not saints, not sanctified, not living as near 
to the Lord as they could live,— not separate, even in 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN Vol. V. Chap. 8. 

R2987 : page 105 

heart, from the world, the flesh, and the devil. Such 
persons have strong reasons for disliking the word 
"saints," realizing that it would exclude them and 
nearly all of their friends and special associates in 
Christian work. Another reason for opposition to 
the word "saints" is that in the dark ages it became 
the custom for the Roman and Greek Catholic 
churches to "canonize," or legally set apart as objects 
of reverence, certain persons respecting whom, after 
several centuries had elapsed, nothing specially evil 
was remembered, but only things esteemed as honorable 
and praiseworthy. The word, saints, thus became 
separated from living Christians; and, indeed, 
this may have been because there were few Christians 
really so "alive toward God" as to be representatives 
of saintship. Another reason why some dislike 
this term, "saints," is that they consider it to be 
rather boastful,— some would even say hypocritical; 
because having lost sight of "justification by faith" 
in its proper application they have become accustomed 
to think of and to pray for all Christians as 
"miserable sinners"— overlooking the fact that there 
are some in whom "the righteousness of the Law 
is fulfilled," because "walking not after the flesh, but 
after the spirit," the merit of Christ covers all their 



unwilling shortcomings.— Rom. 8:4. 

The Lord's people, however, are to remember to 
apply and take pleasure in all the names and practices 
authorized by apostolic usage; and the term "saint" 
certainly thus approves itself to us. Almost all of 
the epistles of the New Testament are addressed to 
the saints; and those who can not properly apply the 
term to themselves can not properly apply to themselves 
the exceeding great and precious promises 
contained in those epistles,— for all the promises are 
addressed to and meant for the saints— the sanctified 
in Christ Jesus. (Rom. 1:7; I Cor. 1:2; 2 Cor. 1:9; 
Eph. 1:1, etc.) Let it be borne in mind that the 
word "saint" does not signify actual perfection, 
merely, as in our Lord's case, but also those reckoned 
holy through him; and that the apostles who were 
saints, and who classed themselves with the saints of 
God, declared respecting themselves, "We also are 
men of like passions with you."— Acts 14:15. 

The term saints, then, properly applied in the 
Church refers to those who altho originally "children 
of wrath, even as others," have been rescued 
from that condition of condemnation, and been 
washed, cleansed, and thus brought into accord with 
God through the forgiveness of their sins and the 
covering of their weaknesses and blemishes; and 
who, in connection with these blessings of God, and 
in appreciation of them, became the "sanctified in 
Christ Jesus" by making full consecration of themselves 
to live, not perfect lives (an impossibility), but 
as nearly perfect as they may be able;— the Lord's 
grace making them continually "holy, acceptable to 
God" the Father, through the merit of Christ Jesus. 
Let us not be ashamed of this name, "saints": if it 
present before our minds saintship, holiness, separateness 
from the world, that is just the very thought 
which should be there continually. It is a thought 
which will help us, and enable us the better to live 
separate from the world, as our Master indicated, 
saying, "They are not of the world, even as I am not 
of the world."— John 17:16. 

"JESUS CHRIST MAKETH THEE WHOLE." 

Our Golden Text is from Peter's words to 
AEneas, the paralytic, whom the Apostle found at 
Lydda and healed. We are not told that he was one 
of the saints; the presumption, therefore, is that he 
was not, but that at most he was a friend to some 
of them, and that thus the Apostle's attention was 
drawn to him. The fact that he had been bedfast, 
helpless, eight years, testified that the healing was a 
miracle. Its fame spread abroad, and resulted, we 
are told, in the drawing of many unto the Lord and to 
the Church. Thus did the Lord establish the Church 
and attract to it those who were in the right attitude 



of heart, using miracles then, as he now uses other 

means. Those miracles, as already pointed out, can 

not have lasted much longer than the apostles themselves; 

the gifts of healing, etc., being granted only 

through the laying on of the hands of the apostles— 

and the twelve had no successors— the heavenly Jerusalem 

had twelve foundations, and no more, and in 

them were written the names of the twelve apostles, 

and no others. 

"THIS WOMAN WAS FULL OF GOOD WORKS." 

One of the disciples, that is, one of the saints, 
residing at Joppa, on the seacoast, was apparently a 
woman of means and education, and if her name represented 
her appearance, she was very beautiful. 
Tabitha, in the Syriac language, Dorcas, in the Greek, 
signifies graceful, beautiful. But this woman was 
famed for a beauty and a grace entirely separate and 
distinct from whatever she possessed of these qualities 
naturally. Hers was the beauty of a meek and 
quiet spirit, full of love and helpfulness. She was a 
burning and a shining light for the Lord in that vicinity, 
evidently. She was not "a Bible reader," for 
there were no Bibles in the language of the people 
at that time. She was not a tract distributor nor a 
colporteur, for there was no printing done then; but 
she did what she could; she served the Lord, his 
brethren and all needing help, according to the best 
opportunities afforded her. She helped the poor, and 
particularly widows, who as a class at that time were 
apt to be in a very trying position, especially if poor. 
Dorcas had been in the habit (the Greek text indicates) 
of assisting the poor with garments, etc., probably, 
almost certainly, assisting them also with words 
of encouragement and helpfulness, and ministering to 
them the truth. Under these circumstances it is not 
strange that her death should have produced sorrow, 
especially amongst the beneficiaries of her charities, 
and amongst the numerous friends which a beautiful 
Christ-like spirit of this kind is sure to make. 

While it is very true that the civilized conditions 
of the present time take from us many of the opportunities 
possessed by Dorcas, by supplying means of 
employment for poor widows and others indigent, 
and by providing County Homes, etc., for the needy, 
nevertheless, all who have the spirit of the Lord, 
which Dorcas had, and which she so nobly exemplified, 
will surely still find opportunities for laying down 
their lives, some way or other, in the service of the 
household of faith. As the Apostle says, "We ought 
also to lay down our lives for the brethren." (I John 3:16.) 
Some one has suggested that possibly 
Dorcas was a martyr— that her death probably resulted 

R2988 : page 106 



from her service to others. A Christian poet 
has said of such as she:— 

"These, tho their names appear not on the scroll 
Of martyrologists, laid down their lives, 
No less a martyrdom in Jesus' eyes— 
For his dear brethren's sake;— watching the couch 
Of loathsome sickness or of slow decay, 
Or visiting the captive in his cell, 
Or struggling with a burden not their own, 
Until their weary life sinks slow away, 
These, too, are martyrs, brother." 

Yes, all of the Lord's saints are to be martyrs;— 
their consecration is to lay down their lives in the 
service of the Lord, the brethren and the truth; and 
as nearly as they can understand in the way which he 
shall direct them, through his Word and his providences. 
Our covenant is not one of self-preservation, 
but one of self-sacrifice. True, we are looking 
for and hoping for a life eternal and glorious as spirit 
beings; but the terms and conditions upon which we 
are scripturally hoping to attain that perfect and new 
life are that we shall sacrifice what remains of this 
present earthly life. Another thought, that comes in 
this connection, is that while, undoubtedly, our chief 
service under present conditions is the ministry of the 
spiritual food, spiritual drink and spiritual clothing, 
to the household of faith, yet nevertheless we are to 
remember that to the extent of our abilities and opportunities 
we are to do good unto all men, as the 
Apostle enjoins. 

Everyone of the Lord's saints should be recognized 
in his neighborhood as of generous heart, of 
kindly impulses; whether he have dollars to give, or 
only pennies. Of kind words at least he should be 
noted as a giver, remembering that it is more blessed, 
and more God-like, to give than to receive. And 
those who lack the wherewithal for generosity in this 
world's goods, so that they have nothing wherewith 
to minister in a temporal way, to the necessities of the 
saints or others, are not to forget that they have the 
still more precious, more valuable, more helpful, 
more cheering, consolations of the spirit of the truth, 
and kindness to dispense to such as are in any need. 
Would that all of the Lord's people would cultivate 
these Dorcas qualities, and thus become more and 
more beautiful and graceful in the eyes of their Lord, 
as well as in the eyes of the world! 

Today, as the traveler passes from Joppa, going 
toward Jerusalem, the guide shows him on the outskirts 
of Joppa, at the side of the public road, a large, 
and at one time very beautiful and costly, monument 
to Dorcas. It is a fountain at which many weary ones 
have refreshed themselves. The narrative of Dorcas' 



good works and Christ-likeness, like the waters of a 
fountain, have come down the rugged channel of the 
centuries,— encouraging, refreshing, and stimulating 
God's people all the way. Nevertheless, quite probably 
some in her day spoke evil of her; perhaps even 
some who were the recipients of her favors may have 
declared that she performed her charities that she 
might glory in them, and to be seen and known of 
men, rather than for the love of those to whom she 
ministered: and such may be our experience, as we 
seek to do good unto all men as we have opportunity. 
But the fact that good may be evil spoken of must not 
deter us. We seek to please the Lord, and to cultivate 
in our hearts his spirit, and to exemplify this 
spirit before others, thus letting our light shine: this 
is our only proper course, whatever may be said of it 
by the skeptical world, or an envious class of "tares." 
We are to seek chiefly the approval of our Father 
and our Bridegroom;— to be content therewith, and 
to be content with nothing less. 

Apparently Dorcas took sick and died suddenly, 
at about the time that others of the saints at Joppa 
heard of Peter's being at Lydda and the cure performed 
there. They sent for him immediately; probably 
with no thought of his performing such a miracle 
as to bring Dorcas back to life; but rather with the 
thought that they had lost a highly esteemed member 
of their little group, and that Peter could give 
them some consolation at this time. There was no 
telegraph or telephone or mail service then, and some 
of the brethren became the messengers to take the 
word to Peter,— to request his presence, and that he 
would not delay. In the city of Jerusalem a corpse 
must be buried the same day, but in the smaller cities 
and villages they might remain as much as three days 
unburied. Peter's presence was wanted without delay, 
before Dorcas would be buried; and he went at 
once. 

An affecting scene was before Peter as he entered 
the death-chamber. Poor widows and others 
were lamenting the loss of their friend, and showing 
the garments which she had made for them. That 
surely was a noble tribute to the usefulness of her 
life. No millionaire has ever left monuments which 
will endure so long, or which will reflect so much 
glory upon his character, as were left by this humble 
woman. And even the humblest and poorest of us 
may to some extent emulate this example and leave 
some such monuments of love and testimonies of 
appreciation behind us when we die. It is a sad end 
when any, especially of those who have named the 
name of Christ, die and leave none who sincerely, 
truly, mourn for them and miss them. It testifies 
to a life that was either selfish or misunderstood. We 
who are looking forward to the close of our earthly 
journey, and that before very long, should see to it 



that our lives are spent day by day in such a manner 
that some will be the happier for them; and that 
our decease will be recognized by some, at least, as a 
loss. 

Peter's most notable miracle was the bringing of 
Dorcas back from the portals of death. Like the 
other miracle, it was peculiar to that time, and for 
the special purpose of the establishment of the 
Church. We are not to suppose that it was the 
Lord's intention that all of his people during this 
Gospel age should be thus snatched back from death, 
nor that they should be all relieved from beds of 
sickness, nor that they should all have powers such as 
the Apostle here exercised. There is a ministry of 
evil— of calamity, sickness, death, etc.,— which has 
often been valuable indeed to the Lord's people, inculcating 
various lessons and developing various 
fruits of the spirit, meekness, patience, gentleness, 
etc. Let us after consecrating our all to the Lord, 
and while using our consecrated all as wisely as we 
know how, accept whatever divine wisdom shall mete 
out to us. Let us remember our Lord's words,— 
"The cup which my Father hath given (poured for) 
me, shall I not drink it?"— John 18:11. 



R2988 : page 107 

"GOD IS NO RESPECTER OF PERSONS." 

-ACTS 10:34-44.-APRIL 20.- 

MANY SEEM totally to misunderstand the 

Apostle's statement that "God is no respecter 

of persons";— they apply these 

words in a very different way from that in which the 

Apostle used them. The Apostle perceived that God 

is a respecter of character; but that he is not a respecter 

of outward appearances, conditions, color of 

skin, nationality, etc. That this is the Apostle's 

meaning is evidenced by his next statement, "But in 

every nation he that feareth him and worketh righteousness 

is accepted of him." It is a misapprehension, 

far too common, that anybody and everybody may 

come to the Lord upon terms of intimacy and familiarity. 

In consequence of such misapprehensions 

many approach the throne of heavenly grace without 

authority, without invitation, and without acceptance; 

—because (reversing the Apostle's words) they do not 

fear the Lord, are not workers of righteousness, and 

are not accepted with him. Lack of instruction, and 

misinstruction by Christians, are responsible for 

much of this wrong condition existing in nominal 

Christendom. Let us learn to follow carefully the 

Scriptural program and precedent; let us not give the 



misimpression that God is no respecter of character. 
Let us, on the contrary, as Peter did, point out that 
reverence for God is an essential; that an endeavor to 
live righteously is an essential,— a reformation of 
life, a turning from sin to righteousness; and that, 
even then, none can be acceptable to God except 
through the appointed way— faith in the atonement 
work of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Cornelius, the centurion, whose acceptance with 
God is the subject of this lesson, was evidently converted 
to God and to righteousness years prior to 
this incident. This is the testimony;— he was a worshiper 
of God, a benevolent alms-giver, and his love 
of righteousness and his consistent life were recognized 
amongst those with whom he had to do; yet, 
nevertheless, something was necessary before he 

R2989 : page 107 

could be accepted with God in the proper sense of 

that word. There is a lesson here for those who imagine 

that a reverence of God and morality are all 

that are necessary to divine acceptance. As Cornelius 

had these qualities in large measure for some 

time before his acceptance, the Lord's dealing with 

him may well be a guide for all others who desire to 

approach him in covenant relationship. 

Altho devout, etc., as we have seen, Cornelius 
was not a Jew; and realized himself to be outside the 
pale of special divine favor. Still he prayed to God; 
—we are not told for what he prayed, but in harmony 
with the records, we may readily suppose that he 
prayed for enlightenment respecting the divine character 
and plan, and for a closer approach and a realization 
of divine favor and acceptance. Perhaps he 
had heard of Jesus and was perplexed on this very 
subject; perhaps this led him to the earnest prayers 
which the Lord saw fit to answer in a miraculous 
manner, sending an angel to him, assuring him that 
his prayers and his alms were appreciated of the 
Lord as memorials of his piety. (Verse 4.) The 
angel intimated that something further than prayers 
and good deeds was necessary; but the additional 
things the angel was not commissioned to tell. Cornelius 
needed to know of the Lord Jesus from the 
true standpoint; he must exercise faith in him as 
his Redeemer, before the memorials of his piety 
would count for anything with God, or bring him into 
the desired relationship and under the divine favor. 

We know very well that the Lord could have promulgated 
the gospel through the instrumentality of 
angels; but here, as elsewhere, we see that this was 
not his purpose— that he was pleased to use consecrated 
human sons as his ambassadors, to proclaim 
the "good tidings of great joy— for all people." What 
a great honor God has thus done us who "were by nature 



children of wrath, even as others" of the race, 
but who, having accepted divine favor in Christ, are 
not only "accepted in the Beloved" but are made the 
channels of divine blessing and favor in the calling 
out of others. The divine course in this respect has 
not only been an honor to his adopted children, but, 
additionally, it has been a blessing;— for what Christian 
does not know from experience that great blessing 
comes upon all who are faithful in serving the 
Word to others. 

Cornelius was instructed to send for the Apostle 
Peter, and was informed in advance that certain 
words he would tell him were of importance;— essential 
to his further progress in knowledge and in faith, 
—and through these into divine favor. Cornelius' 
readiness of mind is shown by the promptness of his 
obedience. He not only prayed, but prepared to cooperate 
with God in the answering of his own prayer. 
The three persons sent (two of them household servants, 
and one of them a soldier, all devout persons, 
who feared God) give us good evidence that this Gentile 
who was feeling after God, and striving to the 
best of his ability to please and honor him, had not 
been keeping his light and his faith under a bushel. 
It had shone out before his family and servants, and 
before the soldiers under his control. This is the 
kind of man whom God delights to acknowledge, 
whatever may be his nationality or the color of his 
skin, and all such are recognized of the Lord, and 
favored above others with light and truth— ever since 
the close of typical Israel's special favor. There is 
a lesson here that some of the Lord's people need. 
It is that they should let the light of truth shine 
through them upon all with whom they come in contact, 
—that the spirit of devotion should pervade every 
family, every household, including the servants. 

Evidently Cornelius was full of faith in the Lord. 
He did not wait to see if Peter would come; he knew 
that he would come; he had faith in the Lord's promises 
through the angel: accordingly he gathered together 
his friends and relatives and household— those 
upon whom he had been exercising an influence, and 
who, like himself, were pious and earnestly desirous 
of knowing all that they might learn concerning the 
way of life,— the way of reconciliation and harmony 
with God and all the principles of righteousness which 
he represents. 

Meantime Peter, with all the prejudices belonging 
to the Jews for centuries, needed to be prepared to 
receive this first out-and-out Gentile brought into the 
Church. This was done by means of a vision, so that 
Peter, with six brethren from Joppa, came promptly 

R2989 : page 108 

to the centurion's home on the following day— 



"doubting nothing," because evidently the Lord was 
leading him in the matter. We see, too, that of all 
the disciples Peter was the best one to be chosen for 
this work, because of his impetuous disposition and 
zeal to follow the Lord's directions quickly and 
heartily; secondly, because being the oldest of the 
apostles, and in many respects the most influential 
one, his course would have the greater weight with 
the others. It is difficult for us to conceive the prejudice 
of centuries, in the minds of the Jews, against 
any thought of the Gentiles being fellow-heirs with 
them of the Abrahamic promises. They considered 
it a settled matter that God's favor had been set apart 
to their nation; and that it could not possibly go outside 
that nation to others, in the sense of making 
those others equally acceptable to God. These views 
were based, first, upon the promises of God to Abraham, 
"Thy seed," etc.; secondly, upon the fact that 
Israelites were not permitted to have general dealings 
with the Gentiles, nor to intermarry with them; 
thirdly, added to all this, the rulers of the Jews had 
even gone further, and exaggerated to some extent 
these differences. 

But now a new dispensation had come; the 
"seventy weeks" of favor to Israel had expired; and 
the Lord began to extend his favor beyond the Jews 
—as we have already seen, to the Samaritans and the 
Ethiopian eunuch. We may readily suppose that 
those innovations, altho causing surprise to the apostles, 
would be much easier for them to grasp than the 
extension of favor to the Gentiles: they perhaps paved 
the way to the latter. When Peter arrived at the 
house of Cornelius, and the latter saw him and recognized 
him as God's appointed servant for the bringing 
of this message to him, he prostrated himself at 
Peter's feet in worship. How different Cornelius 
was from the majority of Romans,— especially of Roman 
soldiers and officers! Instead of looking down 
upon the Jew,— instead of thinking of himself as a 
representative of the greatest government in the 
world, at the time, Cornelius was filled with the spirit 
of humility, and the fact that his visitor represented 
the Lord called forth from him some of the same feelings 
that were filling his heart in respect to the Lord 
himself,— feelings of reverence. 

But if the centurion was noble and humble, the 
Apostle Peter showed himself in response to be no 
less noble and loyal to God— for he at once began 
to lift up the centurion, saying, "Stand up; I myself 
also am a man." (Verse 26.) Peter commends himself 
to our hearts by this noble course— by this refusal 
to receive unauthorized homage; and he saved 
himself also from a great deal of trial by thus disowning 
supernatural honor and authority promptly,— by 
recognizing his true position, that he was only a 
broken and emptied vessel, valuable only because of 



the filling of the vessel with the Lord's spirit;— distinguished 

only because the Lord had been pleased 

to use him as a vessel of mercy and truth. Not many 

today are disposed to offer worship to fellow-creatures, 

and not many, except high dignitaries in the 

nominal churches, such as popes and prelates, consent 

to receive worship; but all such have a rebuke 

in the course of the Apostle Peter in this case. There 

is perhaps little danger in our day that any of the 

"brethren" would receive too much honor of men, 

because the spirit of our time is running in the opposite 

direction. Nevertheless, wherever a spirit of 

servility is manifest, it becomes the duty of the 

brother to whom it is offered to refuse it; and to point 

his fellow-servant to the Lord, as the real benefactor 

of us all,— from whom comes every good and perfect 

gift, by whatever channels he may be pleased to use. 

"WORDS WHEREBY THOU SHALT BE SAVED." 



Peter coming into the house, and finding a congregation 
of earnest God-fearing Gentiles assembled, 
asked the pointed question, "For what intent have ye 
sent for me?" (Verse 29.) Cornelius then related 
something of his past experience, his desire for fellowship 
with God, his endeavor to live in a manner pleasing 
to him, the vision that he had received, and now 
Peter's arrival in response to that vision, and his expectancy 
that he was about to hear what had been 
promised him— "words whereby thou and all thy 
house shall be saved." (Acts 11:14.) He was not 
saved by his almsgiving, not saved by his prayers, 
nor yet by the message which Peter delivered; but 
Peter's message, "words," explaining matters, enabled 
Cornelius and his household to grasp by faith 
the great redemption which is in Christ Jesus,— and 
thus to be saved. Saved at once from alienation 
from God and from condemnation, as sinners; a foretaste 
of the complete salvation to be granted unto 
them at the second coming of the Lord. 

We note with keen interest the Apostle's preaching, 
that we may clearly discern the life-giving message 
which he brought, from which Cornelius and his 
associates derived their saving faith. We find that 
Peter's discourse was the same gospel message which 
he had delivered repeatedly before. It was Jesus— 
the good, the obedient— and the sacrifice for sins 
which he accomplished when he died on the cross. It 
was the message of the hope of a resurrection from the 
dead through him, as attested by his resurrection by 
the mighty power of God. It was the message that 
a ransom for sinners having been paid to Justice the 
Lord is now pleased to accept sinners on conditions 
of faith, reverence and obedience to righteousness 



according to ability. Peter's discourse was "the old, 

old story" which to many has become tedious and distasteful; 

but which to every soul, in the right attitude, 

is the Father's message of forgiveness of sins, and 

reconciliation, through the death of his Son. This 

is the same message which God is still sending by 

all who are his true ambassadors. There is no other 

gospel, and those who present another message are 

not, in their service, ambassadors for God, messengers 

and mouthpieces of his spirit. 

The Apostle Paul tells us that "It pleased God 
through the foolishness of preaching to save them 
which believe"— that is, it pleased God to adopt this 
method of declaring the truth respecting his redemptive 
plan, and to accept and justify those who 
would believe and accept this testimony. The testimony 
may reach people today through letters or tracts 
or books, or through oral preaching; it matters not in 
what manner; it merely matters that the true message 
shall be delivered, and received; but the message 

R2990 : page 109 

goes, invariably, through the human channel, 

and not through angels, nor by the holy spirit's 

power or operation aside from human agents. We 

are to bear in mind these lessons of God's methods, 

and to apply them appropriately in connection with 

the affairs of life. We are not to expect the Lord to 

move upon or instruct our friends or kindred or 

neighbors; but are to remember that this honor he 

has conferred upon his "royal priesthood;" and accordingly 

we are to be "not slothful in business; fervent 

in spirit; serving the Lord;"— serving the truth 

in any and every manner open to us. 

THE JUDGMENT OF THE QUICK AND DEAD. 



After telling the message itself, Peter explained 
to Cornelius that Jesus commanded the apostles to 
preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he 
which was ordained of God to be the Judge of the 
quick and the dead. (Verse 42.) The coming judgment, 
or trial, of the world, is an important part of the 
gospel message; and is not to be neglected in the 
preaching of the gospel. 

What advantage could accrue to the world 
through the death of Christ if there were no future 
judgment or trial for them? All were judged once in 
the person of Adam; and his condemnation passed 
upon all. The world needs no further judgment 
along the lines of the Adamic transgression and its 
weaknesses. The sentence for that transgression 
was complete, and leaves nothing that could be 



added;— the Judge was Jehovah himself, and the 

sentence was death. And now the good tidings includes 

the fact that Christ is to be the Judge of the 

world— which signifies that a new trial for life is to 

be accorded to Adam and his race. This of itself implies 

a release from the original death sentence; it 

implies a redemption from Adam's sentence, and an 

individual trial to determine which members of the redeemed 

and to-be-tried race will be accounted worthy 

of everlasting life. Yes, this is "good tidings of great 

joy" for the world;— even tho the great Adversary 

has deluded the vast majority, even of Christians, 

into thinking to the contrary— that no new trial such 

as Adam had at first is to be granted to the whole 

world, bought with the precious blood of Christ. 

All are witnesses that this trial could not have 
begun before Jesus became the Judge— hence that 
none of those who had died in the four thousand years 
preceding could have been judged by him;— none of 
them could have been on trial for eternal life. All 
should likewise be aware of the fact that the world in 
general has not been on trial since our Redeemer was 
appointed the Judge, and that it is not on trial today; 
—that, on the contrary, the great mass of the world 
neither knows the Judge nor understands the law, 
nor has any conception of the conditions and requirements 
necessary to life everlasting. This agrees exactly 
with the statement of Peter, under consideration; 
and it agrees also with the statement of the 
Apostle Paul, "God hath appointed a day in the which 
he will judge the world in righteousness by that man 
whom he hath ordained." (Acts 17:31.) The appointed 
day, as the Apostle indicates, was still future 
in his day, and is still future in our day. That day, 
as we see from other Scriptures, is the Millennial day, 
"a day with the Lord, a thousand years." (2 Pet. 3:8.) 
The only judgment— trial— since our Lord's 
resurrection, which has resulted to any, determining 
the question of life or death eternal, has been to the 
Church. The Church, as spiritual Israel, has had 
much advantage every way over the remainder of 
mankind; because, during this Gospel age, it is being 
"called of God according to his purpose,"— that 
the overcomers may be joint-heirs with Jesus in his 
coming work of judging the world. "Know ye not 
that the saints shall judge the world?"— I Cor. 6:2. 

Peter, in discoursing on the matter, evidently 
had his mind more widely opened than ever before 
to a realization of what our Lord meant in giving the 
general commission to preach the Gospel, not merely 
to the Jews, but to whoever would have an ear to 
hear. Peter was not expecting "ears" amongst the 
Gentiles; but now he perceived that God was not a 
respecter of nations and features, etc., but that the 
message was open for all, and he did his best to present 
it. He proceeded to show that Jesus, as the 



Messiah, was not evidenced merely by the things connected 
with his ministry, and the ministry of his followers; 
but that all these things were foreknown to 
God, and planned, and foretold through the holy 
prophets of Israel, and that only in and through the 
name and merit of Jesus,— only to those exercising 
faith in him, was God pleased to show a reconciled 
face, and from such only was he willing to take away 
all sin and shame, and to adopt them into his family. 

Cornelius and his devout household and friends 
had been waiting for just such a message of divine 
grace; and as the words fell from Peter's lips they 
were quickly and gladly appropriated in the hearts 
of his hearers, who were by this time accepting Jesus 
with the same fullness and appreciation as Peter himself. 
Their hearts being thus in the right condition 
before God, it would have been appropriate for Peter 
to have said to them, Now brethren, your proper 
course will be to be baptized into Jesus by a water 
baptism,— symbolizing your faith in him and your full 
consecration to be dead with him, as his faithful followers. 
But Peter was not ready to take such a step, 
we may be sure. He was surprised that God was 
willing that the Gentiles should even know about 
the wonderful provisions of salvation in Jesus; which 
of itself would have been a blessing. But he was not 
yet prepared to expect that the Gentiles would be 
received of the Lord on practically the same terms, 
and with exactly the same manifestations of divine 
favor as were the Jews. To make good Peter's insufficiency 
of knowledge to baptize them, and to lay 
his hands upon them that they might receive the gifts 
of the spirit,— and as a lesson to Peter also,— the holy 
spirit was given to Cornelius and his companions 
without the laying on of hands— in the same manner 
that it was bestowed upon the assembly at Pentecost. 

Peter quickly learned the lesson, and undoubtedly 
his readiness to learn it was in large measure 
due to his humility and sincerity of heart, the 
fulness of his consecration to the Lord, and his desire 
that the divine will should be done in every particular. 
Peter and his companions from Joppa, "they of the 
circumcision," were astonished at God's favor upon 
the Gentiles, yet they were not envious. They were 

R2990 :page 110 

glad to welcome as cleansed, as brothers, all whom 

the Lord indicated that he had received into his fellowship. 

The result of this outpouring of the spirit 

was a grand testimony meeting. The record is that 

they "magnified God," praising him, rejoicing in their 

acceptance, etc. Then Peter drew their attention to 

the symbolical baptism and the propriety of observing 

it. We are not given his arguments on the subject; 

possibly he explained that in thus publicly symbolizing 



their consecration to the Lord they would 
be strengthening their own faith; buttressing their 
own determination to live and die the Lord's; possibly, 
too, he showed them how beautiful is the significance 
of the water immersion as a symbol of death 
and burial with Christ; as a symbol also of a resurrection 
to newness of life in the present time, and to a 
newness of life in perfect bodies at the second advent 
of the Lord. Or possibly he merely contented himself 
with explaining to them that it was the Lord's 
own method of doing, and that he commanded that 
all of his followers should similarly be immersed. 

Having called for an expression from those present 
—especially from the brethren who accompanied 
him from Joppa— to know if any objection could be 
thought of why these dear brethren, who had believed 
in the Lord, who had given evidence of their 
consecration and good works, even before they knew 
of the Lord and his glorious plan, and who now had 
been accepted of God, and his acceptance manifested 
—why these should not be admitted to every blessing 
and arrangement which God had provided for his 
faithful ones— irrespective of their being Gentiles by 
birth. No objection being offered Peter commanded 
[directed] them to be baptized in the name of the 
Lord. He had been sent to teach them, and he delivered 
his message with no uncertain sound. Similarly 
the Lord directs all of his people, all who have an 
ear to listen and to hear his message, through the 
Apostle Peter, in this lesson. We command no one, 
for we have no authority; we are not apostles. We 
can merely point out the command of the apostle; the 
example of all the apostles; the example of our Lord, 
etc., and leave the matter with the "ear" and conscience 
of each. Indeed, where we recognize that 
the true immersion of the will, into the will of Christ, 
has been accomplished, we may properly recognize 
the brother or sister in full fellowship, even tho he 
or she has not performed the outward symbolic immersion 
in water; because we are living in a time 
when great confusion on this subject prevails, and 
when it would be improper that we should cast off, 
reject, or even temporarily disfellowship any brother 
or sister who gives evidence of having had the 
real antitypical baptism into Christ. For a general 
examination of the question of Baptism, see our 
issue of June 15, 1893. A copy supplied free on 
application. 



R2991 :page 110 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



"ELSE WERE YOUR CHILDREN UNHOLY." 



Question: The Apostle says in I Cor. 7:13 that 
"the believing husband sanctifieth the unbelieving 
wife; likewise the believing wife sanctifieth the unbelieving 
husband; else were your children unholy, but 
now are they holy." (1) In what sense of the word 
does the believing one sanctify the unbeliever? Is 
it not the truth that sanctifies? and is it not God who 
sanctifies through the truth? and is it not ourselves 
he sanctifies, in the sense of setting apart to the Lord 
and to his service? What does the Apostle mean by 
a different statement? (2) In what sense are the 
children holy in this text? Is there any imputed holiness? 
Can they be said to be partakers of the divine 
nature through their parents? What does the Apostle 
mean? 

Answer: The words "sanctify" and "holy," as 
used in this text, do not have at all the same signification 
that is properly attached to them elsewhere in 
the Scriptures. The Apostle is discussing the fact 
that amongst the consecrated of the Lord's people 
were some unequally yoked with unbelievers— married 
to unbelievers before receiving the truth and 
coming under the enlightening influence of the spirit 
of truth and counsel from above through the Word. 

The question discussed is respecting the holiness 
of the children born of mixed (believing and unbelieving) 
parentage. Would such children be counted 
strangers, aliens and foreigners to God and his favor, 
because of the unbelieving parent, or would they occupy 
the relationship of favor with God through the 
believing parent? This important question is not so 
clearly discerned today as it was in the days of the 
apostles, when people knew from the Jewish pattern 
that all the posterity of Adam shared in his fall and in 
the condemnation which came upon all through him, 
and that all by nature were "children of wrath." 
(Eph. 2:3.) They perceived that Israel had been 
lifted out from amongst the nations by the 
Lord through a Law Covenant, and that all 
born into that nation were born under the terms of 
that covenant, while all born outside of it were strangers 
and aliens and foreigners to God and his provisions. 
Now they understood that a New Covenant 
had been introduced, taking the place of the Law 
Covenant; but they could readily discern that as it 
requires some means of coming under the Law Covenant 
in order to be recipients of its favors, so now 
it requires some process to come under the terms of 
favor represented in the New Covenant. They could 
see that the believing husband or the believing wife 
would be under the New Covenant, but they could see 



equally that the unbelieving husband or unbelieving 
wife would have neither part nor lot in the matter. 
The query which the Apostle is answering may be 
stated thus: How about our children? Must we 
wait until they come to years of discretion before we 
can introduce them to the Lord, and consider them to 
be under his protection, if they then accept him? or 
is there any way in which children might be brought 
under the terms of the New Covenant? The Apostle's 
answer is that God counts the children as belonging 
to whichever parent belongs to him; and thus 
counting the children, they are reckonedly treated 
of him, not as sinners, but as without sin, that is, justified. 

R2991 :page 111 

As the unjustified state is a state of sin, so the 

justified state is one of removal or covering or passing 

over of sin, and hence one of holiness— though not 

what is generally represented as holiness in the Scriptures, 

through an entire consecration to the Lord as 

living sacrifices. Such children partaking of the justification 

of their parents, might properly be considered 

as belonging to the "household of faith," altho 

they had not in any sense of the word become 

saints, by a presentation of themselves as living sacrifices. 

Hence also they could not in any sense of the 

word be considered "members of the body of Christ," 

nor as being begotten of the spirit of adoption to the 

spiritual nature. 

As respects the sense in which the believing husband 
or wife sanctifies the unbelieving one: The 
thought is that in the exercise of the procreative 
powers the Lord's favor upon his consecrated child 
extends, to this necessary degree, to the partner in 
life— so that the children shall not be counted as partially 
the Lord's and partially children of wrath; but 
shall be counted as entirely the Lord's and as under 
his protection and care during the period of infancy, 
to the same extent as is the believing parent. 

IF ANY MAN DRAW BACK. 



Question: A brother who has manifested considerable 
interest in present truth in the past, seems 
to have lost it to some extent, and has re-united with 
the denominational sect he withdrew from previously. 
In what position would you think such a course places 
an individual? What is the right and wrong involved 
in such conduct? 

Answer: (1st) While we may safely reckon that 
many members of denominations are properly true 
children of God, and may properly fellowship them 
as brethren in Christ, notwithstanding the fact that 



that they are still in Babylon, and blind to the harvest 

message, yet the case seems quite different when 

we apply it to those who by God's grace have once 

been delivered out of Babylon, and who return 

thither "as a dog to his vomit, as a sow that was 

washed to wallowing again in the mire," of sectarianism 

and blasphemy against God. I think this is a 

case such as the Apostle Peter mentions, where "it 

would have been better for them that they had never 

known the way or righteousness, than that they 

should know it and turn again from the holy commandment.' 

-2 Pet. 2:21,22. 

(2) However, on the question of right, I suggest 
that it is all right that those who are not appreciative 
of the light should go into the outer darkness. It is 
all right, because it is the divine arrangement, that 
those who have tasted of the good word of God and 
the powers of the age to come, and have not appreciated 
them, should lose them. We are not saying that 
they lose them forever; that is not for us to decide, 
but for ourselves we safely can say, 

"My soul, be on thy guard: 

Ten thousand foes arise. 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard 

To draw thee from the prize. 

"Ne'er think the victory won, 

Nor once at ease sit down; 
Thine arduous work will not be done 

Till thou hast gained thy crown." 



R2991 :page 111 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 

-APRIL 20TH, 1902.- 

AS ALREADY ANNOUNCED, the true anniversary 
date for the commemoration of our 
Lord's Memorial Supper, according to Jewish 
reckoning, will this year be the evening of Sunday, 
April 20th, after six o'clock. The fact that Roman 
Catholics, Episcopalians, and others, will this year 
celebrate Good Friday as its memorial nearly three 
weeks earlier than the true date has caused confusion 
of thought to some, who have written inquiring if we 
had not miscalculated. We answer, No. The discrepancy 
is the result of a change of method of counting, 
adopted in the second century for the purpose of 
avoiding the Jewish Passover. By this the first Friday 
after the 14th of the Jewish month, Nisan, took the 
place of the irregular days upon which the 14th of 
Nisan itself would occur. Later this was confirmed 



by the Council of Nice,— "which decreed that Easter 

(Passover) should be celebrated throughout the 

Church after the equinox, on the Friday following 

the 14th of Nisan."— McClintock & Strong's Ecclesiastical 

Encyclopaedia. 

We still pursue the earliest method of reckoning, 
which was long and strenuously defended by the 
Churches of Asia Minor, to whom most of St. Paul's 
epistles were addressed;— counting Nisan from the 
Spring equinox, the usual Jewish method, and letting 
the date fall as it may on any day of the week. Respecting 
this early observance, the authority quoted 
above (McC. & S.E. Encyclopaedia) says:— 

"In the earliest ages of the Church, the day of 
our Lord's crucifixion was religiously observed, not 
independently, but as part of the sacred season of 
Easter [Passover] which was celebrated by Christians 
instead of the Jewish Passover, in commemoration at 
once of the death and resurrection of Christ." 



The meaning of this Memorial Supper and its 
appropriateness as the time and manner of commemorating 
our Lord's death has already been presented 
in these columns. (March 1st, 1898, Dec. 1st, 1901.) 

We hope that the celebration this year will be 
quite general among our readers;— not only where 
there are little groups or churches to assemble 
themselves, but also where there are only "two or 
three" to meet in the Lord's name; or where solitary 
individuals must perforce celebrate alone. We are 
solicitous because we know that those who observe 
it in the right spirit will have a special blessing and 
uplift, and that those who neglect it will miss 
correspondingly. 

The Allegheny Church will convene for the celebration 
at 7:30 p.m., in Bible House Chapel. Friends 

R2992:page 111 

will be cordially welcomed; but we advise that on such 
occasions each should so far as possible avoid absence 
from his usual meeting. If unfermented wine cannot 
be procured, "fruit of the vine" can be made by stewing 
raisins. If regular unleavened bread cannot be 
secured from some Jewish baker or family, biscuit 
would be the best substitute. 

We hope that each little gathering will appoint 
one of its members to send us a postal card report of 
the number attending and the interest manifested. 



page 113 



SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. APRIL 15, 1902. No. 8. 



CONTENTS 

Great Voices in Heaven 115 

Time of the Dead— to be Judged 116 

All Rewards and Punishments 
Under Seventh Trumpet 117 

Whose Are the Great Voices? 117 

The Privilege of the Service 119 

Volunteer Work for 1902 119 

What Doth It Profit? 120 

Noting Dispensational Changes 120 

The Charges Against Peter 121 

"The Disciples Were First Called 

Christians at Antioch" 123 

An Interesting Question Answered 126 

Letters of Interest 127 

page 114 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



Your recent valued orders for tracts have about exhausted 
our supply but plenty more are being printed, and 
orders will be filled soon; if not, order again. 



THE NEW BIBLES WITH DAWN, ETC. REFERENCES. 



We have received a small sample lot of the new Bibles 
and they are very satisfactory. It will require considerable 
time to bind and prepare for shipment the entire 5,000; 
but some of them will go out soon. If your address has 
changed since you ordered, advise us at once of old and 
new residence, as labels are written as soon as payment is 
received. 

We announced an advance of $ 1 .00 on each style, after 
December 1, 1901; but we do not feel quite satisfied with 
this, especially since we find that those who have delayed 
ordering number many of the poorer brethren who can 
least afford the extra dollar. True, the original prices, 
$2.00 bound in "French Seal," and $3.00 in genuine morocco, 
silk sewed, proved to be too low;— less than cost 
when the postage is added. However, the loss will amount 
to but little more if all get the books at the same prices; 
so we have concluded to supply all at the same figures— 
so long as the lot lasts;— and there will probably never 
be another edition embodying the same features. 

Those who have sent the extra dollar on account of 
these Bibles will please notify us what else we shall apply 
it to; or if they prefer to have it returned in cash. 

1902-PILGRIM VISITS-1902. 

If you desire a Pilgrim visit, free, be sure to respond 
to the questions of page 2 of our January 15th issue. 



R2992:page 115 

GREAT VOICES IN HEAVEN. 



"And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, 
saying, The kingdom of this world is become the kingdom of 
our Lord and of his Christ; and he shall reign 
for ever and ever."— Rev. 11:15. R.V. 

WE ARE NOT SURPRISED that it is difficult 

for the Lord's people, and impossible 

for the world, to recognize clearly and distinctly 

the fulfilment of prophecy at the time of its fulfilment. 

It has ever been thus. Looking back to 

the first advent of our Lord, where many prophecies 

converged and met fulfilment, we notice with what 

difficulty even the "Israelites indeed" were then enabled 

to grasp the reality of their fulfilment. We 

remember how the Lord's brethren and his disciples, 

although in close contact with the Master, hearing 

him who "spake as never man spake," and seeing 

miracles performed such as had never been performed 



before, were, nevertheless, "slow to believe all the 
things written [concerning the Messiah] in the law 
and the prophets"— slow to realize the fulfilment of 
these predictions. Even John the Baptist, who realized 
that he had been specially commissioned of God 
to do the work of a forerunner, to introduce Messiah, 
and who had been given the token that the one upon 
whom he should see the dove descend, he might know 
to be the real Messiah,— after he had borne this witness 
to Jesus, saying, "Behold the Lamb of God 
which taketh away the sin of the world"— after all 
this, was not thoroughly convinced of the fulfilment 
of either his own prophecies or the prophecies of 
others; and while languishing in prison sent messengers 
to our Lord inquiring, "Art thou he that should 
come, or look we for another?" Jesus offered him no 
new demonstration, but merely pointed out that the 
Scriptures were being fulfilled by him day by day,— 
demonstrating that he was the very Christ. 

Indeed, we see clearly that all prophecies were 
written with the divine intention that they should be 
so obscured as to be unintelligible except to a particular 
class for whom their information was intended; 
and to be made known to these only through the 
guidance and interpretation of the holy spirit. It is 
in perfect accord with this that we find that our Lord's 
teachings at his first advent were spoken in parables 
and dark sayings; that hearing his hearers, might not 
understand— except the few, the "Israelites indeed," 
the chosen, the elect. To these our Lord so explained 
his course; saying, "Unto you it is given to 
know the mystery of the Kingdom of God; but unto 
them that are without [to outsiders] all these things 
are done in parables [and dark sayings];. ..that 
hearing they may hear and not understand." (Mark 4:11,12.) 
And these chosen "Israelites indeed" 
needed special instruction even after his resurrection; 
for we read that he explained unto them the Scriptures; 
saying, "Thus it is written and thus it behooved 
the Son of Man to suffer and to enter into his glory." 
Similarly it was with difficulty, and only under the 
guidance of the specially instructed apostles, that the 
primitive Church learned of the partial fulfilment of 
Joel's prophecy in the Pentecostal blessing; and, 
later on, were taught respecting the fulfilment of 
other prophecies through the widening of the message 
of reconciliation and joint-heirship in the Kingdom, 
so as to include such Gentiles as would come 
unto the Lord through faith and obedience. 

These things being obviously true, we are not to 
wonder that the fulfilment of prophecies now, in the 
end of the Gospel age, in its harvest time, should be 
similarly obscure, and require elucidation, and then 
be comprehensible only to the true spiritual Israelites, 
now keenly awake, and seeking to know and 
to do the Lord's good pleasure. In the Millennial 



Dawn series, we have called attention to many of 
these prophetic fulfilments now transpiring;— to the 
end of the 6,000 years of the reign of evil, and to the 
opening of the seventh thousand, or period of rest 
and blessing;— to the great antitypical Jubilee, a 
thousand years long, in whose beginning we are now 
living, and whose trumpets of Jubilee announcement 
are now antitypically being blown in the proclamation 
of the restitution of all things which God hath 

R2992:page 116 

spoken by the mouths of all the holy prophets (Acts 3:21); 

—to the "Times of the Gentiles" whose full 

end will be with a great time of trouble, political, ecclesiastical, 

social, witnessing the full establishment 

of Christ's Kingdom upon the ruins of present institutions; 

—to the close of the 2,300 days of Daniel's 

prophecy, and the cleansing of God's antitypical temple, 

the true Church, from the defilement of the dark 

ages, as now being due;— to the end of the 1,335 days 

of Daniel's prophecy which were to bring in the present 

"harvest" time, which, as foretold, has brought, 

and is bringing to God's people great joy and blessings 

through an expanded view of the divine plan 

of salvation, enabling them to appreciate better the 

heights and depths and lengths and breadths of the 

love of God, which manifests itself in the divine plan; 

—to the completion of the parallels between fleshly 

Israel, the type, and spiritual Israel, the antitype, by 

which we see that we are now in the "harvest" of the 

present age, and can know what to expect in its remaining 

years if we look back at the closing years 

of the Jewish harvest, the type. As our Lord Jesus 

said to some of his faithful ones when explaining the 

prophecies due at the first advent, so, also, might now 

be applied, to some of God's people, the Master's 

words,— "Oh, slow of heart to believe all that the 

prophets have spoken." 

Our text is another prophecy which we believe 
applies in this harvest time, and which, consequently, 
has a beginning of its fulfilment now. As already 
pointed out in these columns, we, in common with 
almost all expositors, recognize that the seven trumpets 
of Revelation are symbolical and not literal— 
indeed that this entire book is a book of symbols, and 
that so far it has been symbolically fulfilled. Christian 
people in general understand that five of these trumpets 
have already "sounded" and are in the past;— 
we would say six. It is admitted that those that have 
already "sounded" have not been literal blasts of a 
bugle on the air, but divine decrees and their fulfilments; 
and we esteem that it is reasonable to expect 
that the seventh trumpet will be similar in this 
respect to the preceding six. But literal things are 
so much more easily received by the natural man that, 



even though absurd, they commend themselves as 

instead of the truth,— until our minds are guided of 

the holy spirit into the proper channel by "comparing 

spiritual things with spiritual"— by comparing the 

seventh trumpet with the preceding six trumpets, and 

not with a natural blast upon the air. So firmly entrenched 

is the error that many advanced Christians, 

Bible students and ministers are really expecting 

some day to hear what is sometimes denominated 

"Gabriel's horn," shrill enough and loud enough to 

awaken the dead. It is both proper and necessary 

that we exercise great patience with Christian brethren, 

who thus display their infantile development of 

knowledge in respect to spiritual things, while we 

point out to them that this seventh trumpet— "The 

Last Trumpet"— "The Trump of God," is as much 

symbolic as were its predecessors, and marks a much 

larger and more important fulfilment than any of 

them. Its fulfilment extends through a period of 

1,000 years; its events mark and coincide with all the 

various features of the Millennial reign of Christ. Its 

beginning, we understand, was in 1878, and its termination 

will be a thousand years future from that date. 

It will be "sounding" for all that time— during which 

its events will be in process of accomplishment. 

What the events represented by this Seventh 
Trumpet are, is briefly explained in the verses following 
our text (17,18). The first feature of this Trumpet 
is the announcement of Christ's Kingdom in the 
earth— the assumption of his great office, the beginning 
of his reign. This, as we have already shown 
from other Scriptures, was chronologically due to begin 
in 1878. The results of this assumption of authority 
by Messiah follow in due course as narrated. 
(1) "The nations were angry and thy wrath is 
come." The laying of judgment to the line and justice 
to the plummet, and the sweeping away of the 
refuge of lies, an early feature in our Lord's reign, 
as described in the prophecy of Isaiah (Isa. 28:17), 
will necessarily result in great commotion in the affairs 
of the "present evil world"; because its social, 
financial, political and religious conditions and arrangements 
will not square with the Lord's line and 
plummet of righteousness. And because he will not 

R2993 :page 116 

put a new patch upon an old garment, present institutions 
in their entirety will be overthrown, as has 
been predicted, in the "time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation"— no, nor ever shall be 
afterward. How graphically in a few words is this 
trouble pointed out,— "The nations were angry, and 
thy wrath is come." 

TIME OF THE DEAD-TO BE JUDGED. 



Then follows a statement of the object of the establishment 
of the Kingdom upon the rains of present 
institutions; namely, because that will be "the 
time of the dead that they should be judged." The 
dead— who are they but the whole human family 
which came under divine sentence of death? "Death 
has passed upon all men, for that all are sinners." 
Only those who have heard of and have received 
Jesus upon divine conditions have life; all the remainder 
of mankind, from the divine standpoint, are dead 
—under sentence of death, and rapidly hastening to 
the tomb. "He that hath the Son, hath life; he that 
hath not the Son of God, hath not life."— John 5:12. 

But are the dead to be judged? If they have not 
already been judged, why should they be dead? Is 
not death the penalty of sin, the sentence, the result 
of a judgment? Truly so; but a redemption has taken 
place. All became involved in sin and its penalty, 
death, through one man's disobedience (Adam's), and 
even so through the obedience of one (Jesus) justification 
to life has passed upon all the condemned,— 
the dead world. As a result of the atonement the 
whole world of dead humanity is to have an opportunity 
of hearing the voice of the Son of Man (his 
commands), and of obeying, and of thus being judged 
by his words, to be either worthy or unworthy of 
everlasting life. They cannot be judged without his 
words, and the vast majority,— "dead in trespasses 
and sins," blinded and deafened by the Adversary, 
through sin,— have not thus far been enabled to hear 
their Redeemer's wonderful words of life. In the 
present age only "so many as the Lord your God shall 
call" have been able to hear with any distinctness; 
only such, therefore, have had any responsibility for, 
or been able in any degree to reject, the wonderful 

R2993 :page 117 

words of life, and to bring upon themselves afresh the 
sentence of death,— the Second Death. The present 
age, therefore, witnesses the call and the acceptance 
of only a "little flock" to whom it is the Father's good 
pleasure to give the Kingdom,— to make joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ their Lord in the Millennial Kingdom. 
They will be with him in all the work of his 
one thousand years' reign, for the blessing and uplifting 
of the dead. The dead world will then have the 
eyes of its understanding opened and its ears unstopped, 
and the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth and reach every member of the dead race, 
not only those who have not yet gone down into the 
tomb, but "all the families of the earth;" for, "all that 
are in the grave shall come forth" for the very purpose 
of hearing the "wonderful words of life," and of 
being judged by them. If they shall accept them 



heartily they shall, by restitution processes, be 

brought fully up to life conditions; such as Adam possessed 

before sin and death took hold upon him; if 

they shall reject them and cling to sin and injustice, 

they shall be adjudged worthy of the Second Death 

and be "destroyed from amongst the people"— 

Acts 3:23. 

What is here termed "the time of the dead that 
they should be judged," is elsewhere termed the "day 
of judgment," of which the Apostle declares, "A day 
with the Lord is as a thousand years"— with men. 
We remember that the inspired declaration respecting 
this day of judgment is— "God hath appointed a day 
[the Millennial day— the thousand years of Christ's 
reign], in which he will judge the world [dead in 
trespasses and sins, but redeemed by the precious 
blood] in righteousness [that is with a just trial or 
judgment] by that man whom he hath ordained"— 
the Christ, Head and body. "-Acts 17:31. 

What a glorious judgment day that will be, and 
how miserably false have been our conceptions of it 
in the past— how foolish, how ridiculous, how dishonoring 
to God and repulsive to justice, wisdom and 
love divine! Yes, this is an object worthy of the Millennial 
Kingdom;— it is emphatically "the time of 
the dead [world] that they should be judged," that 
they should have their trial for life or for death everlasting, 
—their share of the great ransom. Then will 
not be the time for the judgment of the Church, for 
that takes place in the present age; as it is written, 
"Judgment must begin at the house of God"; as it is 
written again, "When we are judged of the Lord, we 
are chastened, that we should not be condemned 
[judged] with the world"— in the coming Millennial 
age of judgment or trial. 

ALL REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS UNDER SEVENTH 
TRUMPET. 

After having thus summarized the work of the 
Millennial age to be a work of judgment, beginning 
with a national judgment and wrath upon the nations 
in the establishment of God's Kingdom, and gradually 
accomplishing for every member of the race of Adam 
an individual judgment, the declaration proceeds to 
give certain particulars; saying,— it is the time "That 
thou shouldst give reward unto thy servants the 
prophets, and to the saints, and them that fear thy 
name, small and great; and shouldst destroy them 
that corrupt the earth." Here the entire work of the 
Millennial age, all the events covered by this seventh 
symbolic trumpet, are enumerated, the prophets, the 
ancient worthies, and the teachers or exponents of 
the Lord's words, of this Gospel age, together with 
all the saints, all the faithful in Christ Jesus, all the 
holy ones, are to be rewarded early in this Millennial 



day: their reward is to be amongst the first events 
under this seventh trumpet. Subsequently, all the 
dead world shall "hear the voice of the Son of God; 
and they that hear [obey] shall live [attain to full 
perfection of being, life everlasting];" thus will be 
fulfilled the rewarding of "them that fear God's name, 
small and great." They that reverence God will reverence 
his laws, and come into full and hearty obedience 
to the same; and to all such the Lord will be 
pleased to give the great reward of life eternal. 

As for the others, such as will refuse to hear the 
voice of the Son of Man, such as will neglect, when 
they hear them, the wonderful words of life, such as 
will prefer injustice, in-equity, even when they know 
thoroughly the good from the evil,— what of these? 
These are corrupt, and their influence will be corrupting, 
defiling; and hence the divine decree is that they 
shall be destroyed in the Second Death. And all this 
rewarding and judging and cleansing of the earth 
from every defilement, bringing it back to its primitive 
holiness, perfect harmony with God— all this will 
be accomplished under the sounding of the seventh 
trumpet— by the time Immanuel's reign of righteousness 
shall have accomplished its intended work; for, 
"he must reign until he hath put all enemies under his 
feet";— until he shall have rescued from condemnation 
and death, and brought back into harmony with 
the Almighty, every member of the human family desiring 
such reconciliation with God and found to be a 
lover of righteousness and a hater of iniquity. 

WHOSE ARE THE GREAT VOICES? 

If now we have gotten a glimpse of the purport 
of the Seventh Trumpet, and are no longer expecting 
its fulfilment as a voice upon the air, but in the 
glorious events of the Kingdom, what shall we say respecting 
the "great voices" which, at its very beginning, 
are to announce that the time has come for the 
establishment of the Kingdom? We answer that we 
are not to expect them to be angelic shoutings in the 
sky, nor mutterings of thunder. We are to remember 
that the voices are symbolic as well as the trumpets, 
and in this direction we look for the fulfilment of 
this declaration which must be due at about the present 
time, if we are correct in our understanding of the 
prophetic teachings, to the effect that the Kingdom 
power of Messiah was assumed in 1878, and that the 
King has since been ordering the events which will 
shortly bring about the great time of trouble, the 
angry nations, and the wrath of God manifesting 
itself in their destruction, as nations and institutions 
—not as people, though, undoubtedly, many human 
lives will be sacrificed in that trouble. 

As we examine some of the parallels given to 
illustrate the work of this Gospel age, especially the 



work of this "harvest" in the close of the age, we learn 
that like as the Lord and his followers at the first 
advent did a reaping work in the harvest of the Jewish 
age, separating the "wheat" from the "chaff- 
gathering the wheat into the garner of the higher 

R2993 :page 118 

spirit dispensation, and leaving the chaff to be consumed 

with the fire of trouble which came upon the 

Jewish nation utterly destroying its polity,— so likewise 

will it be in the harvesting of this Gospel age, in 

the separating here of the "wheat" from the "tares;" 

in the gathering the wheat to the garner of the 

heavenly Kingdom and the abandonment of the tares 

to the burning time of trouble which will destroy the 

present institutions of the angry nations. As the 

reapers, who in the Jewish harvest gathered the wheat 

into the garner, were the Lord's faithful servants 

(men in the flesh), so the reapers in this present harvest 

will be the Lord's faithful servants (men in the 

flesh), under the guidance and instruction of his 

Word. 

Similarly we find that the Lord's people living at 
the present time are again referred to by the Lord 
in figurative language, when he declares that he will 
send forth his messengers with the sound of the great 

R2994:page 118 

trumpet [the Seventh Trumpet] and shall gather together 

his elect unto him, from the four winds of 

heaven. This work we understand to be now in 

progress; each one who receives a knowledge of present 

truth is not only made glad and strengthened, 

refreshed individually, but is also put into service 

forthwith and permitted in a special sense to be a co-worker 

with his Lord in the harvest work,— the 

gathering unto the Lord of all the ripe wheat of this 

present time. According to the parable the wheat 

and the tares were to grow together until the harvest; 

—there was to be no general gathering or separating 

before the harvest: and so we see that, in all denominations, 

wheat and tares are to be found very generally 

commingled. But now the harvest time has 

come, and the harvest truth, as a sickle, is to separate 

and gather the wheat, that it may all be safely garnered. 

The wheat is not to be gathered into another 

new sect, or denomination, with another new sectarian 

name, but is to be gathered to the Lord,— 

"Gather my saints together unto me; those who have 

made a covenant with me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) 

This work is going onward gradually, steadily; more 

and more the Lord's true people are coming to a 

knowledge of his true plan and getting free from the 

ignorance and superstition and blindness of the dark 



ages, superinduced by the great adversary, Satan. 
Gradually these faithful ones are being individually 
ripened, perfected and made meet for the Kingdom, 
and passing into it, they shall be "changed in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye"— the moment of 
death. 

As in these various parables and figures, representing 
the end of this age, the living members of the 
Church are evidently the active agents in the Lord's 
service— as we do not see angels going about through 
the world binding the tares with literal cords into 
literal bundles, and gathering the wheat into a literal 
barn,— neither do we see the angels flying through 
the heavens [symbolic of the religious institutions of 
the present time]; so we are not to expect that the 
voices under the Seventh Trumpet, proclaiming the 
Kingdom, will be any more than human voices and 
human agents. Nor should we expect them to be 
other than the voices of those who have some measure 
of light in respect to the times in which we are 
now living, the harvest time, the time of the establishment 
of the Kingdom. Those who utter these voices 
declaring that the "Kingdom [dominion] of this 
world, has become the kingdom of our Lord, and of 
his Christ" must of necessity be such as have first 
learned this fact from some quarter. 

There are some of God's people in all parts of 
the world (and their number is increasing daily) who 
do realize fully and thoroughly these very things, and 
who are doing all in their power to gather together, 
unto the Lord, all who are his consecrated ones;— 
seeking to separate the wheat from the tares and to 
prepare them for the garner, the Kingdom; and to 
these we must look expecting to hear from them the 
"great voices" announcing the Kingdom. 

We might say that the volumes of Millennial 
Dawn have to some extent been such voices, announcing 
the Kingdom, and giving the reasons for believing 
that it began to be established in 1878; that 
it will reach full establishment in October, 1914; and 
that ultimately it shall bless all the families of the 
earth. These voices have been circulated here and 
there throughout the whole civilized world, not by 
worldly agents, not through book-sellers, but by 
those who have themselves been blessed by the light, 
and who desire to render a service to the Lord and 
to the truth, and to lay down their lives for the brethren 
by taking to them the glorious and encouraging 
message now due to the Lord's people. These 
voices have been uttered, and to some extent heard, 
in the symbolic heavens, the nominal church; yet 
they do not seem to fulfill all that is implied by the 
"great voices" of our text;— we note other voices, all 
however, from the— 

"HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE." 



For some three years past a "volunteer work" has 
been steadily progressing amongst the brethren— the 
work of rendering assistance to the members of the 
household of faith still in Babylon, still in darkness respecting 
the Lord, his true character, his true plan, 
and respecting the nearness of his Kingdom. This 
consists generally in the circulation of printed matter, 
not far from the exits of the various churches of all 
denominations, especially in the United States, Canada 
and Great Britain. Their services are all rendered 
freely "as unto the Lord"— time, energy, carfare, 
etc., are gladly sacrificed in the service of the 
truth and of the brethren; and, additionally, contributions 
are sent in from which the "ammunition" is 
provided,— the tracts, booklets, papers, etc., for free 
distribution. These "Voices," uttered for the past 
three years, have been "great voices" in the sense of 
being widespread and in the sense of exercising considerable 
influence— they have been heard by many. 
But although they have been tending in the direction 
of the announcement mentioned in our text, they 
have not, up to the present time, made a distinct annunciation 
of the important matter mentioned in our 
text; namely, that the Kingdom time has come; that 
the King is present and has assumed the authority, 
and that his work is henceforth to be accounted the 
chief factor in connection with all of earth's affairs;— 
as leading up to the great disintegration of present 
institutions in the approaching time of trouble which 
shall make his people willing to hear his voice— when 
many nations and peoples shall say, "let us go up to 

R2994:page 119 

the mountain [kingdom] of the Lord's house; he will 
teach us of his ways and we shall walk in his paths" 
—when he "will turn to the people a pure language 
[a pure word of instruction which they can understand 
—in contrast with the present mysticism and 
confusion] that they may all call upon the name of 
the Lord, to serve him with one consent."— 
Zeph. 3:9. 

The volunteer matter prepared for this present 
year (the issues of our journal for February 15 and 
March 15) had already been prepared, and contracts 
had already been made for a million copies of these 
issues, in equal parts, for this volunteer season, which 
will begin immediately after the Memorial— April 
27th— before we thought of how wonderfully this 
year's distribution will agree with the declaration of 
our text. The matter was called to our attention by 
one of the brethren of the office force. Here will be 
a million voices proclaiming throughout the nominal 
Church (symbolic heavens) the great message of this 
present time; namely, the second presence of our 



Lord as the reaper of the harvest of the Gospel age, 
gathering the wheat into the "garner" and destroying 
the tares (as tares— not as human beings) and establishing 
his glorious Kingdom upon a firm foundation 
of righteousness and equity, for the blessing of 
every creature redeemed by his own precious blood. 
These voices summarize in a brief way some of the 
testimonies of the Scripture respecting the presence 
of Christ, its time, its order of events, and his final 
manifestation in the glory of Kingdom power. We 
have no assurance that the "heavens" will hear, or 
respond to the message, and glorify God on this behalf; 
indeed we can only expect that at most only a 
remnant will be counted worthy to understand respecting 
the great work of God now in progress— just 
as only a few in the end of the Jewish age were found 
worthy to understand and appreciate the truths concerning 
their harvest time. 

THE PRIVILEGE OF THE SERVICE. 

Referring to the reapers of the Jewish harvest, 
his faithful disciples, our Lord said, "He that reapeth 
receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto eternal life." 
The same words are evidently applicable in this present 
harvest: it is a privilege to serve our Lord at any 
time and in any manner, but a special privilege came 
to the faithful in the end of the Jewish age; and similarly 
a special privilege of service has come to God's 
people now, in the end of the Gospel age. The message 
may indeed be resented, and those who promulgate 
it may be spoken evil of and persecuted, as were 
the apostles and faithful brethren in the past; but 
what of this? Shall we not like them and like our Lord 
"learn obedience" by the things which we may suffer 
for the truth's sake? Shall not we also learn to "rejoice 
in tribulation" and to "count it all joy" when our 
names are cast out as evil, and when all manner of 
evil is said against us falsely for Christ's sake? Yea, 
verily! We do rejoice, and we will rejoice yet more, 
in the great privilege granted us of being co-laborers 
together with God in this grandest and most momentous 
day the world has ever known. 

The number of those engaging in this volunteer 
service is quite considerable— especially in some localities 
where the love, the zeal for the Lord, and for 
the truth, abounds greatly. (Those who cannot thus 
engage can find other opportunities tho none better, 
except, perhaps, the colporteur work.) In Washington, 
Toronto and Boston, are found three of the most 
energetic companies, probably 70 per cent of whom 
are so full of zeal as to be able so to arrange their affairs 
as to participate in this service of the truth. It 
is not surprising to know also that nowhere does the 
love of the Lord, and interest in his cause more 
abound than among the brethren of these three cities. 



The friends participating gratefully acknowledge that 

they have received blessings far more than compensating 

them for every trial and every sacrifice involved. 

Yes, indeed "He that reapeth receiveth 

wages," daily, hourly;— his service brings its rich recompense; 

he realizes that God is accepting his imperfect work 

through Jesus, and that thus he is confirming 

and establishing his faith and demonstrating 

the honesty of his consecration to the Lord, the reward 

of which God has promised shall be life everlasting 

through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

R2995 :page 119 

We hope, dear brethren and sisters, that in view 
of what we saw in our issue of December 1, 1901, 
respecting the "Three Signs" and respecting our 
share in the making of those signs; and in view also 
of what we saw respecting our privilege as reapers in 
the harvest, gathering the "wheat"; and what we saw 
respecting the gathering together of the elect unto 
the Lord; and what we see in this article respecting 
the "great voices" which are to declare the dominion 
of this world transferred to the Lord; and that now 
he is a King among the nations; and that it is our 
privilege to be engaged in the work of sounding 
forth the announcement in the "heavens";— in view 
of all these things we trust that fresh zeal, fresh energy, 
fresh courage, will be the portion of each of 
the Lord's consecrated ones, so that this year more 
than ever we may show forth the praises of him who 
hath called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light. 

Should all the Lord's people, who enjoy this light 
of present truth, become thoroughly awake to their 
privileges, it would probably require two million papers 
to supply their requirements during the coming 
season, and if this quantity should be called for, 
we believe that the Lord would, in due time, enable 
us to meet the requirements. Let us each resolve 
that others may do as seems proper to them; but that 
we will exercise our God-given judgments and opportunities 
in the service of the truth— as the feet 
members of the body of Christ "saying unto Zion,— 
Thy God reigneth"— the reign of the anointed one 
has commenced. 

1902 VOLUNTEER WORK AND AMMUNITION ORDERS, 1902. 



Let each little group elect as its captain for this 
"volunteer" service the brother manifesting the greatest 
executive skill and judgment. Ascertain how 
many "volunteers" you can secure. Meet weekly for 
conference, prayer and encouragement. Estimate 



the quantity of papers necessary to serve the attendants 
at all the churches you can serve, and order from 
us at once one-half of these. Order the remaining 
half one month before you will be ready to use them. 

The object in having the two different papers for 
this year is, to avoid sending duplicates into the 

R2995 : page 120 

homes— because members of the same family usually 
leave church together. We will send the papers of 
equal parts in each bundle; but when you open the 
bundles, please, first thing, separate the two kinds 
and then combine them so that each paper of one date 
will be followed by another of the other date in the 
entire pile. Then as they are handed out they will 
go equally and alternately. We have no opportunity 
for thus mixing them before sending to you. Large 
orders will be filled in bundles of 800 and 1,600 (half 
and half, the two dates) and will be shipped by our 
printers by freight. Use up whatever old "ammunition" 
you have on hand, but order no more for this 
service. 

WHAT DOTH IT PROFIT? 

MAL. 3:14-18. 

"What doth it profit me?" I hear a weary pilgrim say, 
As he sinks beside his burden upon the "narrow way." 
"What do I gain," he plaintive moans, "in service of my 

God, 
Save weary pain and labor, bearing this heavy load? 
For many dreary years I've toiled through sunshine and 

through rain, 
Through chilling winds and wintry blasts, I've suffered 

keenest pain, 
The rocks have cut my weary feet, I've left a bleeding 

track, 
I cannot climb this mountain side, my feet are slipping 

back. 

Why should I suffer day by day, bearing this heavy cross? 
Why may I not the 'promise' gain without this pain and 

loss? 
I see so many all around who do not serve the Lord, 
Yet they are not thus burdened and their lives hold rich 

reward; 
Their barns are filled with plenty and their vats with wine 

o'erflow, 
While I am made to drink the dregs of bitterness and woe." 
And thus he faints upon his way, and darkness fills his 

heart. 
O, foolish one! with "armor" loosed, and pierced by Satan's 

"dart"— 

Dost thou not hear the Master: "The servant's like his 



Lord," 
O, listen to His message and heed His Holy Word: 
"If ye will suffer with me, then with me ye shall reign; 
He who would shine in glory, is perfected through pain." 
We cannot walk with Christ our Lord and still find flowery 

ways, 
The path that leads to Heavenly heights finds many sunless 

days; 
The "narrow way" to Life Divine, oft leads through 

shadow-land, 
Yet the loving Master walks beside, and holds our trembling 

hand. 

The "shield of faith" we must not fail to use as on we go, 
For "darts" are flying thick and fast from the Christian's 

wily foe; 
The world has not been "called" to walk upon our "narrow 

way." 
The shallow pleasures they enjoy are only for a day. 
O, who would covet their poor joys, or look with envious 

eye 
Upon the flow'rs which deck their path and blossom but 

to die? 
Happy your lot, ye sons of God! O, "Jewels" of the Lord 
Press on! Nor faint upon the road that leads to your 

reward! 

The way is weary, yet it ends in life, in bliss, in God! 
Press on! Nor longing look ye back o'er the path that ye 

have trod. 
Keep looking upward toward the "Prize," and let its glory 

wake 
Glad "Hallelujahs" to our King, who suffered for our sake; 
Who died to give us life, that we might also with Him die, 
Then share "His Resurrection" and His glorious throne on 

High! —Alice G. James. 



R2995 : page 120 

NOTING DISPENSATIONAL CHANGES. 

-ACTS 1 1:4-15. -APRIL 27.- 

"Whosoever believeth in him shall receive 
remission of sins."— Acts 10:43. 

THE NEWS of Peter's visit to Cornelius and 

the baptism of the latter, a Gentile, into the 

Christian Church, created quite a hubbub— 

not in Jerusalem only, but throughout Judea. Peter 

may have been called to Jerusalem by the brethren 

to give some explanation of such an innovation;— or, 

learning of the commotion, he may have gone voluntarily 

to explain the situation and to set the minds of 



the brethren at rest respecting the propriety of his 

course. He took with him the six of the Joppa 

brethren who had accompanied him to the house of 

Cornelius. This was a wise course; Peter recognized 

that however well satisfied he himself might 

be respecting the propriety of what he had done, it 

was but just to the brethren to give as explicit a testimony 

on the subject as possible— to avoid the least 

ground for criticism or division of sentiment in the 

Church. 

We note the divine providence which guided in 
this matter— that (1) it was Peter, the eldest, and 
in some respects the strongest of the apostles who 
was chosen for this service; and (2) that he was 
guided in judgment in respect to taking with him six 
of the prominent Joppa brethren. Thus does the 
Lord supervise the affairs of his people, while yet 
leaving the matter without a special direct revelation 
—teaching them rather by their experiences and his 
providential leadings. He could have sent an angel 
to the apostles, at the appointed time, to inform 
them definitely that the "seventy weeks" of Israel's 
favor had expired; and that now, in harmony with 
the divine plan, the gospel was to be preached not to 
Jews only, but to people of any or every nation who 
might be found with "ears to hear"— with hearts to 
appreciate it. But to have made such a revelation 
would have had three disadvantages; (1) the Church 
would thus be caused to walk by sight rather than by 
faith; (2) a precedent would have been established 
under which at any future time the Lord's people 
would have been warranted in expecting miraculous 
instruction, and thus their minds would have been diverted 
from the Scriptures which God intended 
should be the light upon our pathway; (3) miraculous 
instruction is opposed to thought, reflection and examination 
of underlying principles— so important to 
the progress of the Lord's people in grace and in 
knowledge. 

We should not be surprised that the apostles 

R2996 :page 121 

would be opposed to Peter's going to the Gentiles 
with the gospel message; such a course was contrary 
to all the traditions of their nation for over sixteen 
centuries— seemingly in contradiction of many 
of the statements of the prophets: prudence, therefore, 
bade them beware lest the new light and blessing 
which they had received should mislead them into 
too great liberty— into license contrary to the Lord's 
Word. They probably called to mind that the promises 
indicated that God's blessings were to come to 
the world through Israel— "the forces of the Gentiles 
should come unto thee"— the "sons of strangers shall 
build up thy walls"— "the nation and kingdom that 



will not serve thee, shall perish," etc. They may also 

have recalled our Lord's words at the beginning of 

his ministry when sending forth the apostles, and 

subsequently, the "seventy," he said, "Go not into 

the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans 

enter ye not; for I am not sent but unto the 

lost sheep of the house of Israel."— Matt. 15:24. 

In view of these things the apostles and brethren 
did only their duty in calling Peter to account— in 
seeing to it that they took no liberty with the Lord's 
directions— that they did not attempt to get beyond, 
or to circumvent his arrangements. They did realize 
that a change of dispensation was upon them, and 
that in some important sense Israel was rejected by 
the Lord, so that only the remnant accepting Christ 
were now in divine favor; but they did not realize 
fully what this meant, nor see clearly how the Lord's 
promises centering in Israel were yet to be fulfilled. 
We can see now, in the light of providential leadings 
and apostolic teachings, and in the light of prophetic 
fulfilment, what it was not possible for them to see 
clearly at that time. 

We can see that natural Israel was being rejected, 
—blinded with a blindness which would last 
for nearly nineteen centuries. We can see God's purpose 
to elect, in the interim, the spiritual seed of 
Abraham; taking, firstly, from the natural Israelites 
all found worthy; and secondly, completing the election 
with chosen ones selected from among the Gentiles 
—possessing the spirit of Abraham, the spirit of 
faith and obedience. We can see, that this Spiritual 
Israel was not fully explained through the promises 
and through the prophets; but that the elect church 
in the prophecies was counted in the Messianic promises 
—as members of the body of Messiah of which 
Jesus is the Head, "God blessed forever." (Rom. 9:5.) 
We can see, that not until this body of Messiah 
shall be complete will the Lord's promises to 
natural Israel have fulfilment;— then their blindness 
being turned away (Rom. 1 1:26-32), they will become 
the leading nation of earth, representative of the spiritual 
Kingdom of God, the glorified Church, the 
Messianic body: then the forces of the Gentiles will 
come to them, and all earthly interests will co-operate, 
and a blessing through Israel shall proceed to all the 
families of the earth. 

THE CHARGES AGAINST PETER. 

It is rather peculiar, that the charges made 
against Peter were not that he had recognized Cornelius 
as a Christian and baptized him and his household, 
but that he had gone into their house and had 
eaten bread with them— proceedings which were contrary 
to Jewish custom entirely— the recognition of 
the Gentiles as being on an equality with the Jews— 



a matter which had been settled to the contrary with 

them, from time immemorial. Singularly, too, the 

Apostle Peter in his defense entirely ignored their 

charges and proceeded to acquit himself as though 

they had charged him in the way we would have expected 

—with receiving a Gentile into Christian 

brotherhood. Yet Peter's course was just the proper 

one, and, undoubtedly, he was guided thereto. There 

is a lesson in this for the Lord's people to the effect 

that it is always better to discuss fundamental principles 

and divine laws than to dispute over traditions 

of men and mere technical observances, customs, etc. 

When Peter got the fundamental features straight before 

the minds of all, the question of social customs 

was settled; whereas, if he had discussed the proprieties 

of the social custom, the larger question 

would still have been unsettled. 

Peter's simple, humble, unvarnished explanation 
was a rehearsal of the facts in the case. He considered 
that the evidence which had convinced him that 
he was right, would similarly convince the others; 
and he was correct in this. He might on the contrary 
have "stood on his dignity" and have insisted that 
what he did was none of the business of the others— 
that he was an apostle and the eldest of them, and 
specially guided of the Lord; and that the Lord had 
even declared in advance that he should have and use 
the keys of the Kingdom; and that as he had used 
the first of these in announcing the divine favor on 
the day of Pentecost, so now he had used the other 
in opening the door of favor to the Gentiles. Such 
a course while it would have had a great deal of truth 
in it, would have been an unwise one to say the least; 
—the humbler, kinder, more brotherly course he did 
take speaks well to us of his heart condition, his 
humility, his love to the brethren, his desire to make 
matters so simple, so clear, so explicit, that none 
could have any occasion for stumbling over his action. 
Had he been arrogantly disposed, a great 
breach in the church might have resulted;— but no; 
the Lord was at the helm, and had Peter been out of 
proper condition of heart would not have used him, 
but some humbler brother for this service. There is 
a good lesson in this for us all— especially for such as 
are chosen leaders of the various little companies of 
the Lord's people: the lesson is, humility, brotherly 
kindness, love. Any appearance of haughtiness, anything 
dictatorial in manner or tone would be unbecoming 
in any of the Lord's people, but especially 
so in any seeking to serve him: leaders manifesting a 
haughty spirit should be considered, in that respect 
and degree, unsuited to the position they fill,— while 
those who manifest the humbler manner and spirit of 
Peter on this occasion, should be proportionately the 
more esteemed by all. 

Peter rehearsed his experiences, the Lord's leadings, 



going into the smallest details, so that the 
brethren might have the benefit of the situation as 
fully as though they had been in his stead; and to 
their credit, the record says, that, when they had 
heard the particulars, so far from further murmuring 
against Peter or finding fault with his course, they 

R2996 :page 122 

glorified God. This shows us clearly that their opposition 

to the extension of the gospel favor was not 

the result of any narrowness or meanness of heart; 

but was the result of conscientious conviction respecting 

the divine program. They were gradually learning 

the lesson that a new dispensation was being 

ushered in, by divine providence, and their entire 

anxiety was that they might run no faster than the 

Lord's spirit, through his Word and providences, 

would direct them— glad, however, to note the leadings 

and to receive the lessons and to act accordingly. 

Similarly, we today are living in a time of changing 
dispensations; similarly, the Lord's providence is 
now guiding his people to a clearer appreciation of 
his plan— to a discernment of certain changes of dispensation 
now in progress: First, that as in the end 
of the Jewish age the nominal systems of fleshly Israel 
were rejected of the Lord, and ignored, so now 
the nominal systems of spiritual Israel are rejected 
of the Lord, and all "Israelites indeed" are being 
gathered out of them. Second, as it was a difficult 
matter for the Jews to realize that divine favor would 
extend beyond their nation to the Gentiles, so now 
it is a difficult matter for Christian people to comprehend 
that divine favor does not end with the election 
of the Christian Church; but that, on the contrary, 
the blessing of all the families of the earth 
must there begin; and that the new dispensation, the 
Millennium, in which this favor to the world is to be 
bestowed by the Church, is nigh, even at the door. 
As Peter was patient in his explanation of the Lord's 
providence and leadings in respect to the greater 
lengths and breadths of divine favor, so now it behooves 
all of the Lord's people to be very patient, 
very gentle, and as wise as serpents in presenting to 
their fellow Christians, true Israelites, the evidence 
which the Lord's providence has furnished to us, in 
respect to the world-wide blessings and their nearness. 
Our Lord's words are applicable, "Be ye wise 
as serpents, harmless as doves."— Matt. 10:16. 

Peter explained to his hearers the simple gospel 
message which he had presented to the Gentiles, and 
which they had so gladly received; that it was in no 
sense a perversion of the message preached to the 
Jews, and in no degree were any of the gospel's conditions 
modified to win Gentile approval; it was the 
same gospel that had blessed them which now refreshed 



and blessed the Gentiles. He told them of 

his surprise when the Lord manifested his favor toward 

the Gentiles by bestowing some of the gifts of 

the holy spirit upon them— similar to those bestowed 

upon the Jewish believers at Pentecost, and subsequently 

transmitted through the apostles. He declares 

that this manifestation of divine favor called 

to his mind the words of the Lord, "John indeed baptized 

with water; but ye shall be baptized with the 

holy spirit." (Acts 1:5.) By this he understood 

clearly that the holy spirit baptism was of much 

greater importance than water baptism; and he understood, 

further, that only the "you" class would be 

baptized with the holy spirit; and hence he could not 

logically ignore the fact that the Gentiles having received 

the same spirit must be in the Lord's estimation 

reckoned as members of the same body of Christ, 

and eligible to baptism, etc. He concluded his argument 

with a question which must have appealed to 

all of his hearers; "Who was I that I should withstand 

God?" 

The whole company agreed, that Peter would 
have had no right to withstand the will of the Lord; 
but that every propriety called upon him to conform 
his teachings and his conduct to the Lord's arrangements; 
and so under this wise presentation the entire 
company came into full harmony of heart and 
mind, on an important subject which, had it not been 

R2997 : page 122 

properly handled, might have meant rending and discord 
in the early Church, and have made two or 
more factions of those who were at heart desirous of 
being right and in accord with the Lord's will. Let 
us each and all resolve to follow Peter's example in 
every such matter, and thus to study the welfare, the 
best interest, the peace, of Zion. 

The decision of the conference was, that the evidence 
educed by Peter was unquestionable, that a 
new step in the divine plan had been taken, and that 
henceforth God had granted to the Gentiles as well 
as to the Jews the privilege of "repentance unto life." 
Very properly none of them thought of calling into 
question God's right, God's privilege in this matter 
of granting repentance unto life. These faithful 
brethren were not disposed to run into either of two 
extremes common to some today— they neither 
claimed that God was bound to give his favors only 
to Israel, nor on the other hand did they claim that 
he was bound to make a free offer of repentance unto 
life to everybody alike. Some today go to even a 
greater extreme than this, claiming not only an opportunity 
for repentance unto life to all, but that God 
must eventually and everlastingly save all— grant all 
everlasting life. Let all the Lord's people beware that 



they do not attempt to dictate to the Almighty; that 
they recognize him as a sovereign, and seek to know 
his will, and not to dictate according to their wills. 

The brethren evidently drew the lesson which 
the Lord wished them to draw; namely, that God was 
thenceforth willing to grant forgiveness of sins to 
Gentiles as well as Jews who would repent and seek 
to be in harmony with him. There is no suggestion 
in this of coercion nor of acceptance upon any other 
condition than repentance and pardon of sins; and 
this implies faith in the Lord Jesus and in his work 
as the ransom for sinners, and turning to God with 
full sincerity of heart, to know and, as far as possible, 
to do those things which would please him. This is 
still the position of the Lord's people and must be 
to the end of the age; it is the established principle 
underlying all of the Lord's dealings and promises. 

Our Golden Text is in full accord with this. The 
remission of sins, typically, year by year, was Israel's 
favor only, for centuries; and when the real sacrifice 
for sin had been offered, the privilege of repentance 
unto remission of sins, tho confined for a time (three 
and a half years) to the Jews was thereafter thrown 
open to all alike— "He that hath an ear let him hear" 
the message. There is no other means of approach to 
God than through the remission, the covering of our 
sins; and there is no other means of covering than 
through faith in the precious blood of Christ. "No man 
cometh unto the Father but by me." "There is none 
other name under heaven given among men whereby 

R2997 : page 123 

we must be saved." All suggestions therefore of salvation 

without a belief in Jesus,— all suggestions of 

salvation of the heathen in ignorance, all suggestions 

of their being no necessity for a knowledge of the historic 

Christ,— all suggestions that a recognition of 

the Christ spirit of righteousness is sufficient,— all 

suggestions of harmony with God through any other 

than the one, appointed, "Mediator of the New Covenant," 

—receive a thorough condemnation in the 

words of this text. The entire plan of God sets forth 

and honors not only divine justice, wisdom, love, and 

power, but it likewise sets forth and honors the Lord 

Jesus as the only way by which, access may be had 

to the Father, and by which everlasting life may be 

attained by any. In view of these limitations, how 

comforting are the assurances of the Scriptures, that 

for the vast majority of our race the time of knowledge 

and, hence, the time of probation for everlasting 

life is future; during the Millennium. In that, 

their "due time," all the deaf ears shall be unstopped 

and all shall hear the voice of the Son of Man (and 

his Bride, glorified) directing in the right ways of the 

Lord;— "and they that hear [obey] shall live."— It 



is a further cause of joy that this blessing and opportunity 
for resurrection to perfection, under the judgments 
of such gracious judges, is to extend also to 
"all that are in their graves."— John 5:25,28; 
I Tim. 2:6. 



R2997 : page 123 

"THE DISCIPLES WERE FIRST CALLED CHRISTIANS AT ANTIOCH.' 

-ACTS 11:9-30. -MAY 4.- 

"The hand of the Lord was with them; and a 
great number believed and turned unto the Lord." 

ANTIOCH, at the time of our lesson, was the 
third city in the world in rank of commercial 
importance and population, the latter being 
estimated at 500,000. Its situation was about 300 
miles north from Jerusalem,— a long distance in those 
days of foot and camel and sailboat traveling. It is 
noted as being the first city outside of Palestine in 
which a Christian church assembly was formed; and 
indeed, we might say that as Jerusalem was the center 
of influence in Palestine, so Antioch became a 
center of influence as respected the gospel amongst 
the Gentiles. It seems that the start of the work of 
the Lord at Antioch, the little spark of light and truth 
which started that important work, resulted from the 
persecution at the time of Stephen's death. Some of 
those forced out of Jerusalem by the persecution settled 
in Antioch, and, of course, they could not live 
and walk in the light of the gospel without letting the 
light shine out for others. This at first was done only 
toward those who were of the Jewish faith, for in a 
large commercial city such as Antioch there were 
sure to be large numbers of Jews. We know not how 
many of these were reached with the gospel; but it 
was confined to them, surely, until the end of Israel's 
seventy symbolical weeks— until A.D. 37. At the 
same time that the Lord was sending Philip to the 
Samaritans and to the Ethiopian eunuch, and opening 
the door to the Gentiles through the Apostle 
Peter, he was ready to open the door to the Gentiles 
everywhere; and under the leading of divine providence 
some of the Christian Hebrews got the proper 
thought at the proper time,— that a Gentile who 
would receive the Lord Jesus, and conform his 
life to his teachings, could be classed as a disciple 
equally as tho he had been born a Jew. The work 
thus started amongst the Gentiles at Antioch spread 
considerably, the Gentiles seeming to take more notice 
of it than had the Jews to whom the gospel was 
first preached, and, as our Golden Text assures us, 



large numbers believed. There is a lesson here, to 
the effect that while the Lord made clear to the 
apostles first the matter of receiving the Gentiles into 
the Church, he, nevertheless, did not confine his message 
to them, but was willing to use any convenient 
disciple, no matter how humble, as a mouthpiece for 
the truth, and was pleased to bless the consecrated 
ambassadors and their service. So today let each and 
all of the Lord's people be alert to notice opportunities 
for service, and let those who occupy a position 
as teachers in the Church emulate the example of the 
apostles, who manifested no spirit of jealousy in respect 
to this broadening of the work— rejoicing, 
rather, at the spread of the good news by whatever 
instrumentality the Lord might be pleased to use. 
This is the true spirit of discipleship, the spirit of 
humility. It is in accord with the Apostle's words, 
"In honor preferring one another;" "Rejoice not in 
iniquity, but rejoice in the truth." 

The news of the gospel going to the Gentiles at 
Antioch, and that large numbers were turning to the 
Lord, reached the Church at Jerusalem— the head-center 
of the Christian work, so to speak. The apostles 
and all of the brethren had already been prepared 
by the Lord's manifest dealing in the case of Cornelius, 
and this, undoubtedly, would take away from 
their surprise and largely correct any prejudice on the 
subject of the Gentiles as fellow-heirs of the promises 
which had previously pertained to them alone. 
Nevertheless, we note that the record does not say 
that this news caused rejoicing in the Jerusalem 
Church. We may infer, therefore, that they heard 
with some considerable trepidation that large numbers 
of the Gentiles were attaching themselves to the 
faith, and may have reasoned that this would have an 
injurious effect upon the cause they loved to serve- 
inasmuch as the Jews would say, Yes, your message 
is good enough for the barbarians or the Gentiles; 
it takes hold of the non-religious; but it attracts very 
few of the deeply pious of God's chosen people, to 
whom belong the promises and the covenants of the 
Lord, etc. It would appear, then, that the original 
motive in sending Barnabas to Antioch (visiting 
other intermediate churches en route) was that he 
might see and judge of the true condition of things, 
and give some report as to whether the new converts 
were worthy in their lives and characters to be recognized 
as fellow-heirs with the saints. Barnabas, 
when he had come, took note of "the grace of God," 
manifested amongst the believers at Antioch— it must 
have been manifested not only in their faith in the 
Lord as their Redeemer and Master, but also in their 
conduct as disciples or followers of Jesus. It is written, 

R2998 : page 124 



"He that hath this hope in him purifieth himself 
even as he is pure," and we may suppose that Barnabas 
quickly discerned the cleansing and sanctifying 
power of the truth amongst these believers at Antioch, 
and thus realized that the cause, instead of being 
hindered by such accessions, would be honored. 
We read that he was glad; and we may assume, altho 
it is not stated, that he promptly made a report 
to the brethren at Jerusalem, and that they were glad 
also. A good man, out of the good treasure of his 
heart, is always made glad by evidences of God's 
grace operating in himself and in others. It is one 
evidence of the possession of the holy spirit, and that 
in good measure, when we rejoice in all good things 
—"Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things 
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever 
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever 
things are of good report; if there be any 
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these 
things. "-Phil. 4:8. 

The apostles evidently made an excellent choice 
when they sent Barnabas. We remember that he was 
a Levite by birth, and this, unquestionably, would 
make him very careful of every Jewish interest connected 
with the faith, and, undoubtedly, he was well 
learned in the Law. We remember, too, that he was 
a native of Cyprus, an island in the Mediterranean 
Sea, near Antioch. Born thus at a distance from 
Jerusalem, amongst Gentiles, he was probably a 
broadminded man, as well as familiar with the dialect 
of the people of Antioch, and added to these good 
reasons for sending him, was a fourth; namely, his 
beautiful character, his helpfulness as a brother and 
a teacher in the Church. We remember that he sold 
a part of his property in the interest of the poor in 
Jerusalem. We remember, too, that he received the 
name Barnabas as a title of love and respect in the 
Church, which thus designated him "a son of consolation," 
a "helper." The fact that this good man 
was glad, is an assurance to us that the conditions he 
found in the Antioch Church were good conditions, 
for a good man "rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth 
in the truth." 

Barnabas at once overflowed toward the Antioch 
brethren, and in the same comforting and helpful 
manner as at Jerusalem he exhorted them all. The 
Greek word here is from the same root as his name, 
and signifies comfort, stimulation, assistance. No 
doubt he saw various things needing to be corrected; 
but instead of beginning with fault-finding, instead 
of lacerating their feelings and chiding them, he began, 
properly, by acknowledgment of what he saw in 
them as a cause for rejoicing. His comforting message 
was to the effect that they should cleave unto 
the Lord with purpose of heart. The word "cleave" 
here in the Greek signifies to glue, to adhere. He 



wished the dear brethren, new in the truth, to see to 

it that their hearts were firmly united unto the Lord, 

that their minds were fully made up, that their consecration 

to him was complete. This was the matter 

of first importance. Later on he might show them 

kindly, gently, certain weaknesses of the flesh to 

which they were addicted; or their hearts being more 

firmly united to the Lord they might very speedily 

see these inconsistencies of themselves, without a 

word being said. The point we would impress is that 

it was not a restraining of the flesh, nor a perfecting 

of it, that was sought, but a much deeper work of 

grace than this; a purity of heart, of intention, a 

heart-adhesion to the Lord. We today cannot do 

better than follow this same course in our endeavors 

to do good unto others as we have opportunity. The 

brethren needed strengthening rather than tearing. 

They needed building up in the most holy faith and 

love. They needed encouraging in heart-adhesion to 

the Lord, and that criticisms of the flesh come in afterward 

gradually and very carefully and kindly. There 

were three elements co-operating which made Barnabas 

so suitable a person for this service, and the same 

three elements in any of us today will surely make 

us able ministers of the truth. Those elements are 

stated here; viz., "He was a good man [moral, upright, 

reverential] full of the holy spirit [he had not 

received the grace of God in vain; it was in him a living 

power, the new mind guiding and controlling in 

all of his affairs] and of faith." However good a 

man may be, and however much of the Lord's character 

and spirit he may have, faith is essential. 

"Without faith it is impossible to please God." Let 

us strive to have all of these qualifications in our 

ministry, that we may be true sons of consolation, 

helpful in the Lord's service, and to his people wherever 

we may be. No wonder we read that as a result 

of his labors at Antioch much people was added 

unto the Lord! 

The last we heard of Saul of Tarsus (Acts 9:30) 
was that after the opening of the eyes of his understanding, 
after he became the disciple of the Lord 
Jesus, and had preached in Damascus, and then in 
Jerusalem, his life being endangered the brethren 
sent him down to Caesarea, and then probably by ship 
to his native city, Tarsus. We are not informed regarding 
the nature of his work in his home city, but 
can readily suppose that one of his character and disposition 
would not long remain idle. And if the sphere 
of outward activities was a narrow one we may be 
sure that his mind was active in the study of the divine 
plan, and that his great heart was active too, in 
comprehending the divine grace and considering 
ways of service. He was in Tarsus while Barnabas 
was at Antioch, and the latter now had in mind the 
talents, the force, the logic, of Brother Saul, whom 



he had met in Jerusalem, and he concluded that Tarsus 

being not very far from Antioch he would look 

him up, interest him in the service of the Antioch 

Church, etc. He probably remembered that Saul's 

ideas were extremely broad in respect to the gospel 

—too broad, perhaps, for the brethren at Jerusalem 

to fully appreciate him when he was amongst them. 

But by this time all the brethren, and especially large-hearted 

Barnabas, had come to see the divine plan 

in a broader light— more nearly as Saul of Tarsus 

had comprehended it. Barnabas concluded that the 

conditions at Antioch were just such as would deeply 

interest Saul, and that the brethren there would be 

greatly profited by his assistance. He found him; 

he brought him to the Church at Antioch, where his 

influence was no doubt great for the good of all. We 

rejoice in noting the heart nobility of Barnabas. 

Many Christian men of smaller caliber would have 

R2998 : page 125 

reasoned themselves into a different course, and a 

wrong one; saying, As it is, I am the chief one 

amongst the brethren here, having had larger opportunities 

than the others, and having had close contact 

with the apostles at Jerusalem; but if I bring 

Saul into our midst his superior abilities as a logician, 

as an expounder of the Scriptures, will cast me quite 

into the shade, etc. Brethren who reason thus are 

misguided by their own selfishness. They forget that 

the Lord's work is in his own hands, and with such 

a spirit they could neither please him nor be prospered 

in his service, and that the reactionary effect 

upon their own hearts would be a serious one. All 

of the Lord's people should be noble and unselfish; 

and the closer any of us approximate this character 

the more will we be loved of the Lord, the more will 

we be loved of the brethren, and the more useful will 

be our sphere of influence for righteousness, for truth, 

for the Lord. 

DISCIPLES WERE FIRST CALLED CHRISTIANS. 

It is noteworthy that our Lord never gave any 
name to his people; he called them disciples, which 
signifies pupils, learners. The apostles have applied 
to the Church various terms, "church of the living 
God;" "church of God;" "church of Christ;" "the 
church;" but gradually the name "Christians," 
identifying God's people with their Redeemer and 
leader, came to be the general name throughout 
the world. It is a pity that any have thought 
it necessary to adopt any other names than these, 
common to the entire church of Christ, or to use 
these names in a sectarian manner. Evidently the 
name Christian should represent one who trusts 



in Christ as the Messiah— one, therefore, who trusts 
in him also as the Redeemer, and who accepts all the 
fundamental doctrines of the Scriptures, based, as 
they are, upon these two declarations— (1) that men 
were sinners, needing to be redeemed before they 
could be acceptable to God, and that they were redeemed 
by the precious blood of Christ; (2) that they 
have accepted the name of their Redeemer, and are 
seeking to walk in his footsteps. There was a start 
toward sectarianism in the early Church, some saying, 
I am a Christian, but of the order of Paul; others, 
I am a Christian, but of the order of Apollos; others, 
I am a Christian, but of the order of Peter, etc. But 
the Apostle promptly rebuked this spirit, assuring 
them that the relationship in Christ was all that was 
necessary; that neither Peter nor Paul had redeemed 
them, and that neither, therefore, could occupy the 
place of a head to the Church. The Apostle, furthermore, 
calls our attention to the fact that such a spirit 
on their part was an evidence of that much of carnality 
still remaining; that much of a worldly partisan 
spirit contrary to the thought and teaching of the 
holy spirit. It is to be regretted that ever since the 
Reformation times this spirit has prevailed to a large 
extent, some taking the name of Luther, others of 
Wesley, others of Calvin, others non-personal, but, 
nevertheless, sectarian or party names, as Methodist, 
Presbyterian, Congregational, Baptist, etc. We are 
not claiming that those who do these things are 
wholly carnal, without the Lord's spirit, but we do 
claim with the Apostle that a disposition to such a 
partisanship is contrary to the spirit of the Lord, and 
to that extent is carnal, fleshly, and should be overcome 
by all who would be recognized of the Lord as 
overcomers. 

Let no one misunderstand us to advocate one 
sect or party as instead of many. On the contrary, 
we know that if there must be sects there is an advantage 
in having many, as they serve to keep each 
other within more reasonable bounds, serving to 
some extent to hinder gross arrogance and persecution. 
What we ought to have is one church, one 
household of faith, accepting the plain fundamentals 
of Scripture, and with limitations as to acceptance of 
more or less conjectural views outside of those fundamentals 
—all fraternizing, fellowshipping each other, 
and all known as Christians, and thus separated 
from all who deny the atonement, from all who deny 
the results of the atonement, in the resurrection, and 
from all who deny the propriety of a newness of life 
in the present time. In this view of the matter each 
individual Christian would have an independence as 
respected his own thought, aside from fundamentals 

R2999 :page 125 



which are clearly stated in the Scriptures. 

BENEVOLENCE A FEATURE OF PIETY. 

In view of the fact that the condition of the Antioch 
Church made Barnabas glad, and in view of the 
instruction and assistance rendered it by Paul and 
Barnabas, we are not surprised that it was a living 
Church, instead of a dead one, and we are not surprised 
that, an opportunity offering through a famine 
especially affecting the vicinity of Jerusalem, this 
congregation of believers at Antioch was prompt to 
make up a relief fund and send it to the Church at Jerusalem, 
as an expression of its love and sympathy 
and oneness of spirit. It is more blessed to give 
than to receive, not only as respects the sentiment 
of the matter, but the results are still more blessed. 
No doubt the contributions sent were a comfort and 
a help to the Jerusalem brethren, but the blessing to 
the givers we may be sure was far greater. The Lord 
would reward them, and that in proportion as they 
had given, at some sacrifice as respects earthly things, 
luxuries, etc. 

"Is thy cruse of comfort failing? 

Rise and share it with another, 
And through all the years of famine 

It shall serve thee and thy brother. 
Love divine will fill thy storehouse, 

All thy handful still renew; 
Scanty fare for one will often 

Make a royal feast for two." 

We do not mean to say that this principle could 
be worked out now, under present conditions, with 
the nominal church full of "tares," and thoroughly 
soaked in false doctrines. What we do mean to say 
is that had it not been for the sectarian spirit which 
early crept into the Church after the death of the 
apostles, there would not have been the present 
number of tares, professed Christians, nor the same 
amount of false doctrine discounting the true. Ambition 
for numbers and for influence led to the formulation 
of doctrines which attracted the tares into the 
Church. Without these false ambitions, and with the 
fundamentals of the ransom and full restitution 

R2999 : page 126 

clearly recognized by all, the nominal Church today 
would be amazingly smaller than it is, but it would 
be comparatively pure, and it would be at one with 
itself, and there would be no desire for any other 
name than that of the one Lord and Head. 

The question then may arise, In view of this what 
should we do? Should we join with those who are 



trying to form a federation of all the churches? We 
answer, No, for two reasons: First, because common 
sense tells us that such a union as is proposed is not 
along the principles which the Lord laid down, but 
is merely a human expedient. (Second) The Lord's 
Word shows us an illustration in the harvest time, 
and that it is not the time for organizing, etc., but a 
time for reaping, separating, threshing, winnowing, 
and gathering into the barn of the true wheat— the 
time also in which the tares will be bundled for the 
day of burning or great time of trouble with which 
this age shall close. 

Our proper course is to separate ourselves from 
all the Babylonian systems and to "stand fast in the 
liberty wherewith Christ has made free," and to own 
no other name than his, and to accept no other standards 
than those of his Word. Our duty, after coming 
ourselves into this position, is to help others into 
the same liberty, and to avoid putting restraints upon 
the brethren, or making tests of any kind, except 
such as are fundamental— faith in the ransom and full 
consecration to the Lord, which would include an 
honest desire to know the meaning of his Word. 
There can be no danger amongst such as are taking 
this position, and where only this class is recognized 
as the Church, and where this liberty wherewith 
Christ has made us free is strictly observed. 



R2999 : page 126 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION ANSWERED. 



LIFTING THE CURSE. 



Question.— When and how is the Adamic sentence 
lifted from the human race— the Church and the 
world? 

Answer.— This subject has been treated at length 
in Dawn Vol. V., and also in our issue of August 1, 
1901. For these reasons our answer here will be 
brief, for so large a question. 

(1) The legal condemnation of the race has rested 
upon the world since Adam's disobedience, and this 
has led to the actual sufferings and dying of mankind. 
There is a difference, however, between the 
legal and the actual "curse." The legal curse or 
sentence went into force against Adam immediately 
after he had sinned, but the effects of that legal sentence 
in pain and suffering came on him and his posterity 
gradually, and are still with them. Similarly, 



there will be a difference between the cancellation of 
the legal sentence and the rescue of man from the 
difficulties which came upon him as the result of the 
legal sentence. 

(2) The work of Christ, the work of the atonement, 
embraces both of these features— man's release 
from the legal sentence of the divine law, and 
subsequently his release from the actual pains and 
weaknesses which came upon him as a result of that 
divine sentence. Our Lord's death was a full offset 
to the sentence against Adam, and could have been 

so applied at once, had this been the divine arrangement. 

If so applied it would have canceled at once 

the legal sentence against man, but it would have 

done nothing in the way of recovering him from his 

fallen and dead condition— that work of restitution 

is separate and apart from his redemption or purchase 

from the curse or legal condemnation of the 

law. 

(3) Instead of applying his death at once, as a full 
cancellation of the legal penalty against the race, the 
teachings of the Scriptures give us the thought that 
our Lord Jesus presented the whole matter of his 
death sacrifice on man's behalf before the Father, and 
that it became a credit on his account, but that it was 
not yet applied to the world. The next step in the divine 

R3000 : page 126 

program was the arrangement for the justification 
of the Gospel Church— not actually, but by faith, 
reckonedly. So many as believed, so many as accepted 
Jesus, were reckonedly justified— reckonedly 
had the legal curse lifted from them, tho they were 
actually allowed to remain under the weaknesses and 
difficulties resulting from that curse. To such of 
these, reckonedly justified ones, as made full consecration 
of themselves to the Lord, the privilege was 
granted of walking by faith in the footsteps of Jesus, 
and being conformed to his sacrificial death;— the 
promised reward for this being a share in the Lord's 
glory, honor and immortality. But not until the last 
member of this elect body of Christ shall have been 
accepted as faithful will this Gospel age of sacrifice 
terminate. 

(4) As the Apostle explains, the Lord is reckoning 
that the various members of the body of Christ 

are filling up a measure of the afflictions of Christ 
(they are joined with him in the atonement sacrifice; 
not that their sacrifices could have been acceptable 
with God at all without that of their Lord Jesus, but 
that they are acceptable to God through and under 
the merit of his sacrifice). "I beseech you, therefore, 
brethren, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, 
holy, acceptable to God, your reasonable service." 
(Rom. 12:1.) When the Church's sacrifice is complete 



the whole work of suffering for sin ends, and 
forthwith the Church will be received to conditions of 
glory with her Lord, in the first resurrection, as he 
was received by the Father from the dead after he 
had finished his sacrifice. Then, according to the 
Scriptures, the Lord will appropriate on behalf of the 
whole human family so much of the merit of his own 
sacrifice, and of the entire sacrifice of the Church, as 
Justice could demand, and Justice will be fully satisfied 
of all its legal claims against mankind. 

(5) As a result of such a legal satisfaction of the 
claims of Justice, early in the Millennial day, there 
will be no hindrance whatever to prevent the institution 
of the restitution arrangements which God 

has provided in Christ and the Church, and of which 
all the holy prophets have spoken since the world began. 
-Acts 3:19-23. 

(6) Thus seen, the curse or condemnation for 
Adam's sin will be no more— as a legal sentence 
against mankind from thenceforth forever. Full 
atonement will have been made and accepted, for the 

R3000 : page 127 

sins of the whole world.* But this will not mean that 
the effects of the curse will then instantly disappear; 
just as if a man imprisoned for crime by an earthly 
court lost his hair, his sight, his hearing, and in general 
his entire health, while serving out the imprisonment; 
if he were then pardoned and set free the pardon 
would not restore to him his hair, his sight, his 
hearing, all his health. These must be sought for in 
some other direction. Justice is not responsible for 
their loss, and has nothing to do with their restoration. 
The freed man must look for some good physician. 
Just so with the race and its release from the 
sentence— from the condemnation to death. It must 
also look to the "Good Physician." And this is just 
what God is providing for the world in the glorified 
Christ— a wonderful and faithful Prophet, Priest and 
King— to rule and bless and uplift the redeemed 
world, or so many of the race as will accept his just 
and gracious terms. 

(7) Here, then, we see the distinctions between 
Christ, the Redeemer, and Christ, the Life-giver. We 
were redeemed by the sacrifice of Christ, and through 
the merits of that sacrifice all will be freed from the 
condemnation; and then, as the Life-giver, he who 
previously redeemed will restore as many as will accept 
his favors, bringing them back to the conditions 

of perfection from which they fell— back to a condition 
in harmony with their Creator, and thus back to 
a condition of at-one-ment with God by the close of 
the Millennial age. 



"See "Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices." 



R2999 : page 127 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

Having just finished carefully reading the recent 
"Watch Tower," and with profit comparing spiritual 
things in them with the spiritual things contained in 
the Book (I Cor. 2: 13); and having found much food, 
both milk and meat (Heb. 5:12-14), I discovered 
among the papers in the hotel in Mt. Jewett, the 
March, 1902, number of "World Wide Missions," a 
twenty page monthly, now in its fourteenth year, and 
which from its attractive appearance bade fair to furnish 
an appetizing dessert to the full meal just partaken. 
But I studied its aggressive frontispiece 
and turned its pages in disappointment. At her bare 
cupboard Mother Hubbard's poor dog was equally 
fortunate; no food was there, not even a discussion of 
the Sunday School lesson. 

What it did contain was five portraits of as many 
Reverend gentlemen, and two groups of missionary 
subjects; ninety-four articles of various lengths concerning 
meetings, work, services, revivals, conferences, 
discipline, rum and opium, church erection, 
impecunious missions, money, Buddhist opposition, 
addresses, colleges, health and food, Epworth 
League, charcoal, one short poem, New England, 
China and war, travels, Africa, Europe, Mexico, 
Korea, Porto Rico, Chicago, self-denial, charity, mission-giving 
benevolence and six complimentary notices 
and six personals; it believes they are just on the 
eve of success in China, and that by proper effort the 
world will be evangelized during the twentieth century. 
There was much regarding persons and things, 
in which the first person, singular and plural, predominated; 
and finally, six and one-half of its twenty 
pages were devoted to thirty -eight miscellaneous and 
illy selected advertisements. 

The brethren who edit the paper seem full of zeal; 
but, alas! it does not appear to be according to knowledge 
(Rom. 10:2). There was not a single Scripture 
reference, nor did I notice any Scripture quotations. 
They were very anxious to prevent the use 
of profanity, liquor, opium and tobacco, but the 
coarser sins are not mentioned, while the more refined, 
as envy, lust, gossip, are overlooked. Meekness 
is mentioned approvingly, as an adjunct to benevolence, 
and for the benefit of the missions' coffers; 



but love, joy, peace (Gal. 5:22,23) receive little attention. 
"Zions Watch Tower," on the contrary, contains 
of Scripture references nearly a thousand a year, 
and of quotations several times as many. 

But if we are more favored by the light now due 
and shining upon us from the pages of the Bible, the 
"Dawns" and the "Towers," we have nothing of which 
to boast, nothing that we have not received (I Cor. 4:7); 
and we may well remember with fear that our 
duties and obligations increase as we advance from 
opportunity to knowledge, and from knowledge to 
still farther opportunity. Will you not pray for me, 
dear brother, as I do daily for you, that this wonderful 
glorious opportunity and light may not have come 
to us in vain. 

With Christian love, 
Your fellow-servant, 

Wm. M. Wright,— Pennsylvania. 



page 127 

Dear Brother:— From the amount of publishing 
that you are doing, it is quite evident that your time 
must be fully occupied. On this account I have long 
hesitated to trouble you with my difficulties and hindrances 
to advancement in present truth. About one 
and a half years ago I received my first number of 
"Watch Tower," which I perused with pleasure and 
profit. Other numbers followed full of good Bible 
teaching. 

I read the first volume of "Dawn" with much interest, 
and thought I had now found what I had been 
seeking for,— a substitute for the prevailing delusions 
of the day. I read and reread it and talked as 
much as I read, and gave to friends four or five copies. 
I then took up the succeeding volumes. I soon began 
to find things so contrary to my preconceived 
notions that I laid them aside and read volume V, 
which proved really "meat in due season." I have 
since been reading the three volumes laid aside and 
making some advancement. And now comes 
"Tower," March 15, containing the very subject I am 
stumbling over. I am reading them carefully and 
prayerfully, and hope to find the truth. Your effort 
to publish the truth is commendable. 

"Old Theology Quarterly," in Yiddish is quite 
opportune. I think you hit the right thing to publish 
for Hebrews in that language which is spoken at the 
present moment by some millions of that people. 

I am earnestly and prayerfully studying "Dawns." 
I have not much time for anything else at present. 

Yours in the love and fellowship of the Truth. 
C. C. Stanbro,-New York. 



page 129 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. MAY 1, 1902. No. 9. 



CONTENTS. 

Yearly Reckonings— Spiritual 

Accounts 131 

Examples of Proper Counting, 

Valuation, Etc 132 

How the Lord is Accounting 

Respecting Us 133 

Contrasting Experiences of the Saints 134 

"It is His Angel!" 137 

"Thy Will Be Done!"~Poem 138 

The Early Christian Missionaries 138 

Letters of Interest 142 

Special Items 130 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



NEW BIBLES GOING OUT. 



We are glad to announce that the binders are making good 
progress with the new wide-margin etc. Bibles. The first thousand 
has gone out and others will follow at the rate of about 
1000 per week. Wherever possible these go by express; and 



friends living in small places where express matter is not delivered, 
should call on express agent. 

PATENT BINDERS FOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 



The price has been advanced on us, so that on orders recently 
filled we have been losing money. We must restore the price 
to 50 cents each, delivered. However, they are still very 
cheap, as one binder holds two years' issues of Z.W.T. 

1902-PILGRIM VISITS-1902. 



If you desire a Pilgrim visit, free, be sure to respond 
to the questions of page 2 of our January 15th issue. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



Your recent valued orders for tracts have about exhausted 
our supply but plenty more are being printed, and 
orders will be filled soon; if not, order again. 



R3000 :page 131 

YEARLY RECKONINGS-SPIRITUAL ACCOUNTS. 

"Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou hast done, 
and thy thoughts which are to usward: they can not be reckoned 
up in order unto thee; if I would declare and speak of them, 
they are more than can be numbered."— Psalm 40:5. 

BUSINESS MEN are at great expense to secure 
accuracy in their accounts. Millions 
of dollars are spent every year in details of 
bookkeeping, an important part of which is to enable 
proprietors to know definitely upon which items 
of their business there is a profit, and upon which 
there is a loss,— to the intent that the profitable 
branches may be increased, and the unprofitable ones 
corrected. This is admittedly a wise procedure. 
If the case be such with those who are seeking 
temporal wealth and its honors, how much more careful 
accounting should be attempted in connection with 
spiritual matters ! The Lord's people are not merely 
seeking for wealth, which will last for a few years, 
and then must be parted with— at the tomb, if not 
sooner;— they are seeking for the riches which perish 
not, and which thieves do not break into and steal. 
More than this, with the heavenly riches they are assuredly 



seeking also heavenly honors and glories- 
even join t-heirship with the King of kings and Lord 
of lords, in the Millennial Kingdom, and in the glorious 
opportunities which it will bring in connection 
with the promised blessing of all the families of the 
earth. 

The general settlement day with the world is at 
the close of the old year, and the beginning of a new 
one, but with the Church an equally appropriate occasion, 
or, indeed, a still more appropriate one, comes 
with the annual remembrancer of our Lord's death 
as our Passover Lamb— and of our participation with 
him in his sacrifice; and in the Easter celebration of 
his resurrection, and of our figurative rising with him 
to walk in newness of life— in prospect of the actual 
resurrection in which, if faithful, we shall be changed 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, to be like 
our glorious Redeemer, to see him as he is, and to 
share his glory. 

Let us see how our spiritual accounts stand for 
the year past— since last we broke together the emblems 
of our Redeemer's sacrifice and of our own 
participation with him. Let us note whether or not 
the year's experiences have brought us nearer to the 
Lord, or have in any measure separated us from the 
warmth of his love and fellowship, and from fellowship 
with fellow members of his body. Every year 
should find us nearer to the Lord, not only in the purposes 
of our hearts, but in the conduct of our lives,— 
nearer to the perfect standard. We should be making 
progress, growing in all the graces of the spirit, 
and growing also in our knowledge and appreciation 
of the Lord and of his wonderful plan. 

We trust that each reader, as he takes a conscientious 
view of the situation, whichever way he 
feels that the balance stands (favorable or unfavorable, 
as compared with a year ago), can nevertheless 
thank God that by his grace we are what we are, and 
where we are;— still his, with hearts striving for 
things of the spirit, and not for things of the flesh. If 
any have slipped to some extent backward, let such 
thank the Lord that matters are not worse than they 
are, that they have not wholly let go of his hand, and 
relinquished their share in the exceeding great and 
precious promises of his Word. Let them thank God 
that this day of reckoning and reviewing of accounts 
finds them desirous of being on the Lord's side, and 
making a better record during the year before us. 
Let us look together at our text, and see if we cannot 
joint heartily with the Prophet in the sentiment 
expressed. He divides the subject into two parts. 
(1) Thankfulness to God for his wonderful work of 
grace already done or accomplished; and (2) for his 
thoughts, his plans, his purposes, toward us, which 
are not yet accomplished, and which we have grasped 
by his promises, with our arms of faith. 



Looking back at the things that God already has 
done for us, we see that the Prophet has defined some 
of these, saying, "He brought me up also out of an 
horrible pit, and out of the miry clay, and set my feet 

R3000 : page 132 

upon a rock, and established my goings." (Verse 2.) 
If we can apply this heartily to ourselves, what a 
cause it is for thankfulness. As we look about us, 
and see the whole world lying in the Wicked One, 
without God and having no real hope,— merely vague 
impressions— and when we look back and see how the 
Lord has delivered us from the horrible pit of condemnation 
and sin, how he has had mercy upon us 
and delivered us, and established our feet of faith upon 
the rock foundation, Christ and his redemptive work, 
well may we give thanks, and tell his mercies all 
abroad. Looking back we may see that happy day 
that fixed our choice upon our Savior and our God, 
as being the time from which our goings have been 
established,— our course no longer vacillating. It was 
there that we obtained a fixed purpose, a ballast which 
has hindered us from being upset when tossed, hither 
and thither, by the varying winds of philosophy and 
human speculation. Praise God for this which he already 
has done for us! No wonder, as the Prophet 

R3001 :page 132 

proceeds to say, we realize that "He has put a new 

song into our mouth,— even praise unto our God." 

The new song is not one of doubt or of fear, nor concerning 

anguish of sinners; but a song of God's Justice 

and Mercy and Love,— reasonable and harmonious 

in its every cadence. Thank God! It has 

brought a new life to us; a new pleasure in life, as 

well as new aspirations and new hopes for others as 

well as for ourselves. We can never thank the Lord 

enough for the blessings which we have already received 

at his hands,— for the things which he has already 

done for us. 

And yet the things that we already enjoy of the 
Lord's favor we are assured are but a foretaste of the 
blessings yet in reservation for them that love him 
—blessings which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
neither hath entered into the heart of man to see or 
appreciate, but which God hath lovingly declared, 
and which we grasp by faith, seeing through a glass 
only obscurely, as yet, the glory, honor and immortality 
promised to the faithful. What we now have 
are not realities so much as promises and hopes. 
Present experiences being but the beginning of our 
comfort, we agree with the Prophet, that the number 
of God's favors cannot be reckoned, computed. 
We are exceedingly his debtors; we can never discharge 



the obligation. But then we are his children; 
he is pleased to give us these things, and his request 
in return is that we shall act toward him in such a 
manner as will betoken our gratitude, and that we 
are indeed his offspring, begotten of his spirit. 

Let us proceed in our calculation of present assets, 
and in our balancing of the year; and let us not 
be content simply with generalities in the balance. 
Let us retrospectively scrutinize the privileges and 
mercies enjoyed during the year, and the use we made 
of them and the blessings we derived. Let us carefully 
note which features of our daily course have been 
most helpful to us, and which have to any extent 
retarded our spiritual progress, hindered our fellowship 
with the Lord, prevented our running with patience 
or with best results the race set before us in 
the Gospel. These items will necessarily vary with 
each individual— for no two are alike in temperament 
or environment. Each in his counting should 
weigh the advantages derived from fellowship and 
communion with the Lord in prayer; and should determine 
whether or not this feature of his spiritual 
interests could be advantageously expanded during 
the beginning year. 

Each should consider, also not merely how much 
time he had spent in talking to the Lord, but also how 
much time he had spent in listening to the Lord's 
voice— in searching the Scriptures; in seeking to 
know the divine mind, the divine plan, as it pertains 
to himself individually and to the Church and to the 
world. Included in this matter of listening to the 
Lord's voice, he should reckon the helps to Bible 
study provided by the Lord through the brethren, 
the members of the family, the members of the one 
body of Christ;— remembering the statement of the 
Apostle, that God himself had set the various members 
in the body as it hath pleased him; and that he 
set these members for the very purpose of blessing 
one another, edifying the Church, building it up in 
the most holy faith. True, we are to consider that 
the Apostle were set first, foremost, and hence, that 
their teachings are paramount; and that all other 
teachings are to be submitted to the test of harmony 
with the testimonies of the apostles and the prophets. 

If any, on reckoning up, shall find that they have 
not made such good progress as they had hoped, or 
perhaps apparently less progress in the narrow way, 
than some others about them, let them consider to 
what extent this failure to progress was due to a failure 
to use the divinely appointed means for growth in 
grace and knowledge and love;— namely, the Word 
and the brotherhood. If the progress has not been 
so great as could be hoped, let another point be examined: 
see whether or not you have been as active 
as was possible in serving the truth. Consider that 
you have consecrated your entire life to the Lord, 



and that by his direction it is to be laid down, sacrificed, 

yielded up in the interest of his brethren, the 

Church. Consider, count, reckon, whether or not you 

have been faithful in this matter of laying down your 

life during the past year— faithful in serving the 

Church, the body of Christ, to the best of your 

ability. Remember that it is a part of the Lord's provision, 

that he who watereth shall himself be watered, 

that he who serves the truth to others may appropriate 

to himself the more abundantly at the Lord's table 

of grace and truth. 

EXAMPLES OF PROPER COUNTING, VALUATION, ETC. 



In our counting let us take some hints and suggestions 
from the inspired apostles; let us note how 
they counted matters and things— which matters they 
set down to the profit account, and which to the loss 
account. Hearken to the Apostle Paul's words: 
"Neither count I my [earthly] life dear [precious, 
valuable] unto me." (Acts 20:24.) Again, "I count all 
things [earthly] but loss for the excellency of the 
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord." (Phil. 3:8.) 
Paul's estimation was not merely that the future glories 
were worthy of some loss in the present time, but 
that even the knowledge of Christ (including the 
knowledge of God's grace toward us through him, 
and the knowledge and consequent opportunities of 
running the race for the great prize)— was alone worth 

R3001 :page 133 

the price; he estimated that the loss of all things, in 
order to obtain this knowledge (and its opportunities), 
would be a great bargain. Let us thank God if we have 
this good asset— a knowledge of Christ,— a knowledge 
of his character, and a deep appreciation of it, a 
knowledge of the plan which centers in him— no matter 
what it has cost us of earthly good; if we have this 
knowledge, if to us he is precious, we are rich today, 
thank God! The same Apostle proceeds to say 
that already he had suffered the loss of all things and 
did "count them but dung," that he might "win Christ, 
and be found in him"— a member of his body. 

A further suggestion as to how to count is found 
in the Apostle James' words, "Count it all joy, when 
ye fall into divers temptations, knowing that the trial 
of your faith worketh patience," etc. (James 1:2.) 
No doubt, as each looks back for a year, we see that 
there were numerous snares and temptations in our 
pathway. Over some, no doubt, we gained victories, 
readily; others perhaps we conquered with a severer 
struggle; and still others perhaps were only partial 
victories,— they were partially reverses, partially victories 



for our enemy. 

What did these temptations bring us? What has 
been their value? One value, as the Apostle suggests, 
is the lesson of forbearance. They proved to 
us that we are still in the schooling time, in the testing 
time;— to demonstrate our loyalty to the Lord, 
and our worthiness, through his merit, to a share in 
his Kingdom. All wish frequently, no doubt, that 
the testings were all over, and that we were accepted 
to a place amongst the overcomers; but patience and 
faith and trust are to do a refining work in our hearts, 
making us mellow, willing and obedient to the Lord. 
Let the good work go on. Let us rejoice if our trials 
have brought us lessons of any kind that are profitable 
to us,— that have tended to make us stronger in 
character, more firm for truth and righteousness, 
more aware of our own weaknesses, and more on 
guard against the same. Even those conflicts which 
have resulted in only partial victories have possibly 
been to our advantage. Surely so, in proportion as 
we contended earnestly against our weaknesses or 
against the besetments of the Adversary. Even on 
points in which there may have been absolute failure, 
the result may be a strengthening of character, a crystallization 
of determination for greater zeal in that 
direction again; and a humility of heart before the 
Lord in prayer, which has caused us to remember the 
throne of grace afresh, and that thither we may flee 
in every moment of temptation and find the succor 
which we need. 

The Apostle Paul summed up his account, and 
balanced it, as follows: "I reckon that the sufferings 
of this present time are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us"— the 
faithful. (Rom. 8:18.) In our reckoning, in our account 
for the year, let us similarly reckon the things 
which we have suffered, whether they be few or many, 
small or great— whatever we suffered for Christ's 
sake, for righteousness' sake, for the truth's sake,— 
let us rejoice therein, and endeavor for the coming 
year, to be so much more faithful in all these respects, 
that it may be our high privilege of suffering something 
further for the name of Christ, for his cause, 
and for his brethren. 

As we reckon the profit and loss sides of the account 
for the year, let us be thankful that amongst 
the shortcomings which all may have to deplore none 
of us find one item of evil which the Apostle mentions; 
viz., none of us "count the blood of the covenant, 
wherewith we were sanctified, an unholy [ordinary] 
thing." Thank God, we still appreciate the 
precious blood of Christ; we still appreciate the fact 
that we are accepted, not in any merit or worthiness 
of our own, but in him who loved us and who bought 
us with his own precious blood. Oh, how much we 
have to be thankful for in this one feature of our experience, 



even if, as we look back, we find that there 

have been vacillations or slips or slidings in the pathway! 

How much we may thank the Lord, that by 

his grace we still are what we are, and still have the 

opportunity of persevering and running with renewed 

zeal and patience the race set before us,— looking 

unto Jesus for our example. 

HOW THE LORD IS ACCOUNTING RESPECTING US. 



Finally, in our account of matters, let us take 
courage from the Lord's statement respecting how 
he counts things, and let us count accordingly. The 
Apostle said himself, "I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, 
who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, 
putting me into the ministry." (I Tim. 1:12.) Ah, 

R3002 : page 133 

yes, what a blessed satisfaction it is to us to know that 

while the Lord knows of our every word and every 

deed he is pleased to count us something different, 

even from our words and our deeds— something better! 

Our words do not always represent the full 

sentiments of our hearts; our conduct does not come 

up to the standard: after the words have been spoken 

and after the deeds have been done— perhaps to the 

very best of our ability— we realize that they have 

come short of the glory of God, and short of our 

own ideals, desires and efforts. How consoling it 

is to us, then, to know that our imperfect work shall 

be acceptable through Christ to God; that the Lord 

counts us according to our intentions, according to 

our wills. Praise his name! We would have no 

hope of coming up to any standard of perfection which 

he would approve, were it not for his gracious arrangement 

by which our imperfections are covered by 

our Redeemer's perfection and sacrifice, and our 

works accepted according to the intentions and desires 

of our hearts. 

The Apostle rejoiced that by the Lord's counting 
him according to his intentions, and not according 
to his deeds, he was counted worthy a place in the 
ministry. Let us similarly rejoice, and let us remember 
that the word "ministry" signifies service, 
and the word "minister" signifies servant. Let us 
remember that all of the Royal Priesthood, all of the 
truly consecrated Church of God, are ministers, servants 
of God and of each other. The Lord has put 
us all into the ministry; and there is a ministry, a service 
of kindness and of love toward the Lord, in 
honoring his name and declaring his righteousness; 
and a ministry toward the brethren, in opening the 
eyes of their understanding and enabling them to 



appreciate the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the Lord's character. A share in this ministry 
belongs to each one of us, and it is a great privilege. 
It is a ministry, or service which, if neglected, 

R3002 : page 134 

or in proportion as neglected, brings us corresponding 
loss in spiritual progress and character. Let us 
count this privilege a valuable asset, to carry over 
into the new year, to be used with greater diligence 
than ever in the service of our King. 

The Apostle, in writing to the Church at Thessalonica 
(2 Thes. 1:5), says, "That ye may be counted 
worthy of the Kingdom for which ye also suffer." 
Ah, yes; this is more of the Lord's counting. We are 
not worthy of the Kingdom of God. No human being 
is worthy; but the Lord purposes to count his 
faithful ones worthy. He will do this through the 
merit of his own great atonement-sacrifice which permits 
the acceptance of our wills, our intentions, as instead 
of the perfect works of righteousness. Thank 
God for this generous accounting! Let it encourage 
us, and let us remember the Apostle's statement that 
those who will be counted of our Lord thus fit for 
the Kingdom, will be such as suffer something for 
it. Let us then strive in a reasonable, rational manner, 
according to the divine Word and plan, to suffer 
for the Kingdom's sake. 

We are not to seek suffering in a foolish way, by 
doing foolish things. We have no such example in 
our Lord's case, nor in the case of the apostles. It 
is not even necessary that we should suffer martyrdom 
or physical persecution. Possibly the extent 
of our sufferings may be the wounding of our feelings, 
when— "The workers of iniquity. ..whet their 
tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot 
their arrows, even bitter words, that they may shoot 
in secret at the innocent." (Psa. 64:3.) Perhaps 
our sufferings, even, will be still less than this, as the 
Apostle explains (Heb. 10:33-35): "Partly whilst ye 
were made a gazingstock, both by reproaches and 
afflictions, and partly whilst ye became companions of 
them that were so used." Let us resolve to carry this 
good asset over into the new year, rejoicing that we 
have been privileged thus far to suffer some little for 
the Lord's sake and for the sake of the truth, and in 
companionship with the brethren; heeding the Apostle's 
words, "Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, 
which hath great recompense of reward." God 
wishes us to trust him according to his promises, and 
will reward such faith. 

We conclude this exhortation to spiritual accounting, 
by calling attention to the Apostle's words: 
"We pray always for you— that God would count you 
worthy of this calling and fulfill all the good pleasure 



of his goodness, and the work of faith with power." 
(2 Thess. 1:1 1.) This is our prayer for you, beloved 
in the Lord; and we trust also that this is your prayer 
for us. What more could we ask than that the Lord 
would count us worthy of the great high-calling of 
this Gospel age,— to joint-heirship with his Son in 
the Kingdom? We have his assurance respecting 
the terms on which he will count us worthy. We 
realize that the terms are very reasonable indeed, and 
that what we do sacrifice in conforming to those terms 
would be really only as loss and dross to us, so long as 
we were filled with a proper zeal for the Lord and his 
cause. And now notice the Apostle's words, that 
these good things which our heavenly Father has 
called us to receive— to prove ourselves worthy of 
receiving, according to his gracious terms in Christ 
—are not things which he offers us grudgingly, but 
things which he is well pleased to bestow. There 
was a time, perhaps, with each of us, when, under 
misinterpretations of the Lord's Word, we supposed 
that coldly and heartlessly, our Heavenly Father preferred 
not to give many blessings, and would give 
them to but few, and to them in a grudging manner, 
because impelled thereto by Jesus; and that for 
the great majority he had determined, beforehand, 
that they should be delivered over to devils for an 
eternity of misery. Thank God for a clearer opening 
of the eyes of our understanding, by which now 
we may know him as our Father, and appreciate to 
some extent his wonderful plan! 

And, as respects our own share, let us settle it in 
our hearts that these gracious things to which we 
are called are "all the good pleasure of his goodness." 
Let us start into the new year with good courage, 
remembering that if God loved us while we were yet 
sinners, strangers, aliens, foreigners, much more does 
he now love us since we have come into relationship 
with him through Jesus Christ our Lord;— since we 
are seeking to walk, not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit; since we are seeking to be copies of his dear 
Son, our Lord; since we have been begotten by his 
holy spirit. Truly, faith may confidently exclaim, 
"All things are ours, for we are Christ's and Christ 
is God's!" 



R3002 : page 134 

CONTRASTING EXPERIENCES OF THE SAINTS. 

-ACTS 12:l-9.-MAY 11.- 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that fear him, and delivereth them."— Psalm 34:7. 



HEROD, was a family name. There were several 

kings over Israel by this name; (1) 

Herod the Great, who flourished about the 

time of our Lord's birth, and who murdered the babes 

of Bethlehem. (2) Herod Archelaus, son and successor 

to Herod the Great— deposed A.D. 6. (3) 

Herod Antipas, another son of Herod the Great, the 

murderer of John the Baptist, who subsequently, 

with his men of war, set at naught and mocked Jesus, 

just prior to his crucifixion— deposed A.D. 40. (4) 

Herod Agrippa I., grandson of Herod the Great, 

mentioned in the present lesson as the murderer of 

the Apostle James. (5) Herod Agrippa II., the last 

of the Herods, before whom the Apostle Paul defended 

himself.-Acts 26:28. 

The Herod of our lesson (Agrippa I.) was given 
his kingdom by Claudius Caesar, Emperor of Rome, 
whom he saved from a violent death. History says 
of him, "He curried favor with the Jews in every way: 
he hung in the Temple, as a votive offering, the gold 
chain which the Emperor Caligula had given him; 
he lived in Jerusalem, and punctiliously observed the 
traditions of the fathers, and secured the fervent loyalty 
of the Pharisees. At the Feast of Tabernacles, 
A.D. 41, he took the reader's stand, and read the 
whole Book of Deuteronomy aloud, bursting into 

R3002 : page 135 

tears, as if quite overcome, when he reached the 
words, 'Thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, 
who is not thy brother.' He feared that because he 
had Edomite blood in his veins he might incur the 
hatred his grandfather, Herod the Great, had borne, 
and took this way to gain the political favor of the 
Jews, who cried out, 'Do not weep, Agrippa; thou 
art our brother.'" Within a month after the events 
of this lesson he was a corpse. His tragic end at 
Caesarea, whither he had gone to a magnificent festival, 
in honor of Claudius Caesar, is thus summed 
up by Geike, from Josephus' account:— 

"A vast multitude assembled to see the festival 
and games, and before these the king, in all the pride 
of high state, appeared in robes inwrought with silver 
threads. The time chosen was daybreak, so that the 
kindling sun shining on his grand mantle lighted 
it into dazzling splendor. Presently some of his 
flatterers, always at hand beside a king, raised the 
cry, echoing a reminiscence of the days of Caligula, 
'Deign to be gracious to us, thou divine one! 
Hitherto we have honored thee as a man; henceforth 
we own thee as more than mortal!' Instead of rebuking 
such lying servility he drank in this adulation 
with high pleasure. Next moment a great pain 
racked his bowels. Conscience-stricken at this blasphemous 
folly, the poor wretch felt that the wrath 



of God had struck him down, and the cry arose from 
him in his agony, 'See, your god must now give up 
life, and hasten into the arms of corruption!' In the 
Acts (12:23) we are told that he 'was eaten of 
worms.'" 

Knowing thus much about the man, Herod, enables 
us to understand why he made his attack upon 

R3003 : page 135 

the Church. Altho not a descendant of Jacob, but of 
Esau, he had espoused the religion prevalent in his 
kingdom, and was seeking favor with the Jews by his 
zeal for Judaism,— which meant, of course, his zeal 
and energy correspondingly against Christianity. 
As we have already seen, the Jews had begun a work 
of persecution against the Church, but were hindered 
by their own troubles with Caligula Caesar; but the 
latter was now dead, and the persecuting tendencies 
of misdirected fervor could again be exercised. The 
Lord, of course, was not subject to these conditions, 
and could have miraculously prevented the persecutions 
recorded. But, as the lesson shows, he permitted 
the evil to triumph in part and restrained it 
in part. 

The Apostle James, whose death is here recorded, 
in few words, was a matter of fact one of 
the most noble and notable of the apostles. He was 
one of the three who usually accompanied our Lord 
in the most confidential capacity;— with his brother 
John, and Peter, he was with the Lord in the Mount of 
Transfiguration. In the same company he was present 
at the awakening of Jairus' daughter. In the 
same company he was one of the inner circle of the 
Lord's friends in the trying hour in the Garden of 
Gethsemane. It was he and his brother whom our 
Lord surnamed Boanerges— "sons of thunder"— 
probably because of their eloquence and forcefulness 
of speech. It was he and his brother whose mother entreated 
the Lord that they might sit "the one on his 
right hand and the other on his left, in the Kingdom," 
and who, when questioned by our Lord, declared their 
willingness to share in his work and suffering, even 
unto death. They were both faithful, James being 
amongst the earliest of the martyrs for the cause, and 
John living to a life of old age,— being probably the 
last survivor of the apostles. Altho the record of 
James' ministry is brief in the extreme, it contains 
nothing that gives the slightest suggestion of anything 
except zeal and faithfulness to the Lord and to 
his cause. This James, who died early in the Christian 
era, should not be confounded with the other 
James, the author of the Epistle of James— known as 
"James the Less," the son of Alpheus (Cleopas— 
Mark 3:18)— husband of Mary, supposed to have been 
second cousin to our Lord, and for this reason, according 



to Jewish custom, styled "the Lord's 
brother. "-Gal. 1:19. 

When Herod saw what satisfaction it gave his 
subjects, and especially their leaders, the Pharisees, 
that he should thus persecute the Christians, he proceeded 
to take Peter also. The implication is that 
James and Peter were two of the foremost amongst 
the apostles in the Church at this time. The expression, 
"When he had apprehended him," implies that 
some delay occurred between the order for his arrest 
and the time of his imprisonment. He was delivered 
to four quaternions of soldiers. A quaternion consisted 
of four soldiers to guard a prisoner, two of 
them being chained to him, one on each side, by the 
wrists; the other two doing sentinel duty, one at the 
door of the cell and the other in an outer court. The 
four quaternions were in the nature of relief guards, 
so that each quaternion would have charge of the 
Apostle for six hours of the twenty-four. 

It was at the season of Easter, or, more properly, 
the Passover— "the days of unleavened bread." The 
time of his arrest was too close to this religious festival 
to make it proper for such a public execution as 
Herod had determined upon. He would reserve his 
show of zeal for the Jews' religion until this festival 
was at an end. Meantime, the infant Church at Jerusalem 
was evidently sadly perplexed by the trend of 
affairs— at a loss to know how to interpret the Lord's 
providences. Doubtless they held their memorial of 
the Redeemer's death at this time, as we now do, and 
their hearts were sadly stricken with a realization of 
the fact that the Lord's faithful must all drink of his 
cup— of ignominy and death. Altho a considerable 
number of Jews had accepted Jesus, as we saw in a 
previous lesson, apparently the majority of the believers 
were scattered abroad, but few of them residing 
in Jerusalem. These few it seems met in little 
groups, in private houses, for prayer and praise, for 
study of the Lord's Word and for building one another 
up in the most holy faith; and such a meeting 
was in progress during this eventful Passover week. 
We are informed that the burden of their prayer was 
for Peter. 

Well instructed by the apostles, we may be sure 
that they strove not to ask amiss; and that they copied 
the Master's petition, at least in so far as the expression, 
"Nevertheless, not my will, but thine, be done." 
We have no record that the Church met in prayer 
for James, tho quite possibly it did; neither are we 
bound to suppose that if they had not met and prayed 

R3003 : page 136 

for Peter, Herod would have succeeded in killing 
him also. It is sufficient for us that we remember 
that God has plans of his own, irrespective of the 



plans and prayers of his people, and that all of his 
good purposes will be accomplished; but it is well 
that we should note also his good pleasure that his 
people should come so fully into accord with him and 
his plans that they would neither be surprised nor 
disappointed in their fulfilment. 

Probably James' death was accomplished suddenly, 
while, as we have seen, Peter was held over in 
bonds. This gave the Church time to consider how 
much she had already lost, and how much she might 
lose further were not the Lord to interpose for her 
protection. No doubt they reasoned that they had 
already sustained a great loss; and no doubt Peter's 
life and his service seemed much more precious to 
them since the loss of James. In any event, the 
Lord's people were getting a blessing through their 
experiences and through their prayers. Peter also 
was getting a valuable experience; and doubtless the 
Lord was overruling in the matter so that a great 
blessing and stimulus to the faith of all, would ensue 
through Peter's release. 

Peter, his heart filled with the peace of God which 
passeth all understanding, was enabled to sleep peacefully 
in the prison, notwithstanding the unfavorable 
conditions in which he was placed, and his expectancy 
that on the morrow he would be called before 
the king and publicly executed. What a blessing is 
this rest of heart, this ability to entrust to the Lord 
all of life's affairs! It is written, "He giveth his beloved 
sleep." (Psa. 127:2.) We cannot say that the 
Lord's people are never troubled with insomnia, 
sleeplessness, but we can say that many, previously 
troubled with the cares of this life, exciting to nervousness, 
have by the Lord's grace been enabled 
so to cast all their care upon him that it has in great 
measure controlled their nerves and brought back to 
them the ability to enjoy sweet refreshing rest in 
sleep. Nothing is more favorable to this peace of 
heart than a full consecration to the Lord— "all to his 
wisdom resigned:" it entitles to a full confidence in the 
divine promises,— through faith in the divine wisdom, 
love and power, which has guaranteed that all things 
shall work together for good to those who love God, 
who are called according to his purpose. 

Peter was aroused from his sleep, loosed from 
his chains, bidden to arise and fasten the girdle usually 
relaxed in slumber, to put on his sandals,— 
wrap himself in his outer cloak and follow the messenger, 
the light of whose glory filled the prison cell. 
The doors opened before them; they passed the sentinel 
unobserved, and Peter was led from the castle 
of Antonia into the city proper. There the heavenly 
messenger left him. There is a simplicity to this narrative 
which, even on the surface, commends it as 
truthful. Were it a fiction doubtless the author 
would have stated matters altogether differently. He 



would have represented the angel as doing homage 
to the apostle, or delivering to him some complimentary 
message from the Lord, or lifting him up or putting 
on his sandals and fastening them for him, or 
assisting in girding him or putting on his mantle. 
He would have had him give Peter certain directions 
at the time of leaving, etc. But this simple account 
merely represents the angel as doing for Peter what 
he could not do for himself, and no more, and leaving 
him without a word as soon as he had brought 
him properly into the city. 

The record shows that Peter was so surprised 
with what had transpired that he for a time fancied 
himself in a dream, in a trance,— expecting that he 
would awaken shortly to realize himself still bound; 
but the cool morning air, between three and six 
o'clock, and being left alone, brought him to his 
senses and convinced him that he was actually at liberty. 
He knew well the usual meeting place, and 
thither he bent his steps. It was the home of Mary, 
mother of John Mark— cousin of Barnabas, (so 
"sister's son" should read in Col. 4:10.) John was 
his Hebrew name and Marcus his Latin name. It was 
this Mark who was the Evangelist, the author of the 
Book of Mark,— the same who accompanied Barnabas 
and Paul on their first missionary journey. 

Altho the hour was an unusual one, the inmates of 
the house were awake, the prayer-meeting was still 
going on at the very time when the Lord was answering 
the petition. Peter's knock on the outer door was 
responded to by the little maid-servant of the family, 
Rhoda (Rose), who, child-like, discerning the voice of 
Peter (for it was customary to make inquiries before 
opening the door) was so surprised and delighted that 
she neglected to open the door before running back 
to give word to the assembled disciples. 

The fact that the praying ones were amazed, astonished, 
and could scarcely believe that it was Peter 
who had come, does not prove that they had not faith 
in their own prayers. Rather, we may say that their 
faith in prayer was well attested by their continuance 
in it all night, and to such an hour in the morning, 
and that they were not asleep at the time Peter 
knocked; but, knowing something regarding the 
prison and the appointment of four quaternions of 
soldiers, they would reasonably expect that whatever 
answer might come to their prayers would not be a 

R3004 : page 136 

release of Peter under such circumstances, but might 
rather be some interference at the time of the trial, 
something to change the mind of the king, who would 
be the judge in this case, and thus to bring about 
Peter's release. But "God works in a mysterious 
way his wonders to perform," and not infrequently 



his ways are not as our ways, and sometimes we learn 
valuable lessons under just such circumstances. 
Doubtless the faith of some was shaken considerably 
by the death of the Apostle James; doubtless they 
queried concerning the lack of the manifestation of 
divine favor and interference for the protection of the 
Apostle and for his preservation as a helper in the 
Church. But if they were thus tempted and tried, and 
their faith sorely tested for a while, they had now, in 
Peter's experience, a valuable lesson on the other 
side— an illustration of God's power to intervene 
when he will and how he will on his people's behalf. 

Here again, in this contrast between the experiences 
of James and those of Peter, we have something 
that would be entirely contrary to the manner 
or thought of a forger attempting to write such an 
account from his imagination. It would not occur to 
him to have so marked a manifestation of divine 
providential care in the case of Peter, and to leave 
James' case with apparently no evidences of divine 

R3004 : page 137 

protection. And this calls to our mind the fact that 
divine providence seems frequently to operate along 
these lines— contrasting between the experiences of 
different members of the body of Christ, and sometimes 
instituting contrasts in our own individual experiences 
as Christians. In some of life's events we 
can see the Lord's protecting and guiding care most 
markedly, while in others it would seem absolutely 
lacking. The lesson it should bring to us is one of 
full faith in the Lord, and of full submission to all his 
providences. Indeed, we are to note that in the majority 
of cases our experiences are far more like that 
of James than like this experience of Peter's. The 
miracles which we can trace in our own experience 
are certainly few and far between. Whatever we have 
had, or whatever the apostles or others have had in 
this direction, which serves to demonstrate to us 
God's supervision of his own affairs, is evidently intended 
to give us strength and courage, whereby we 
can walk fearlessly and courageously in the dark, 
for, as the Apostle says, under divine providence we 
generally are called upon to "walk by faith, not by 
sight. "-2 Cor. 5:7. 

"IT IS HIS ANGEL!" 

"Are they [angels] not all ministering spirits 
sent forth to minister for them [unto those] who 
shall be heirs of salvation?" (Heb. 1:10.) Knowing the 
Apostle Peter to be one of the heirs of salvation, and 
never for a moment considering the possibility of his 
escape from prison, the brethren queried if their visitor 
might not be Peter's angel as his representative, 



come in answer to their prayers, to give them consolation. 
Soon, however, they realized that it was Peter 
himself, and afterward learned of his miraculous deliverance 
by the angel. 

Verse 17 implies that when the brethren realized 
that it was actually Peter who stood before them they 
were excited with joy, and would probably have created 
quite a commotion had not the Apostle beckoned 
to them with his hand that they should be quiet. 
Then calmly explaining to them his providential deliverance, 
and sending a message to James ("the 
Less") "the Lord's brother" or second cousin and to 
all the brethren, he at once left the place— left Jerusalem. 
When Peter and John were delivered from 
prison it was by the Lord's instruction that they went 
back to the Temple and continued to proclaim; but 
now, in the absence of any instruction from the Lord 
to the contrary, the Apostle wisely understood that 
his proper course, in co-operation with the Lord's 
providences, was that he should flee, that he should 
not put himself unnecessarily into danger, nor attempt 
to wage a warfare with the representative of 
the Roman government, trusting to further miraculous 
deliverances. 

We know some who would have been inclined, 
in Peter's place, to have made a great hurrah about 
the escape, and to have boasted that prison-walls 
and Roman soldiers were powerless against the Lord; 
and who, perhaps, would have gone the length of daring 
the king to arrest them again. But we believe 
such a course would not have been the will of the 
Lord, and that Peter evidently took the proper course. 
This suggestion may be valuable to some of the 
Lord's people. This is the time in which "the prince 
of this world" is permitted to maintain his general 
control; and we are to expect miraculous deliverances 
to be the exception rather than the rule, and are to 
act accordingly;— so far as lieth in us, preserving 
the peace, living peaceably with all men. Peter's conduct 
in not daring the king was not a manifestation of 
lack of confidence in divine power, but it was in obedience 
to the Master's words, "When they shall persecute 
you in one city flee ye to another." The persecution 
had reached him personally; he had been delivered 
from it, and now was his time to flee to another 
place, where doubtless, the Lord had other work for 
him to do. Let us be prompt in following a similar 
course in proportion as our circumstances correspond. 
When the persecution gets too severe, cry to 
the Lord for help, and if he opens a door of deliverance 
flee to another place or condition, where, with 
equal boldness and courage and faith you will, as before, 
lift high the royal banner. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT. 



It is comparatively easy for us to associate our 
Golden Text with Peter and his deliverance, and with 
ourselves in instances of peculiar assistance from the 
Lord in our affairs, temporal or spiritual; but it is 
much more difficult for us to associate it with the experiences 
of the Apostle James and with our own experiences, 
in which disasters, difficulties and fiery 
trials are permitted to come upon us. Such experiences 
are doubtless sent of the Lord for the development 
and testing of our faith. The Lord's providential 
care was none the less in the case of James, 
and we may be sure that nothing happened to him 
contrary to divine intention and permission; and so 
with ourselves; we may be sure, not only that the 
Lord knoweth them that are his, but sure also that 
"Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his 
saints," and that he "will not suffer us to be tempted 
above that we are able, but will with the temptation 
provide also a way of escape." In James' case the "escape" 
was final and decisive, in Peter's it was 
temporary. 

Our trials and difficulties are not, therefore, to be 
esteemed as the results of divine carelessness in respect 
to our interests, but as the outworkings of divine 
providence for our good. Those who are able to view 
the matter from this standpoint are thus enabled to 
learn some of the very best and most helpful of life's 
lessons, and are thereby prepared for the glorious 
things coming; whereas those who allow faith to falter 
in times of trial, and who will walk with the Lord and 
have confidence in him only when they are the recipients 
of miraculous favors, are correspondingly weak, 
and correspondingly unprepared for the Kingdom. 
And as these lessons are necessary to the individual, 
so they are necessary also to the Church as a whole, 
as in the case of James and the Church in our lesson. 
So far as James was concerned, it could matter little 
to him which way the Lord effected his "escape" if, 
in the Lord's wisdom, he had finished his course, 
perfected his character and stood the test. As for the 
Church, it could learn an important lesson; viz., that 
God, while pleased to use the Apostles and various 
agencies in the prosecution of his work, was not at all 
dependent upon them, but that one or all of them 
could be dropped out, and yet the Lord be thoroughly 
competent to manage his own work and to accomplish 
all the gracious promises of his Word. 

R3007 : page 138 

"THY WILL BE DONE!" 



My Lord, thy will not mine be done: 

Whatever path thy love shall choose for me, 



Through desert sands, or if beside the sea,— 
Thy will be done! 

Oh, may thy will in me be done! 

Should "harvest" labor be for me thy will, 
Or if I may but suffer and be still,— 
Thy will be done! 

My Father, let thy will be done: 

If sweet the Cup thou pourest for me to drink, 
I'll praise thee; but, if bitter, I'll not shrink,— 
Thy will be done! 

Forever may thy will be done: 

I would not choose, I leave it all with thee,— 
The pilgrimage, if short or long it be,— 
Thy will be done! 

-G. W. Seibert. 



R3004 : page 138 

THE EARLY CHRISTIAN MISSIONARIES. 

-ACTS 13:1-12.-MAY 18, 1902.- 

"Go ye therefore, and teach all nations."— Matt. 28:19. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT is aptly illustrated in 

this lesson. Our Lord's commission* was 

not, as some have supposed, a command 

to convert the world, nor is there any suggestion anywhere 

in the Scriptures that the preaching of the gospel 

was with such an end in view. Quite to the contrary, 

every intimation of our Lord's parables illustrating 

the subject, and all of the words of the apostles, 

were to the effect that at the end of the age, at 

the second coming of Christ, he would not find faith 

predominating in the earth; he would not find God's 

will done on earth as in heaven; but he would find 

merely a little flock, selected from the world through 

the preaching of the truth. These would be made 

meet to be the Bride, the Lamb's wife, and joint-heir 

with him in the glorious Kingdom then to be established 

for the purpose of binding Satan, restraining 

evil, and causing truth and righteousness to fill the 

earth and bless all the nations.— Luke 18:8; 12:32; 

Rev. 20:1-3. 

The commission meant merely— You are no 
longer restricted to the Jews in preaching this Gospel 
of the Kingdom; you may now deliver it to all the 
world, every nation, so that "he that hath an ear" may 
hear— to the intent that a little flock, the elect, spiritual 
Israel, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar 



*The word "therefore" in this text, is omitted by the 
oldest Greek MS., the Sinaitic, and also by the Alexandrine. 

R3005 : page 138 

people, may be selected from all nations for future 

service in the Kingdom. In accord with this, 

our Lord's instruction, as related by Luke, says, "Repentance 

and remission of sins should be preached in 

his name unto all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." 

(Luke 24:47.) And again, as recorded in Acts 1:8, 

he said, "Ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem 

and in all Judea and in Samaria and unto the 

uttermost parts of the earth." The apostles evidently 

did not at first comprehend the scope of the 

Master's commission. They were ready enough to 

begin at Jerusalem; ready also, as we have seen, to 

extend the work throughout Judea; ready also when 

the Lord's providence so led, to preach to the Samaritans; 

but it required very special instructions for 

Peter to preach to the Gentiles also. As the Gospel 

was not intended to convert all of the Jews, but only 

to take from them a remnant while the rest were left 

blinded for a time, so, likewise, it was intended to take 

from amongst the Gentiles also only a remnant, 

so that the entire company of the elect of this age is 

properly termed "a little flock," to whom it is the 

Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom,— which 

Kingdom, it is also the Father's good pleasure, shall 

bless all the families of the earth. 

Antioch was the first church of believers, so far 
as we know, outside of Palestine— the first church 
amongst the Gentiles. Its members were probably 
chiefly Jews, and these chiefly foreign born. The 
Jews residing abroad doubtless appreciated the fact 
that amongst their Gentile neighbors were some of 
noble character, not less worthy of divine favor than 
were the Jews; and these doubtless would, on this 
account, the more quickly fall into line with the 
Lord's instruction and leading respecting the gospel 
—that it was thenceforth not for Jews exclusively, 
but for people of all nationalities who were in heart-readiness 
to receive it. 

A previous lesson showed us Barnabas and Paul 
meeting with the brethren at Antioch, for a considerable 
time, in the worship of the Lord and in the study 
of his Word. The result of these studies was to develop 
the Church as a whole, and to bring it to the 
point of considering and praying about means for the 
service of the truth— the spread of the Gospel. There 
were a number of prophets (public orators) and teachers 
in the Church, and evidently they began to think 
of how they might be used to the glory of God and 
to the blessing of others, as they themselves had been 



blessed by the truth. This is always the case with those 

who receive the truth into good and honest hearts. 

Properly enough, they desire to feed thereon themselves 

and to grow strong in the Lord, but just so 

surely as the truth is received, with its spirit, it gives a 

strength and a desire to use that strength. This is 

as true today as it was then: the consecration which 

the truth brings is identical with our begetting of 

the spirit; and the energy for service corresponds 

to the quickening of the spirit. 

We see a distinction drawn in our lesson between 
prophets and teachers. The Greek word rendered 
"prophet" signifies a "forth-teller." It might 
be understood to mean one who tells in advance, or 
foretells, or prophesies coming events; but in its general 
use in the New Testament the word seems to 
indicate one who tells forth, in the sense of proclaiming, 
giving public utterance to, or standing up before 
the people in declaration of the Lord's message. 
The distinction between prophets and teachers, as 
here used, seems to be that the former were persons 
of natural talent and ability for teaching the truth in 
a public manner, in orderly discourse, etc., while the 
teachers would be those possessing talent as instructors, 
but not necessarily in a public, or oratorical 

R3005 : page 139 

manner. The same distinctions are true today 
amongst the Lord's people; comparatively few have 
the qualifications for public speaking— for presenting 
an address in an orderly manner, that will be truly 
helpful to the hearers. Some others, who have not 
ability as public discoursers, have talent for presenting 
the truth in a less public manner, as in Bible 
studies, etc. 

It is for the Lord to supply the talents as he may 
deem best, and it is for each individual and the Church 
as a whole to utilize the talents of which they find 
themselves possessed. Little companies of the 
Lord's people are not to determine that they must 
have public preaching, and then endeavor to have 
it, good or bad. Rather, they are to seek to know 
the mind of the Lord on the subject, and to have such 
meetings as the Lord's providence may make possible 
and proper. If there be one or two or more 
brethren in the congregation who have the ability to 
teach— to conduct the services of the Church, and 
to draw out the brethren in questions and answers as 
a Bible class, in a Bible study, giving their own opinions 
with the others, the Church should seek to use 
such brethren in its services as they may consent. 
And if there be in the number one or more with talent 
for a public or connected presentation, in the nature 
of a discourse, let them also, if they will, be put into 
service. The object of the Church should, in every 



case, be to develop, to use, to exercise, all of its different 
members: each according to his ability and development, 
spiritual and natural. 

It would be specially unfortunate if any companies 
of the Lord's people whom he had brought 
into the light of present truth should become ensnared 
with the wrong views and wrong practices of 
the nominal church systems, so as to consider public 
preaching (prophesying) the only proper and satisfactory 
service. Rather, let us remember to look 
for the various members whom the Lord shall set in 
the body and endeavor to use all of them. (I Cor. 12.) 
We will find that he sets many more teachers 
than prophets, orators; and we will find that our blessing, 
as little companies of his people, will be greater 
in proportion as we note the Lord's providences and 
fall in line with them. We trust that the new Bibles 
will prove very helpful in this respect— in enabling 
many to teach— to lead meetings— to draw out the 
thoughts of the brethren— to present before their 
minds the Word of the Lord and the true understanding 
of the same. The Topical Index will be found 
very helpful too we trust. 

The Church at Antioch evidently had an over-supply 
of teachers, as compared to its own requirements; 
but having the proper spirit in the matter, desiring 
to accomplish as large results in the Lord's service 
as possible, the brethren had no thought of 
crushing out or holding down any who manifested 
ability for the Lord's service. On the contrary, they 
began to look about them for larger fields of usefulness. 
They were uncertain regarding the course they 
should pursue, and hence looked to the Lord as the 
real Head and guide in the Church's affairs. They 
served and they fasted, and we may be sure that they 
prayed also; and as a result they came to the conclusion 
to send forth two of their number— Barnabas 
and Paul— as representatives of the whole in mission 
work. We are not informed in what manner the 
Lord directed them to this. It is possible that it was 
after the same manner that we today, under similar 
circumstances, considering such a case, would 
say— We believe, after studying the Scriptures and 
praying, and seeking to know the mind of the Lord, 
that it would be his will that such ones of our number 
should go out for a public service of the truth. 
We believe that we are guided to this conclusion, not 
by any wrong spirit of pride or fond ambition to have 
the name of sending out missionaries, nor with any 
mercenary motive,— but that we are actuated by the 
spirit of the truth, the spirit of Christ, the holy spirit, 
in this determination,— that our motives are sincere. 
We believe that we have the Lord's mind on the subject; 
we believe that it is the Lord's will that we as 
a congregation should send forth these two as representatives 
of our number, to carry the light to others. 



In this manner, or in some manner, the conviction 
came strongly to the entire Church at Antioch 
that this was its duty and its privilege. It is worthy of 
note, too, that it sought out its very best for this service 
—thus letting the spirit of self-sacrifice prevail. 
They still had Simeon Niger and Lucius and Menaen, 
talented brethren, and the latter one of considerable 
worldly standing and influence, tho evidently an aged 
man— foster-brother to Herod Antipas. But none 
of these remaining were the equals of Paul and Barnabas. 
This liberal disposition on the part of the 
Church is worthy of praise, and we are sure brought 
to it a large measure of the Lord's blessing. Not 
that we should be reckless of the interests of the home 
congregation in serving others, so as to leave ourselves 
destitute; but in making our sacrifices to the 
Lord and his service we are to seek to give of the best 
we have. No doubt the Lord blessed the Church correspondingly, 
and made up to them the loss sustained 
in the giving of these two brethren to the mission 
work. No doubt the other members of the congregation 
were all the more energized, stimulated, brought 
forward in activity, and made the more useful. 

The proper course decided upon, the congregation 
fasted and prayed and laid their hands on Paul 
and Barnabas, and sent them on their missionary 
tour with their blessing and God-speed. In our 
practical time some of us may be inclined to pay too 
little heed to incidentals of this kind; there might 
be today too much disposition amongst us to take a 
vote on what we believed to be the Lord's will, and 
to shake hands with the brethren, and say "Goodbye," 
without the fasting and praying and imposition 
of hands. We would be inclined to ask, What good 
would these things do? What purpose would they 
serve? They would do good to all; they would serve 
to impress upon all— the missionaries starting and 
the brethren remaining— the importance of the 
Lord's service, and the fact that those who remained 
were having a share with those who went. The laying 
on of hands would probably be done by the congregation, 
through the other representatives or 
Elders. But this proceeding did not signify, as is 
generally understood today, an "Ordination;" for 
the Apostle Paul and Barnabas had been recognized 
in the Church at Antioch for a considerable time as 
amongst their principal prophets and teachers. It 
would not signify authority to preach, as Ordination 

R3006 : page 140 

sometimes means today amongst Christians of various 
sects and parties. It simply meant that— We, 
the congregation, by this laying on of hands of our 
representative Elders, are sending forth these two 
men, Paul and Barnabas, on a missionary tour; and 



that they go, not only as the representatives of the 
Lord, and as representatives of themselves, but also 
as representatives of the Church of the Lord at Antioch, 
and as such we hold ourselves responsible for 
their maintenance. We will supply them the needful 
assistance, and thus will be co-laborers with them,— 
sharers in their labors, sympathizers with them in 
their difficulties and trials, helpers of them in their 
necessities, and partakers with them also in whatever 
results shall come to the Lord's praise through 
their efforts. Accordingly, we find that after this 
missionary tour the two brethren returned to Antioch, 
and made report. It would appear that subsequently 
the Apostle Paul, at least, travelled without 
any such dependence upon the Church at Antioch, 
—without any such praying and laying on of hands, 
and without any subsequent reports of results of labors, 
— tho still in love and in sympathy with them, so 
far as we may judge. 

The nature of the praying offered in connection 
with the sending forth of the missionaries we can 
readily imagine;— they were, doubtless, prayers for 
the Lord's blessing upon them, for their guidance, for 
their support and strengthening, and that their journey 
might be profitable and to the Lord's praise. 
But why the fasting? says one. What advantage 
could accrue from fasting at such a time? We answer 
that the Lord and the apostles and prophets 
have all set us an example in the matter of fasting. 
It is claimed, no doubt with truth, that many people 
overeat, and that restraints in the matter of diet would 
be profitable to them physically and mentally and 
morally, without any reference whatever to its being 
a sacrifice or oblation unto the Lord. No doubt 
this is true, yet it is for each person to decide for himself 
as to what would be the proper amount and kind 
of food for him— best calculated to help him in spiritual 
matters, that his time and talent and influence 
may count as largely as possible for the Lord's praise 
and for his own spiritual progress. We remind our 
readers again that there are other appetites besides 
those for food and drink which may properly be considered 
in connection with this matter of fasting— all 
the various desires of the flesh need restraining, and 
such self-restraint and the bringing of our minds, our 
thoughts, our words, our conduct and our food under 
such restraints as will be most beneficial to us as new 
creatures in Christ, is the very essence and spirit of 
true fasting, and such fasting will surely bring a 
blessing and permit a closer approach to the Lord 
and a keener realization of his love and favor. 

Luke, the narrator, keeps prominently before us 
the fact that these two missionaries were not sent 
forth regardless of the Lord's will, but by the holy 
spirit— however the Lord's mind may have been ascertained. 
We believe that it was ascertained by 



a vote of the Church; that the Church, having come 
into the attitude of harmony with God, through 
prayer, fasting, consecration, etc., was possessed of 
the holy spirit, and that to such a degree that their 
action would properly be considered the action of the 
holy spirit through them. 

The missionaries went from Antioch, a distance 
of eighteen miles, to the seaport town of Seleucia, 
where they took ship for the nearest large city in the 
Island of Cyprus. It was probably as good a place to 
begin as any, and had the advantage of being the 
home country of Barnabas, who would be familiar 
with the dialect of the people, their customs, etc. 

John Mark, the writer of the Gospel by Mark, 
cousin of Barnabas, and son of one of the Marys at 
Jerusalem (Acts 12:12,25), is noted as being their 
minister, attendant servant, and this, together with 
the fact that he was not sent out by the Church as 
a missionary with the others, shows us clearly that 
while all brethren are to be very highly esteemed as 
brethren this does not signify that they have all one 
office or one work. It is the same lesson which the 
apostle inculcates in I Cor. 12, saying, "If the whole 
body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the 
whole were hearing, where were the smelling? But 
now hath God set the members every one of them in 
the body, as it hath pleased him." The eye serves the 
hand in some respects; the hand serves the eye in 
other respects; the foot serves both in still other respects, 
and both hand and eye serve the foot. 
The lesson here is that each of us should seek to find 
the position in which the Lord is pleased to have us 
and to use us, and finding this we are to exercise ourselves 
therein as best we are able;— continuing, if the 
will of God be such, to abide in that condition and 
service forever, and thankful for the privilege of serving 
the body of Christ in any capacity. In the Lord's 
providence, however, those who serve faithfully in the 
humbler positions of service are very apt to be advanced 
to some still greater and more important 
service. Nevertheless, it is not for us to cultivate 
ambitions, with their accompanying spirit of envy; 
but to say rather, 

"Content whatever lot I see 

Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 

If the Lord opens before us more important 
doors of service, and we are sure that the opening is 
of him, we are to go forward rejoicing in his service 
in any capacity, and confident of a blessing in return. 

Altho these brethren, Paul and Barnabas, fully 
appreciated the fact that Gentiles might now have access 
to the blessings of the Gospel, nevertheless, in 
every place they entered into the synagogues of the 
Jews; because the Jews who already believed Moses 
and the prophets, and who already expected Messiah, 
would necessarily be in a much better attitude of 



mind to receive their message, than would be the Gentiles, 

who had no knowledge of such matters, and 

who, therefore, would have to approach the subject 

more gradually, and would require more instruction. 

Indeed, we may suppose that the larger proportion of 

converts made between the time of our Lord's resurrection 

and the fall of Jerusalem, A.D. 70, were 

made amongst the Jews, and that comparatively few 

Gentiles accepted Christ up to that time. Even tho 

the door was open for them, still we are to remember 

that only those who had the hearing ear could 

hear the message; that only those with the anointed 

sight could see and appreciate the open door. 

R3006 :page 141 

Similarly, now, in the end of this Gospel age, the 
work is chiefly with Christians— it is a harvest work. 
As Paul and Barnabas went chiefly to the synagogues, 
so we today are to go chiefly to the churches. 
As they found in the synagogues a few ready to 
receive their message, so we today find a few in the 
churches who are prepared to receive the truth as 
it is now shining in the Lord's Word. The majority, 
now as then, are deeply immersed in formalism, and 
draw nigh to the Lord with their lips when their 
hearts are far from him, set upon the cares of this 
life, or filled with endeavors to attain riches, or fame 
or something. We today are at a disadvantage in 
that the sects of Christendom and their synagogues 
are determinedly shut against the Gospel of the Kingdom; 
whereas, in the apostle's day there was access 
and an opportunity, at least, for the presentation of 
the truth. Now, even our attempt to speak to the 
sheep, through the printed page, on the outside of their 
synagogues would be resisted;— if the laws of the 
world would permit it there would be no opportunity 
for even handing a tract or a paper to our dear brethren, 
whom we long to help into the glorious light 
of present truth, which has done so much for us. 

The missionary tour consumed probably considerable 
time, as the three went from village to village, 
preaching Christ, until they reached the city 
of Paphos, at the far end of the island. We are not 
to suppose they made many converts. What they did 
do was to witness to the truth;— here and there finding 
an "Israelite indeed" who would have an "ear" 
and receive a blessing. At Paphos they found Sergius 
Paulus, a man of good judgment, the governor 
of the island, procurator or representative of the Roman 
Senate. He had a hearing ear even before the 
apostles got there, and the Adversary, noting this, 
was at work upon him through one of his servants, 
Elymas, a sorcerer or magician, who had already ingratiated 
himself with the proconsul and gained considerable 
influence, and was esteemed his friend. We 



are not to wonder that a man of sound judgment, as 
the proconsul is represented to have been, should be 
so interested in the magician and his doings. We 
are to remember, on the contrary, that similarly there 
are some men of ability today who are to some extent 
under the influence of the same Adversary and 
his bewitching agents— spirit mediums. Besides, 
the magicians in olden times were a compound or 
mixture of scientists and miracle workers, and usually 
very bright men. 

When the proconsul heard something respecting 
the teachings of Paul and Barnabas he sent for them, 
desiring to know more. Then came a conflict between 
the powers of light and the powers of darkness, 
between the truth and the error. There is no harmony 
between the two, there can be no partnership; 
they are opponents at every point; and so in this case, 
as soon as the magician discovered that the proconsul 
was coming under the influence of the truth, he 
used his every power to dissuade him, to turn him 
from the doctrines— doubtless by misrepresentation, 
which is one of the Adversary's most common methods; 

R3007 :page 141 

perhaps also by slander, back-biting, evil speaking, 
which are works of the flesh and of the devil, but 
never works of the Lord or prompted by his spirit. 

This furnished the occasion for a remarkable 
manifestation of divine power through the Apostle 
Paul, who denounced the magician, and pronounced 
upon him, in the name of the Lord, a curse, that is, 
a blight— blindness for a time. We are not to understand 
that such power and authority belong to us, 
or the Lord's people in general; nor did it belong even 
to Barnabas. Paul was chosen of the Lord to be an 
apostle— to take the place of Judas— and the power of 
discerning spirits and of restraining them was accordingly 
his. It was appropriate that some such manifestation 
of divine power should be given at the beginning 
of this age, not only for the establishment of 
the truth then, and thus the establishment of the 
believers of that time, but also for the establishment 
and information of all the household of faith from 
then until now. 

The Apostle upbraided the magician by a plain 
statement of his case— that he was full of cunning and 
deceit and villainy; that the spirit operating in him 
was not the spirit of God but the spirit of the Adversary 
of God, and that therefore he was an enemy 
of all that was right and true, and seeking to pervert 
the right ways of the Lord; and that as a punishment 
the hand of the Lord (not the hand of Paul)— the 
judgment of the Lord— was upon him; and that he 
would become so blind that he could not even see 
the light of the sun for a time. The blindness came 



upon him gradually, first a mistiness, which 
subsequently settled into complete darkness. 

We are not to think of the apostle as pronouncing 
this sentence in any harsh attitude of mind. We 
believe, on the contrary, that he was full of sympathetic 
interest and kindly desire for the wrong doer, 
hoping that the result of his experiences would be 
profitable to him. Doubtless Paul remembered his 
own case, and what blessing had come to him when 
he was smitten with blindness, and doubtless he 
hoped for the magician a similar recognition of the 
Lord and similarly the opening of the eyes of his 
understanding, as well as of his natural eyes. 

This manifestation of the Lord's power was convincing 
to the deputy (proconsul)— not that this incident 
converted him, but that having already heard 
the teachings, and being in the process of comparing 
these, in his judgment contrasting them with his previous 
views, and with the presentation of Elymas, 
he was enabled, by this incident, to reach the right 
conclusion; and to decide his matters on the Lord's side. 

It would be difficult to find an exact parallel to 
this in our experiences. The nearest approach probably 
would be when the truth comes in conflict with 
the error, when the sword of the spirit, wielded by 
some of the Lord's simple followers, proves mighty 
in the overthrow of error; when the light of present 
truth, and the clearness with which it is presented, 
and the beauty in which it can be seen and appreciated, 
is contrasted with the error, the result is either 
that the truth is seen in its beauty, or the erring one 
opposing it becomes more densely blinded than before. 
But only for a season, let us hope; the time is 
near at hand when the great Deliverer, in his Millennial 
Kingdom, shall not only restrain the great Adversary, 
but spoil all of his house, overthrowing all 
the works of evil, and opening the blinded eyes and 
permitting all to see out of the obscurity of sin and 
darkness and misconception and prejudice. 



page 142 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

All that I can do is to thank you very sincerely for 
your kindness to me during the last three years in 
sending me copies of all the good things which you 
have been giving to the world. 

Looking back over the past, I do not see how I 
could have gotten along without them. 

For 45 years, including boyhood, I could find no 



"Bible Story" that satisfied me: whichever way I 

turned I found an incomplete gospel. I was so constituted 

that I could believe nothing that was not 

complete and rational,— fitted to my intellectual capacity. 

I believed that God's words of guidance and admonition 
if for me would be that which I could understand. 
Many cardinal errors as preached and understood 
by many, called from me only indignant denials. 
I said, If it were for me I could understand it, 
and not be dodging around obstacles to my reason, 
in a vain effort to hold on and believe. 

You can imagine my eager and glad surprise when 
the 1st Vol. of "Millennial Dawn" came into my hands. 
I could take it up and read it 10 minutes or an hour 
at a time with the greatest satisfaction. It was a 
never failing satisfaction, very unlike any other book 
I ever read. I had read the Bible a great deal— and 
as I followed you along,— so calmly and dispassionately 
—each deduction so built up by quotations from 
the Bible, most of them being "old friends" of mine, 
and as I saw that you built nothing except on the 
"solid rock" the Word of God, I said, At last! At 
last I do understand! 

And so with great joy and comfort I am still following 
on— feasting on the truth day by day. I shall be 
72 years old on the 14th day of January, 1902. 

I am yours gratefully, 

F. B. Browne,— California. 



Dear Brother Russell:— Thank you very much for 
your welcome letter of the 4th. 

I had a good letter from a sister, who says of herself 
something very encouraging to me— that she read 
a little in the DAWNS for seven years before she became 
really interested. About a year or more ago, she and 
her husband left the Methodist Church in which both 
held prominent positions, and have been alone in the 
truth in their town since then, though she says others 
are partially interested. 

How very true is the suggestion in our last Sunday's 
lesson about our life here being to our Lord's life on 
earth as 1 to 100! I can easily see myself 99-hundredths 
dead as compared with a perfect human being; 
and yet how Christ hath sweetened the scrap of life I 
possess, so that it is full of blessing despite its enveloping 
and pressing and constant limitations. Such a 
poor little scrap as to be quite despicable in the eyes 
of worldly health and healthy mental quickness and 
strength, yet how far I am from being willing to exchange 
with any one else! Once in a while I realize 
how my old friends stand aloof and former acquaintances 
have forgotten me, and feel like protesting with 
a bit of indignation, Why, I'm not dead! And then 
I recollect that I am dead, with Christ, and that hence 



am privileged to live with Christ, as I look up and 
give thanks to be in Him. And I often think of even 
Emerson's words "No man ever yet stated his griefs 
as lightly as he might;" so if he could say that, it is 
much more true of the little flock. Who can so easily 
afford to lose earthly friends as we who have tasted 
of the heavenly friendship! And besides, our loss is 
but temporary, maybe only in appearance now. The 
Lord is able and willing and glad to be our all, in all, 
and fills our needs better than everything else could do. 
Your Sister in Christ, 

Alice L. Darlington,— Pennsylvania. 



Dear Brother Russell: I have been reading the 
"Dawns" and "Towers" for over three years, and have 
never written to thank you; but I can assure you they 
have been appreciated, and have established us in the 
precious faith. I am a widow and advanced in years; 
have been a member of the Baptist Church for 
twenty-five years, but am now excluded, with fourteen 
others for advocating the "Millennial Dawn" 
doctrines. Dear brethren I am so glad that God has 
given me "ears to hear" the good tidings of great joy. 
I have been loaning my "Watch Towers" to all that 
had ears to hear that I could supply. 
Yours truly, 
Mrs. J. E. Cox,— Tennessee. 



page 143 

REDUCED WHOLESALE RATES ON 

New and Old Silver Texts and Tablets. 

Boldly Stamped in Silver on Light or Dark Ground, with Cord for Hanging. 

These Silver Texts and Tablets are of choice designs and excellent 
finish. As Decorations for the Home they are tasteful and very 
praise-inspiring. They constantly remind us of the better 
things and assist us in "overcoming the world and its spirit." 

These texts are often hung in pairs, and as text thus answers 
to text, the power of each to suggest helpful and 
inspiring thoughts is markedly increased. 

As single texts are more likely to receive damage in the mails than 
are quantities, we recommend that friends send their orders together, when 
practicable to do so. Besides the advantage already mentioned, postage 
expenses are decreased by this method. 

Extra postage on single texts will be as stated in the list, but on orders 
amounting to 50c. the extra postage will be 10c; on $1.00 lots the extra 
postage 



will be 10c; on lots valued above $1.00 add extra postage at the rate of 16c. 
to the $1.00. 

The 15c. texts are offered at 2 for 25c, Postage extra 8c; the 8c texts 
at 2 for 15c, Postage extra 5c; the 3c texts at 2 for 5c, Postage extra 2c 
Order by number and letter; do not write out the text. Please name your second 
choice, peradventure your first be out of stock. All orders will be filled as 
accurately as possible. 

As limited space does not permit us to describe all the beautiful mottoes 
that we have in stock, we propose to make up 
EXTRA VALUE PACKAGES, Postpaid for $1.16, 

which we feel sure will commend themselves to our friends, for they would 
contain 
more than you could include in a package of your own assortment at this price. 

These texts occupy valuable space and are more or less a care, but the 
desirability of having such reminders of the grace of God in the homes seems to 
indicate that we should keep a stock on hand; and this we will do, not looking 
for profit in handling them, but seeking the spiritual welfare of the Lord's 
flock. 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, BIBLE HOUSE, ALLEGHENY, PA. 

For prices of these texts in Great Britain, please apply to the Society's 
British Branch, 131 Green St., Forest Gate, London. 

No. 1. NEW TABLETS 16x10. 

VERY BRIGHT. 25c EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 8c 

a Walk in Love, as Christ also hath loved us. 

b As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. 

c He that overcometh shall inherit all things. 

d The Beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety. 

No. 3. MOTTO FOR HOMES 16 x 10. 

DISTINCT LETTERING. 25c EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 8c 

Christ is the Head of this House, the Unseen Guest 
at every meal, the Silent Listener to every Conversation. 

No. 3a. SAME WORDS AS IN NO. 3 10-1/2x8-1/2. 
15c EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c 

No. 5. CONFIDENCE AND STRENGTH 13x8. 
15c EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c 

a Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? 
b In quietness and confidence shall be your strength, 
c Rest in the Lord, wait patiently for Him. 

No. 7. SCRIPTURE SCREENS 18-1/4x8-1/4. 

THREE-FOLD, TO STAND ON MANTEL. 25c EACH. POSTAGE 8c 

a Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to-day and forever. 

Casting all your anxiety upon Him, because He careth for you. 
b Consider how great things the Lord hath done for you. 

I have called thee by thy name, thou art Mine. 

No. 8. THE CHRISTIAN'S DESIRE 1 1-1/2 x 8-1/2. 
15c EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c 
LORD JESUS make Thyself to me 

A living bright reality! 
More present to FAITH'S vision keen 



Than any outward object seen— 
More dear, more intimately nigh, 
Than e'en the sweetest earthly tie. 

No. 9. RULES FOR TODAY 11-1/2 x 8-1/2. 

SAME STYLE AS NO. 8. 15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

No. 10. CAMEO SERIES A 12-3/4x8-1/4. 

RAISED CAMEO TEXTS. 15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Serve Him with all your heart. 

b My God shall supply all your need. 

No. 1 1. CAMEO SERIES B 8-1/2 x 6. 

8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

a Kept by the power of God. 

b The Lord Bless thee and Keep thee. 

c The Love of Christ constraineth us. 

d My grace is sufficient for thee. 

No. 13. LARGE SHIELDS 12-1/2x9-1/2. 

15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Behold, I have graven thee on the palms of My Hands. 

b As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. 

c Be strong in the Lord and in the power of His might. 

d Mine eyes shall see the King in His Beauty. 

e The Beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety. 

f When He giveth quietness, who then can make trouble. 

No. 14. PRECIOUS WORDS 8-1/4x10-1/4. 

BOLD LETTERING, WITH FLOWERS IN COLORS. 

15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Justified freely by His Grace. 

b He will abundantly pardon. 

c Able to keep you from falling. 

d Christ hath redeemed us. 

e Jesus Himself drew near. 

f We dwell in Him and He in us. 

No. 15. SMALL TABLETS 13x8. 
15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord, 
b Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and forever, 
c Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely, 
d All things work together for good to them that love God. 

No. 16. ROYAL BANNERS 8 x 9-1/2. 
10c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 4c. 

a In all thy ways acknowledge Him. 
b He knoweth the way that I take, 
c I will trust and not be afraid, 
d My Grace is sufficient for thee. 

No. 17. GOSPEL TRUTHS 13 x 8. 

15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved. 

b Draw nigh to God and He will draw nigh to thee. 



c Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. 

d Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out. 

e Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, I will give you rest. 

f The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin. 

No. 18. 12-1/2x6-1/4. 

15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a God hath given to us Eternal Life. 

b My Grace is sufficient for thee. 

c The Lord will go before you. 

d He knoweth the way that I take. 

e Bear ye one another's burdens. 

f He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God. 

No. 19. EMMANUEL 13 x 6-1/2. 

LARGE LETTERS. 15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Mighty to Save. 

b He faileth not. 

c Jesus Only. 

d Praise the Lord. 

e God Bless our Home. 

f Lovest thou Me? 

g Abide with Me. 

No. 20. KING'S MESSAGES 10-3/4x6-1/2. 
UNIQUE DESIGN. 10c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 4c. 
a Abide in Me. 
b Mighty to Save, 
c He Faileth Not. 
d God is Love, 
e He leadeth me. 
f Jesus only. 

No. 21. STRENGTH AND COMFORT 9-1/2 x 7. 

LARGE LETTERS, HANDSOME SCROLL AND FLORAL BORDER. 

10c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 4c. 

a God Himself is with us. 

b He careth for you. 

c Ye belong to Christ. 

d Trust in the Living God. 

e Kept by the power of God. 

f The Lord is my Shepherd. 

page 144 

No. 22. JEWELS A 17-1/2 x 12. 

LIGHT BACKGROUND, LARGE LETTERING, ELEGANT. 

25c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 8c. 

a As thy Days so shall thy Strength be. 

b The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil. 

c I can do all things through Christ. 

d The Lord knoweth them that are His. 

No. 24. JEWELS B 12x8-7/8. 

SIMILAR TO No. 22. 15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Kept by the power of God. 



b The Lord is my helper, 
c God Himself is with us. 
d Our sufficiency is of God. 

No. 25. REDEMPTION 10-1/4x7-3/4. 

LIGHT GROUND. BRIGHT DESIGNS. 8c. EACH. POSTAGE, 3c. 

a The Gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ, 
b Behold, now is the day of Salvation, 
c Jesus Christ.. .Who gave Himself for me. 
d We have redemption through His Blood. 

No. 26. SHEPHERD'S CARE 8-1/2x5-3/4. 

APPROPRIATE FOR THE YOUNG. 

5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a Lead me in Thy truth and teach me. 

b He shall gather the Lambs with His arm. 

c Suffer the little children to come unto Me. 

d Commit thy way unto the Lord. 

No. 27. LIFE ABUNDANT 8-1/2x5-3/4. 

SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF CHRIST. 

5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a Jesus said: If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink. 

b Jesus said: Lo, I am with you alway. 

c Jesus said: Have faith in God. 

d Jesus said: I am come that they might have life. 

No. 28. FANS 10 x 6-1/2. 

STRIKING AND ARTISTIC. 

10c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 4c. 

a Be not weary in well-doing. 

b God hath power to help. 

c My peace I give unto you. 

d Very great are His mercies. 

No. 29. HELPFUL WORDS 12x4-1/2. 

CUT-OUT DESIGNS. 8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

a MIGHTY TO SAVE. He giveth power to the faint. 

b HE FAILETH NOT. He shall save His people. 

c FOLLOW HIS STEPS. His way is perfect. 

d REST IN THE LORD. Be quiet, fear not. 

e REJOICE IN HIM. My heart shall rejoice. 

f GOD IS FAITHFUL. We trust in the living God. 

No. 30. SURE CONFIDENCE 10 x 5-1/4. 

8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

a The Lord shall be thy confidence. 

b Your Father knoweth what things ye have need of. 

c His children shall have a place of refuge. 

d Trust in the Lord with all thine heart. 

e Certainly, I will be with thee. 

f Let not your heart be troubled. 

No. 31. TODAY POEM 6-3/4x5. 
8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 



No. 32. WHEN TO TRUST 6-3/4 x 5. 
VERSE CARDS. 12 CHOICE MOTTOES. 
8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 
MY TIMES ARE IN THY HAND 
He knows and loves and cares. 

Nothing this truth can dim: 
He gives His very best to those 

Who leave the choice to Him. 
K. 
No. 33. GARLANDS 8-1/2x4-3/4. 

WITH DECORATED BORDER. 8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 
a Not I, but Christ, 
b By Faith ye Stand, 
c God is my Salvation, 
d What would Jesus do? 
e He careth for you. 
f Emmanuel, God with us. 

No. 34. VERY CHOICE FANS 9 x 4-3/4. 

CHOICE, ENGRAVED BORDER. 8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

4 CHOICE MOTTOES. 

No. 35. WORDS OF LOVE 13x5. 

EXCELLENT VALUE. 

8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

a The Lord Himself is my keeper. 

b Serve the Lord with gladness. 

c Christ in you the hope of glory. 

d Fear not, I will help thee. 

No. 36. SMALL FANS 7-3/4x4-1/2. 

SUITABLE FOR VASES. 5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

SIX CHOICE MOTTOES. 

No. 37. WONDROUS WORDS 8-1/2x6-1/2. 

8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

a The Lord shall guide thee continually. 

b The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety. 

c His children shall have a place of refuge. 

d Saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation. 

No. 38. HELPS BY THE WAY 7x5. 

5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a Wait on the Lord and keep His way. 

b In all thy ways acknowledge Him. 

c The Lord knoweth the way of the righteous. 

d Teach me thy way, O Lord. 

e I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. 

f Commit thy way unto the Lord. 

No. 39. MEDIUM SHIELDS 6 x 8-1/2. 

5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a Your life is hid with Christ, etc. 

b It is God that girdeth me, etc. 

c Shew me Thy way, O Lord, etc. 

d Come unto Me, and I will give you rest. 



e I am the Way, etc. 

f Casting all your care upon Him, etc. 

No. 40. GLEANINGS 7-3/4x5. 

5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. 

b My refuge is in God. 

c Fear not.. The Lord will be with thee. 

d Cast thy burden upon the Lord. 

e The Lord knoweth them that are His. 

f Fear not. .He will not fail thee. 

No. 41. GOOD TIDINGS 9x3-1/2. 

LARGE, PLAIN LETTERS. 5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

TWELVE CHOICE MOTTOES. 

No. 42. GRACIOUS PROMISES 7x5. 

FLORAL DESIGN. 5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

SIX CHOICE MOTTOES. 

No. 43. SHINING LIGHT 6-1/2x4-3/4. 

SILVER BACKGROUND. 5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a Watch and pray. 

b Christ died for us. 

c God is Love. 

d Seek ye the Lord. 

e He is our Peace. 

fThy Will be done. 

No. 44. SUNBEAMS 5-1/2x8-1/2. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

a All for Jesus. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith. 

b As thy days so shall thy strength be. 

c The Almighty shall be thy defence. 

d Ye are My witnesses, said the Lord. 

e Do all to the glory of God. 

f Thou art mine. 

No. 45. GOLDEN WORDS 6x4. 

STAMPED IN GOLD. FLORAL. EIGHT CHOICE MOTTOES. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

The Lord will bless His people with Peace. 

No. 46. NEW RUSTIC SERIES 5-3/4 x 4. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

a The Eternal God is thy refuge. 

b The Lord is my Defence. 

c Lord teach us to pray. 

d Lo! I am with thee alway. 

e Walk as children of light. 

f God knoweth your hearts. 

No. 47. FRUITFUL SERVICE 5x5. 
3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 
a Bring forth fruit unto God. 
b God is a refuge for us. 



c The Lord is my portion, 
d From Me is thy fruit found, 
e Abide in My love, 
f Christ hath made us free. 

No. 48. GEMS 5-1/4x4. 

LANDSCAPES. 3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

TWELVE CHOICE MOTTOES. 

No. 49. RUBIES 6-1/2x3-3/4. 

SIX CHOICE MOTTOES. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

GOD FIRST That in all things He might have the Pre-eminence. 

No. 50. GOSPEL GEMS 6-1/2x3-3/4. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

a Whosoever will, let him taste the water of Life freely. 

b Whoso trusteth in the Lord, happy is he. 

c He that believeth on the Son hath Everlasting Life. 

d By Grace are ye saved through faith. 

e The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon Him. 

f We have redemption through His blood. 

No. 51. SCROLLS 5-1/2x4. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

a Ye belong to Christ. 

b God is Faithful. 

c My Refuge is in God. 

d He careth for you. 

e What would Jesus do? 

f Thou God seest me. 



page 145 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. MAY 15, 1902. No. 10. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 147 

Science Falsely so Called 147 

Who is on the Lord's Side? 147 

Rejected for Unbelief 148 

"The Extinction of Adam" 148 

The Meaning of Europe's 

Great Armies 148 

The Gospel of Forgiveness of Sins 149 

Good Friday and the Mass 151 

Enduring Hardness as Good Soldiers 152 

The Memorial Supper Celebrated 155 

The New Bibles Thoroughly 

Appreciated 158 



page 146 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



DAWNS AND TRACTS IN QUANTITIES. 



The Postoffice ruling interfering with what we claim are our 
legal rights in respect to mailing our paper-bound editions of 
the MILLENNIAL DAWN at newspaper rates, as for years past, has 
led some of the friends to join together, and by giving a united 
order for one hundred DAWNS to get them by freight. We commend 
this plan, and will supply them thus to WATCH TOWER 
subscribers for $10.00 per hundred, any assortment. 

Remember, that our subscribers under our new arrangement 
can send to a friend, post-paid, any volume of DAWN in cloth 
binding, for 25c. No other similar books are supplied at such 
prices— nor, indeed, at any price; and the book in cloth cover 
will make a more favorable impression than in a paper cover. 
Tracts may be ordered in the same box if convenient;— free. 

VOLUNTEER ARRANGEMENTS. 



By this time nearly all who have responded to our call are 
supplied with the new "ammunition;" use up first any old 
ammunition you may have on hand, but expect no more of it. 

We find that some have not understood our object in sending 
out two kinds this time. It is not the thought to give each person 
the two papers, but the very reverse. As people usually 
leave churches in family groups, the distribution of one paper 



to each is apt to put two alike into many homes; our desire is 
that, if possible, they shall be different. 

Our suggestion therefore is, that the captains see to it that 
each bundle (consisting of equal quantities of February 15 and 
March 15 WATCH TOWERS) is thoroughly reassorted so that the 
two papers can be handed out alternately. Let each "volunteer" 
see to this and assist also. We have plenty now; order 
all you can use judiciously. 

Again we urge that in the distribution you do not go inside 
the churches, nor stand upon their steps;— if possible not even 
on the public pavement in their front. It is better rather, where 
possible, to stand 100 feet or more away from their exits. 



R3007 : page 147 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
SCIENCE FALSELY SO CALLED. 



WE ARE GLAD to note that the Richmond 
Christian Advocate is not yet ready to repudiate 
God's Word and accept the theory of 
evolution. 

We agree that scientists who deal in millions and 
billions of years evidently forget the meaning of the 
word "science." We clip from its issue of March 6 
the following:— 

"THE ORIGIN OF MAN. 

"We had hoped that after the repeated failures to find 
the missing link in the chain of evolution the advocates of 
that theory would be less bold and positive in their assertions. 
True science is always cautious in its statements. 
Its teachings are supposed to be based on determinate and 
well-ascertained facts. Otherwise it ceases to be science 
and becomes mere speculation. These remarks have been 
suggested by the following extract from the Chicago 
Inter-Ocean: 

'"The International Congress of Zoology, in session at 
Cambridge, England, during the current week, was remarkable 
for a fascinating paper by Professor Haeckel on the 
world's present knowledge of the descent of man. He did 
not hesitate to declare that science has now established the 
absolute certainty that man has descended through various 
stages of evolution from the lowest form of animal life during 
a period estimated at 1,000,000,000 years. This knowledge, 
which must now be accepted as the crowning achievement 
of science during the nineteenth century, was won 
through recent discoveries of fossil remains in Java, Madagascar, 
and Australia, and is made still more complete evidence 
by available proof of discoveries wherewith Darwin's 



name is most commonly associated.' 

"Professor Haeckel is known to be a Darwin of the Darwinites. 
Indeed, in some of his views upon his pet theory 
he has gone far beyond Darwin himself. Why does he seek 
for proofs of the doctrine of evolution in such remote and 
widely-separated regions as Java, Madagascar, and Australia, 
instead of the original centers of population? Besides, 
Professor Haeckel must have known that the evidences 
he adduces from certain fossil remains in Madagascar 
and Australia have been demonstrated to be utterly 
unreliable. What particular find he refers to in Java we 
do not know; but take it for granted that it is worthless 
as the rest. The fact is, the evolutionists have been so 
pushed to find that 'missing link,' without which their 
whole system falls to the ground as incomplete and insupportable, 
that they have been ready to snatch at anything 
which would seem in the remotest manner to connect 
the broken series. 

"The Professor evidently intends to allow himself ample 
time to work out his progressive developments from 
a protoplasm to an ape, and from an ape to a man. He 
assumes a round billion of years. We say assumes it, for 
every one must see that it is sheer assumption. Why not 
say five billions instead? There is no geological table by 
which he could fix the time at one billion of years. When 
science thus goes out of the domain of exact truth, we have 
a right to question its statements and its calculations. We 
don't know where Professor Haeckel got his arithmetic, and 
he does not know himself. When he declares, and does 
not 'hesitate' to declare, that 'science has now established 
the absolute certainty that man has descended through 
various stages of evolution from the lowest form of animal 
life during a period estimated at one billion of years,' 
we demand proof; but the proof is not forthcoming. The 
declaration is about as satisfactory and sensible as the silly 
reply that Aaron made to Moses when the latter questioned 
him about the golden calf. He said: 'I cast the gold in 
the fire, and there came out this calf.' So the evolutionists 
would have us believe that all these wonderful things in 
nature just 'came out' of themselves entirely apart from 
divine agency. 

"Which is the more rational theory, that all things were 
made by Him 'who is before all things and by whom all 
things consist,' or that things just evolved of their own 
free will and accord? Which is worthier of our credence, 

R3008 : page 147 

that 'God made man in His own image and after His own 
likeness,' or that man developed out of an animal of the 
Simian species? 

"Evolutionists admit that man is the final product of 
the series. If so, why is it that the fossil remains of the 
animal connecting man with his ancestral ape cannot be 
found? It would be the latest fossil, and should be most 
easily found. O, where is the living link, if the fossil cannot 



be found? Echo answers, Where?" 

WHO IS ON THE LORD'S SIDE? 



The Presbyterian, of Philadelphia, attacks the Evolution 
and Higher Criticism errors of our time in good 
style, as follows:— 

"There has arisen a class of preachers, who are proclaiming 
a social gospel, a scientific gospel, a literary gospel, 
a reformatory gospel. The cry appears to be, Anything 
to get rid of the Old Gospel, which 'the orthodox 
religion' upholds and preaches. All kinds of political reforms 
are initiated; critical theories in theology are ventilated; 
the newest industrial formations are given currency; 
and the thought and effort are centered upon the 
material, intellectual, and moral improvement of earth. It 
is no wonder that in the enthusiasm kindled over these 
and other efforts for human amelioration, there is considerable 
diversion from 'the orthodox religion;' but it has 

R3008 : page 148 

a staying and conquering power, and it will always have 
myriads in this and the oncoming ages to heed its teachings 
as a message from God and His Son, Jesus Christ. It 
would be a magnificent thing if all would turn away from 
the siren voices which lure away from the Old Gospel of 
salvation through personal repentance of sin, faith in 
Christ as the only Redeemer of mankind, and holy living, 
or through a renovated soul and life by the transforming 
grace of the Holy Ghost; but where any prefer to pass it 
by as of no account at such a time as this, the responsibility 
rests with them, not with those who press it upon the 
mind and heart of old and young. A conceited age may 
think it has a different message than that which the Son 
of God has given it, but the Christian religion, which has 
done so much for all classes and conditions in the past, will 
ever vindicate its right to exist, and will work out the purposes 
for which God gave it until latest periods." 

REJECTED FOR UNBELIEF. 



The New York Times tells (April 15) of an examination 
of a theological student, Mr. Noll, before a 
Presbytery, as follows:— 

He was being examined on a chapter from the Epistle 
of St. Paul to the Romans, where the Apostle speaks about 
Adam. The examiner asked Mr. Noll what he thought about 
Adam, and he said he did not think Adam was a historical 
character, but rather a myth. The ministers, or at least 
many of the older ones, began to move uneasily in their 
seats. 



"What!" said one of them, "Then you must have come 
to the conclusion that St. Paul did not know what he was 
talking about." 

It was here the trouble began, but this was not the only 
point of doctrine on which the candidate had shown himself 
"unsound." When he was examined on the fifty-third 
chapter of Isaiah he boldly asserted that the prophetic sayings 
there referred to the Hebrew people, not to Christ, 
as a majority of the ministers would have it. 

He was rejected by a majority vote after considerable 
discussion; but the account says further that 
the Rev. Dr. Gregg of the Lafayette Avenue Presbyterian 
Church was a visitor at the meeting, and remarked: 
"This young man would have been received 
with a hurrah in the Brooklyn Presbytery. We 
do things differently there." 

How evident it is to every observing mind that 
"the faith once delivered unto the saints" is becoming 
more and more scarce in Babylon;— and properly it 
is becoming more and more precious to those who 
have it to the extent that they are able to "give to 
them that ask it a reason for the hope that is within 
them." Harken to the inspired advice, "Watch ye, 
stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong ! " 
-I Cor. 16:13. 

"THE EXTINCTION OF ADAM." 



Exchanges of April 29th, report the matter further 
as follows:— 

"The Elizabeth, N.J., Presbytery yesterday granted a 
license to preach to one of the applicants who had expressed 
his disbelief in the story of Adam and Eve, although he still 
adhered to his conviction that the story was merely 'allegorical.' 
He will be ordained for foreign mission duty. 

"With the sanction of so eminent a religious body to sustain 
us we may now all freely admit that we no longer consider 
Adam and Eve our first parents, but regard them as wholly 
mythical personages. This will be a sad loss to literature and 
art, but it will relieve the human race from a sense of long-standing 
injustice." 

AGNOSTICISM IN JEWISH PULPITS, TOO. 



Baltimore, Md., April 13. -Rabbi Emil G. Hirsch, of 
Chicago, delivered a lecture at the Har Sinai Temple here 
today, which took the breath of most of his listeners, despite 
the fact that it is the most liberal congregation in 
the city. In his sermon Dr. Hirsch said: 

"Think of God as you may, so long as you have the 
proper conception of man you are in harmony with Judaism. 
Even if Moses never existed, if the ten commandments 



did not come from Sinai— and I don't believe they 
did— Judaism still lives. 

"The Bible is literature; it is mythology. It did not 
come from heaven in a mechanical way. A new Bible has 
come forth, strangely different from what our fathers loved. 
The old idea is a God who holds in one hand a club and in 
the other a stick of candy. This God was man. He has 
been dethroned. Our soul needs a God who is superior to 
man." 

Yes, truly a great falling away from the faith is 
in progress amongst all nationalities— especially 
among the "wise" and "learned." This poor Rabbi 
is no more to be blamed than Christian ministers who 
are taking the same position. No wonder, then, that 
leading ministers join in dedicating Jewish synagogues 
and Rabbis in dedicating Christian churches. 
It is only a "ceremony" anyway— to impress and 
please the common people. 

Evidently, however, the secret of nearly all the 
rebellion against the Bible is the result of a lack of 
knowledge of God and his plan and his Book. How 
thankful we should be for the opening of the eyes of 
our understanding, which alone keeps us firm and secure 
when all around is shaking ! Well did the Lord 
foretell the blindness coming upon the "learned" and 
worldly-wise and of the blinded followers of the blind 
leaders. "My people are destroyed [dumbfounded] 
for lack of knowledge."— Hos. 4:6; Isa. 29:14. 

THE MEANING OF EUROPE'S GREAT ARMIES. 



The brother who sends the below clipping remarks: 
"How truly this bears out the statements of Millennial 
Dawn, vol. IV., respecting the "Lord's great 
army!" 

If you look at the map of Europe you will see in Russia a 
Czar with a million armed men that he can use as he pleases. 
A million rifles, or five million, if reserves are called upon, the 
Czar can aim this way or that as a child aims its bow and arrow. 
In Germany a vigorous young man, controlled partially by custom, 
common sense and the fear of the Social-Democratic party, 
has another million of armed men to play with. In Italy, in 
Austria, in Spain, you find monarchical figureheads directing 
huge bodies of armed men. If you look superficially at these 
great armies, you will say that they are a permanent menace 
to liberty. You will say to yourself: "How can kings be destroyed 
when such power is in their control?" 

As a matter of fact, the greatest DANGER TO KINGS 
lies in the work that is done by these great standing armies. 
Apparently, they mean security for the monarchical idea. In 
reality, they mean education of the people, the spreading of 
radicalism, and rebellion against the claims of birth and money. 

The German army system captures the yellow-haired 
peasant of Wurtemburg. He is dull of speech, slow in thought, 



kind-hearted, simple, reconciled to his own inferiority, ready 
to pull off his felt hat at the sight of livery worn by the 
servant of the great. This peasant is taken to Berlin or 
Frankfort. If he is slow at drill he is slapped in the face, 
kicked, ridiculed. He is compelled to hold himself for hours 
in a certain rigid position. He learns that he is entirely at the 
mercy of a whipper snapper in a lieutenant's uniform. He 
bitterly hates his own degradation and those responsible for 
it. During his hours of rest he meets and talks with another 
soldier, perhaps the orderly on duty at the officer's casino, 
who drags the lieutenant to a narrow lounge behind the curtains 
when the lieutenant is too drunk to stand up. Or he 
meets the young soldier from the city, the intelligent Jew 
with five hundred years of independent thinking behind him, 
or the non-commissioned officer, who sticks in the army because 
he takes pleasure in making socialists out of country 
recruits. 

That humble peasant arrived from Wurtemburg believing 
himself of less importance than the dog of a country nobleman, 

R3009 : page 149 

and looking upon the German Emperor as the abstract 
equal and the concrete superior of Providence itself. At the 
end of his five army years the German peasant is transformed 
sometimes into a man of force, oftener into one with a supply 
of revolutionary catch phrases that make him dangerous because 
he has not brains enough to assimilate them. 

Millions of such simple-minded peasants are changing into 
radicals and socialists all over Europe. The far-reaching arm 
of enforced military service leaves no quiet, peaceful, title-fearing 
corner in any of the empires. Every young man as he 
reaches maturity has the veneration for rank kicked out of him, 
and the knowledge of HOW TO FIGHT kicked into him. 
This is a serious thing for the kings. It means their ultimate 
undoing. 

Already they are finding this out in Belgium, where the 
King is afraid of his own troups, knowing that their sympathies 
are with the striking men and women in the streets, 
and not with him, or his preposterous pretensions, or his 
spending of public money on ballet dancers in the Paris opera. 
--N.Y. Journal. 



R3009 : page 149 

THE GOSPEL OF FORGIVENESS OF SINS. 

-ACTS 13:43-52.-MAY 25.- 

"Through this man [Jesus] is preached unto 
you the forgiveness of sins."— Acts 13:38. 

PAUL AND HIS COMPANY, passing through 
the Island of Cyprus to the city of Paphos, 



at its southern end, did not tarry there. Its 

climate is miasmatic, and this is presumed to have 

been the reason for a hasty departure for the high 

lands of Asia Minor— Galatia, etc. The Apostle is 

presumed to have referred to his own semi-invalid 

condition at this time when later, in writing the Epistle 

to the Galatians, he said, "Through infirmity of 

the flesh I preached the gospel to you at first." (Gal. 4:13,14.) 

Galatia was the name of a district or 

state in which were located a number of cities and 

churches mentioned in the account of Paul's missionary 

tours— Iconium, Lystra, Derbe, and Antioch on 

the borders of Galatia, in the state of Pisidia. The 

Antioch of this lesson should not be confounded with 

the larger city, Antioch of Syria. 

In our last lesson we noticed Mark as the companion 
and servant of the two missionaries, but he 
discontinued his service at Paphos and returned to 
Jerusalem; hardships or discouragements or home-sickness, 
we know not what, evidently, for the time 
quenched his zeal as a servant of the Lord and of the 
truth,— assuredly much to Mark's disadvantage. 
Whatever the cause, evidently the Apostle Paul considered 
it quite insufficient; so that on another occasion, 
when Barnabas suggested Mark's accompanying 
them similarly, the Apostle declined— which he 
evidently would not have done had Mark's desertion 
been fully justified by considerations of health or 
necessity. It was a labor of love, however; no salaries 
were attached, and if Mark chose to discontinue 
his sacrifice it was his own business, and he was the 
loser. 

So it is today, the Lord leaves his people free 
from restraints; free from threats; free from compulsion; 
to the intent that they may present their bodies 
living sacrifices day by day. Now, as then, whoever 
grows cold may discontinue his sacrificing, but himself 
will be the loser. We want to keep distinctly before 
our minds that while God condemns sin, and 
while his people have no liberty in this respect, but are 
obligated to do their best to withstand sin, it is different 
in the matter of sacrifice. The Lord is calling 
for free-will offerings, and whatever is not given with 
a hearty good-will, yea, with an earnest desire, with 
zeal, may as well be kept;— but the rewards promised 
to those who imitate the spirit of the Master and his 
devotion will be lost also. 

There is an element of encouragement, however, 
in Mark's experience. Later on he evidently became 
quite a thorough and devoted soldier of the cross, 
was again accepted to the Lord's service, and we 
find that the Apostle Paul made acknowledgment of 
appreciation of his faithfulness. (Col. 4:10; 2 Tim. 4:11.) 
Mark's recovery of lost ground and his reinstatement 
by the Lord in his service should be an encouragement 
for any who similarly have grown cold 



and lax as respects their devotion and sacrifice, and 

who have been consequently dropped out of active 

service of the truth. The Lord is very merciful to 

us in our weaknesses and imperfections, and as he restored 

Mark, undoubtedly he is willing also to restore 

all who will similarly learn a lesson from their failures, 

and who earnestly desire and strive for re-instatement 

and the privileges of service. 

The first stop made in Asia Minor was at Antioch 
of Pisidia. The usual custom was followed, of 
going first to the Jews— to their synagogue. The 
missionaries were recognized as strangers and also 
as men of talent, and after the regular services of 
the synagogue had been introduced by the reading of 
the usual lesson from the Law, they were invited to address 
the assembled people— Jews by birth, and Jewish 
proselytes from the Gentiles. The Apostle Paul 
was the speaker, and made a telling address. He recognized 
the fact that his hearers had faith in God's 
promises regarding the coming Kingdom: he did 
not need, therefore, to emphasize the Kingdom 
feature in this discourse. Rather, his hearers needed 
to see that there could be no Kingdom and no permanent 
blessing of all the families of the earth, such 
as was implied in the promises made to Abraham, 
unless in some manner divine forgiveness of the 
world's sins could first be secured. 

The trend of his discourse, therefore, was to 
show how God had established a (typical) kingdom 
in the past, which had never reached the grand stage 
essential to the fulfilment of the Abrahamic promises, 
and that the thing necessary and lacking was 
a redemption of the world and the forgiveness of sins. 
Then he presented to their attention Jesus as the 
Messiah,— not merely a crucified Messiah, but 
also a risen one who, because of his death 
for the sins of the world, was able to save unto 
the uttermost all that should come unto God through 
him. Having put the matter squarely before them, 
the Apostle, in the words of our Golden Text, offered 
his hearers forgiveness of sins as the very essence 
of the Gospel. 

Forgiveness of sin is still the essence of the Gospel, 
altho mankind now, as then, are generally loth to 
accept it thus,— it disappoints them by condemning 
them, and showing up the fact that all are sinners;— 
that there is none righteous, no, not one;— that all 
need just such a redemption as God has provided 

R3009 : page 150 

in the sacrifice of Christ. It disappoints also in that 
it shows a necessity for repudiation of sin in the 
heart, and, so far as possible, resisting it in all the 
conduct of life. Few are prepared for this— few have 
an ear to hear this message. The majority are ready 



to say, Preach unto us smooth things! Praise us 
for our religious fervor! Point out to us how much 
superior we are, not only to the heathen world, but to 
the masses of those who are about us! Tell us that 
we are God's people, and that he could not get along 
without us! Do not tell us that we are sinners, and 
under condemnation as others; and that all who 
would come unto God through Jesus Christ must 
come by the same strait and narrow gate of faith, and 
repudiation of sin, and heart-consecration! 

The discourse had its effect,— a two-fold effect. 
The honest hearted, realizing the truth regarding 
God's perfection and their own imperfection, realized 
their need of just such a Savior as the Apostle 
had preached: these were specially drawn to the missionaries, 
who, recognizing their right attitude of 
heart, assured them that they were already in God's 
grace or favor; and that now the message of salvation 
through Jesus was an additional unfolding and 
development of the same favor that had already been 
extended to the Jews; and that they should continue 
in the grace of God,— continue to let God lead 
and guide them in his way,— continue to be the recipients 
of his mercies and blessings, which now were 
multiplied to them through Christ Jesus, and the 
atonement work he had accomplished. Others were 
much less prepared for the Apostle's words, and 
rather inclined to be envious of the attention bestowed 
upon the missionaries and their teachings,— 
which meant corresponding disregard for the usual 
leaders of the meeting and for the doctrines previously 
set forth, which the new views were calculated 
to supersede entirely. 

So we find it today also: the essence of the Gospel 
preaching of today, as eighteen centuries ago, 
must be man's sinful and condemned condition, and 
his need of redemption, reconciliation and recovery 
from sin and its wages, death. This is the Gospel, 
which is falling into disuse in the pulpits of churchianity, 
in response to the itching ears of the majority, 
the "tares," and their call for the preaching of smooth 
things. 

Additionally, it is proper now to emphasize the 
Gospel of the Kingdom, which the Lord and the apostles 
made so prominent; and to show that the little 
flock, the elect of this age, are to constitute the Kingdom 
—which, in the coming age, is to rule and bless 
the world, by restraining Satan and every evil device, 
and causing the knowledge of the Lord to 
abound. Now, as then, the larger unfolding of the 
truth, the divine plan of salvation, is interesting to 
some— to the honest-hearted; and repulsive to some 
—the vain-glorious, the sectarian, the proud, the self-satisfied. 
Now, as then, when we are appealed to by 
those who have an ear to hear present truth, they 
should be encouraged to "continue in the grace of 



God." They should not be told that their ignorance 
of present truth implies that they have none of the 
grace of God, but that because they have received 

R3010 :page 150 

of his grace into good and honest hearts it is the will 
of God that they should continue therein and grow 
and increase and abound;— that to this intent he is 
sending forth present truth to his people in every 
quarter, that the true wheat may be ripened and 
gathered to his garner. 

News of the new religion— supplemental to the 
Jewish— spread throughout the little city in which 
Judaism had evidently gained a good foothold and 
great respect;— so that the whole city gathered on 
the next Sabbath to hear the message of the missionaries 
—probably the majority coming merely out of 
curiosity, to see the difference between the doctrines 
of these and of the regular Jewish teachers. "The 
whole city" may be understood hyperbolically, as 
signifying a large concourse; or that all classes and 
conditions of citizens were well represented. The 
gathering of such a multitude could not be held, probably, 
in the synagogue, but we may presume, in the 
yard or court surrounding it, or both. Such attention 
to two strangers and their new doctrine, which 
threatened an overthrow of Judaism, naturally 
awakened a spirit of jealousy in those whose interest 
was much in forms and ceremonies, honor amongst 
men and denominational pride, and, as a result, they 
contradicted Paul's statements with blasphemy. Not 
that they blasphemed God's name, but that they 
slandered or blasphemed the Apostle and Barnabas 
—speaking evil of them; we may surmise, misrepresenting 
their motives, their characters, etc. This is 
the usual course of those who fight against the truth, 
and it is so today. The truth cannot be gainsaid; 
it is irresistible; but it can be misrepresented; it can 
be denied; the presentations of it can be distorted, 
and its messengers can be slandered, vilified. The 
Adversary seems to adopt this method on every occasion. 
It is the method now in vogue. Those who 
oppose present truth will not dare to meet it openly 
in public discussion before the people, but they will 
distort and misrepresent it, and say all manner of evil 
against its advocates and will persecute those who 
favor it. 

The missionaries were not discouraged by the 
opposition, but were rather made the more courageous, 
and brought to the point where they explained 
to their vilifiers, plainly, the true state of the case: 
that they were rejecting God's favor, God's plan, 
against themselves— to their own injury, to 
their own loss. They pointed out that God, 
in his mercy, had long favored Israel, and that 



in sending the message of Messiah to them first he 

was still favoring them; but that according to his direction 

it was their duty to proceed, and to tell the 

Gospel to whoever had ears to hear— to the Jew first, 

but also to the Gentiles. They pointed out that the 

lamp of truth which God had now lighted was not 

to be to the Jews exclusively, as had been his previous 

favors, but, as the Prophet had already declared, 

was to be "a light to lighten the Gentiles"— salvation 

unto the ends of the earth.— (Luke 2:32; Isa. 42:6; 

52:10.) 

This feature of the Gospel specially aroused the 
opposition of such Jews as were in the wrong condition 
of heart, but was proportionately attractive to 
the few who were in the right attitude. So it is today: 
the message which is now due to Christendom 
is— More Light! It shows that the lamp of God's 
Word of promise, which at the beginning of this age 

R3010 :page 151 

was permitted to bless both Jews and Gentiles in 
proportion as the eyes of their understanding were 
opened to see it, is shortly now to give place to a 
greater light; that whereas the Word of God has been 
a lamp to the feet and a lantern to the footsteps of 
his faithful for over eighteen centuries, God's purpose 
now, shortly, is that this lamp shall become unnecessary, 
because "the Sun of Righteousness shall 
rise," and the whole world shall be flooded with the 
light of the knowledge of the goodness of God.— 
Mai. 4:2. 

Those of God's people who are in the right attitude 
of heart will be gladdened by this expansion and 
unfolding of the truth: no feelings of jealousy will be 
theirs. But the majority, full of sectarian theories 
and plans and selfish sentiments, and blinded largely 
by false theology and by misrepresentations of the 
Word of God are violently opposed to any thought of 
God's general goodness being extended to every 
creature,— not only those who have not yet gone to 
the prison-house of death, but also to the fifty thousand 
millions who have already gone down into the 
silence of death, in ignorance of the only name given 
under heaven or among men whereby we must be 
saved. But all the faithful, all the honest-hearted, 
will ultimately rejoice at the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of God's plan, to be consummated 
during the Millennium by the glorified Christ, 
Head and body. 

Many of the Gentiles were glad as they heard of 
God's favor being broader than they had previously 
supposed— some, we may infer, were merely pleased 
that something had been shown up that was broader 
than the Jewish teachings, but some others, we are 
assured, believed in the true sense of the word— accepting 



Christ as their Redeemer and as their Law-giver. 
And so today also we see two classes among 
those who favor the present truth: some who hail it 
with joy and gratefully worship and serve the Lord 
more fervently than ever; and some who are merely 
glad to find that there is no Scriptural ground for the 
popular theory of an eternal torment for the vast majority 
of mankind; but are not specially drawn or constrained 
by divine love and mercy. 

The more the truth spread the more angry became 
its opponents, the Jewish leaders; and what they 
could not oppose with argument or logic they did 
oppose successfully with prejudice and superstition, 
arousing these baser sentiments by misrepresentation. 
They secured thus the co-operation of some of 
the most honorable and notable people of the city, to 
such an extent that the missionaries were obliged to 
depart from them. The Adversary's methods are the 
same today in this respect also, that by misrepresentation 
he secures for his agents, often unwillingly, 
some who are noble and honorable people. This 
teaches us two lessons: First, to be careful ourselves 
—to be on guard against the Adversary's methods, 
if we are honorable and well-intentioned; to see to it 
that we are not inveigled into opposing the truth 
while supposing that we are doing God service. It 
teaches us also to have respect for those who are our 
opponents, and who give evidence of sincerity, even 
in their persecution. Some of the best friends of 
present truth today were once its bitter enemies, revilers 
and persecutors. We are hoping for many 
more recruits for the truth from this class of people. 
Their opposition is the result of misapprehension of 
the facts; they are blinded by the Adversary. Some 
may not get proper sight of the matter until the 
Kingdom binds Satan and opens their eyes; but 
others we may hope are the King's own and will be 
helped in time for them to make their calling and 
election sure in the Kingdom "little flock." 

AS MANY AS WERE ORDAINED TO ETERNAL LIFE, 
BELIEVED. 

The word "ordained," here, may properly be 
translated disposed; and thus we get the thought that 
as many of those who heard the gospel and its offer of 
everlasting life, and were disposed to accept the 
terms, became believers— obedient to the faith. So 
it is still. The truth, wherever it goes, finds some 
who like it and some who dislike it; some who appreciate 
the doctrines and rewards which it presents, 
and some who prefer the pleasures of sin or the affairs 
and rewards of the world. It is the time for each 
one who has heard to take his choice. Soon the 
number of the elect will be complete, and then the 
work of the elect will begin— the blessing of mankind. 



We assume that the expression, "shook off the 
dust of their feet" is a figurative one, as we would use 
it today, meaning that we took our departure. Our 
departure, under such circumstances, would be a witness 
against those who rejected our message and 
those who persecuted us— a witness which they would 
remember in coming time. Yet the departure of 
the missionaries was not in anger, for we are assured 
that they were filled with joy and with the holy spirit 
—rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer 
for Christ's sake, and to have their names cast out 
as evil;— rejoicing also that they had, by the Lord's 
grace, accomplished something in the service. The 
expression, however, included more than merely the 
missionaries: it included those who remained as well 
as those who went. All were rejoicing. The truth 
and its spirit are constant causes for joy of heart to 
those who have them. On the contrary, the persecuting 
spirit, the jealous spirit, is always the unhappy 
one. Let us see that our rejoicing is of the same 
kind— in the Lord, in the truth, in the service, notwithstanding 
persecutions, trials and difficulties. 



R3010 :page 151 

GOOD FRIDAY AND THE MASS. 



IN OUR ISSUE of February 15 we referred to 

Good Friday as representing to Roman 

Catholics the "great Mass day." One of our 

readers, formerly a Roman Catholic, calls our attention 

to the fact that on this one day the Mass service 

is less used than on any other day of all the year, and 

wants to have our explanation. We reply that the 

word Mass signifies "oblation," "offering"; and that 

the Roman Catholic Church does specially set apart 

Good Friday as the day of all the year for celebrating 

the great "oblation" "offering" or "Mass" which our 

Lord Jesus gave for us at Calvary. However, it is 

customary among Catholics to reserve this word 

Mass as the special name for what they term "the unbloody 

R3011 :page 152 

sacrifice," which their priests perform repeatedly, 
daily, for the cancelation of sins of the 
people. 

The original bloody "offering," "oblation" or 
Mass at Calvary, Catholics recognize as the basis of 
atonement— canceling original sin and making possible 
the sinners acceptance with God. "The sacrifice 
of the Mass" offered by priests, repeats the original 



"oblation," Mass or "offering," for divine appeasement, 
in connection with subsequent, personal sins. 
We quote from Deharbe's Roman Catholic Catechism, 
pages 263, 265, 288, as follows:— 

"The Sacrifice of the Mass was instituted by Jesus Christ, 
when at the Last Supper he offered himself up under the appearances 
of bread and wine to his Heavenly Father, and commanded 
his Apostles thenceforth to celebrate this his sacrifice. 

"The Mass is the perpetual Sacrifice of the New Law, in 
which Christ our Lord offers himself, by the hands of the 
priest, in an unbloody manner, under the appearances of bread 
and wine to his Heavenly Father, as he once offered himself 
on the cross in a bloody manner. The sacrifice of the Mass is 
essentially the same Sacrifice as that of the cross; the only difference 
is in the manner of offering. Because, in both it is the 
same High-Priest who offers, and the same Victim who is 
offered— namely, Jesus Christ our Lord; and because in the 
Sacrifice of the Mass the oblation [synonym for Mass] which 
Christ made of himself on the cross, for us, to the Father, is 
commemorated and continued.. ..By it we obtain from the 
Divine mercy, (1) Graces of contrition and repentance for the 
forgiveness of sins; and (2) Remission of temporal punishment 
deserved for sins. ...The temporal punishment due to our 
sins is that punishment which we have to suffer here on earth 
or in Purgatory." 

The difference between the Romanist and the 
Protestant view then is, chiefly, that the latter would 
claim that there was but one offering "oblation" or 
"Mass" for the sins of the whole world, and that its 
sacrifice was finished at Calvary; and that the Lord's 
Supper merely commemorates this; while the former 
claim that the sacrificing of the "oblation" "offering" 
[or Mass] is to be continuously repeated, in an unbloody 
form. 

In the same article Z.W.T., page 64, we say, 
"Every Roman Catholic who makes the slightest 
claim to faithfulness to his church is expected to be 
present and participate in the services of Good Friday, 
whether he attends Mass at any other time of the year 
or not." We regret this error. Instead of saying 
Good Friday we should have said Easter-time— that 
is, Passover-time— which begins on Palm Sunday and 
continues two weeks— till Low Sunday. The Council 
of Lateran (A.D. 1215) commanded that all the 
"faithful" must receive communion at least once a 
year, and that within the Easter-time. Altho the distinctions 
are quite small, and in our opinion nothing 
of importance is involved, we suggest that any who 
think otherwise have our full consent to the cutting 
off of said page, 64, so as not to loosen the front page, 
before handing out any of those papers. 



R3011 :page 152 



ENDURING HARDNESS AS GOOD SOLDIERS. 

--ACTS 14:8-19.~JUNE 1.- 

"Thou, therefore, endure hardness as a good 
soldier of Jesus Christ."— 2 Tim. 2:3. 

LEAVING Antioch of Pisidia, Paul and Barnabas 

went to Iconium, about 100 miles distant. 

There also they preached the Word faithfully, 

and there also opposition was aroused and persecution 

threatened; "and when there was an assault 

made, both of the Gentiles and also of the Jews, with 

their rulers, to use them despitefully and to stone 

them, they were aware of it, and fled unto Lystra." 

They did not allow fear to hinder them from the 

preaching of the gospel with courage, boldness; 

neither did they fear threats; but when the persecution 

took a positive form they delayed no longer, but 

fled. Why did they not wait, and expect the Lord 

to grant them some miraculous deliverance? Why 

did they not challenge their opponents to see whether 

the power of God or the power of Satan was the 

stronger? We answer, Because they were better instructed 

respecting the divine will. They were following 

the instructions of the Lord. He did not say 

to them, Be fearful of persecution, withhold your message, 

and put your light under a bushel; but the reverse. 

He did not say, Flee in fear, when there is no 

danger; but he did say, "When they persecute you in 

one city flee ye to another." 

Arriving at Lystra, the preaching of the gospel 
was begun afresh, as courageously as tho there had 
been no previous opposition. Amongst the auditors 
was a cripple, presumably a Jew or a proselyte, who 
manifested much interest in the Apostle's words. 
Paul, perceiving this, and that the man had faith, 
stopped in his preaching and called out to him, "Stand 
upright on thy feet!"— a thing he had never done. 
He had the necessary faith and obeyed the Apostle's 
command; and thus a miracle resulted, evidently to 
the astonishment of the entire congregation. The 
effect upon the people was electrical, and they shouted 
in their own dialect, "The gods have come down to 
visit us!" 

The city of Lystra figured as the scene of a mythological 
event, the tradition being that Jupiter and 
Mercury, two of the gods of mythology, having once 
come to their city in the form of men, had been everywhere 
refused lodgings until they came to the lowly 
hut of a poor man who entertained them to the extent 
of his ability. They rewarded him by turning his 
hut into a gorgeous temple, and punished the others 
of the city with a flood. These traditions were very 
old, but were perpetuated by a statue of Jupiter at the 
gate of the city, as its protecting god. 



It is easy to discern how a comparatively ignorant 
and superstitious people might jump to the conclusion 
that the visit of Paul and Barnabas was a repetition 
of this visit of Jupiter and Mercury, handed 
down to them through tradition. They called Paul, 
Mercury, because in their tradition, Mercury was the 
orator, the speaker; and they called Barnabas, Jupiter, 
and forthwith the priest of Jupiter prepared to offer a 
sacrifice of oxen before the statue of Jupiter, at the 
gate of their city, in honor of the supposed gods 
present with them as men, in the persons of Barnabas 
and Paul. 

The missionaries were probably preaching, or 
conversing and explaining quietly, to the more interested 
ones, when they heard of the commotion in 
the city, and of the sacrifice which was about to be 
offered. They did not for a moment think of taking 
advantage of the superstition of the people to make 
of themselves some great ones, nor did they attempt 

R3011 :page 153 

to turn the event to a service of the truth by claiming 
that God was Jupiter, and that Jesus was Mercury, 
and that they represented them. On the contrary, 
most earnestly and simply they entreated the 
people to desist; explaining to them that they were 
nothing but imperfect men like themselves, "of like 
passions," and that their mission was the very reverse 
of what they supposed, and that Jupiter and Mercury 
and their fabled deeds were only products of imagination, 
ignorance and superstition. They ran in 
amongst the people while they, full of excitement, 
were preparing for the sacrifice, and with difficulty, 
even then, amid protests of their own nothingness, 
did they restrain the people from sacrificing in their 
honor. Noble men they were, and their faithfulness 
to the Lord and to the truth attested the wisdom of 
the divine choice in sending them on this missionary 
errand. 

We may draw a lesson from the incident, helpful 
to all of the Lord's people who are to any extent his 
ambassadors, representatives, teachers of the truth. 
The truth itself, especially in the light of our day, is 
so wonderful, so brilliant, that it naturally reflects 
some of its brilliancy upon those who represent it, 
causing men to marvel, and to say, as of old, "Whence 
hath this man this wisdom?" In some instances it 
might lead to an undue deference, to an ascription of 
undue honor, and to a subserviency which it would 
not be proper for the Lord's ambassadors to receive, 
and which they should as promptly and as thoroughly 
repudiate and refuse as did Paul and Barnabas refuse 
the honors which the Lystrians were about to 
bestow upon them. From the worldly standpoint 
this would be an unwise course. Those who will 



accept flattery and adulation and honor more than 

is due, are likely to be prospered in this course 

to some extent by the Adversary, and apt to find 

that the worldly spirit likes to worship worldly 

heroes, Jupiters, Elijahs, etc. The only wise course 

for the Lord's servants is, therefore, the one followed 

by these missionaries of our lesson— to repudiate the 

entire matter; to confess that they are men of like 

passions with others; to hold up the light of God's 

Word, and behind it to hide and ignore themselves entirely. 

Not alone will this be profitable as respects 

the finding and development of the true children of 

God whom he is now gathering out of the world, but 

it will be profitable also for the Lord's ambassadors; 

for in this way they will grow in the Lord's grace and 

likeness; of which humility was a prominent trait. 

Thus they will best abide in his love, and ultimately 

attain to the still greater exaltation which God has 

R3012:page 153 

promised to all of his children who are faithful and 
humble under present conditions. 

The Apostle, in pointing out to the Lystrians 
that their ideas were vanities, well knew that this 
could not bring him the favor of his hearers; for it is 
not human nature to appreciate being told of our follies. 
To have worked his way into their good graces 
he would have needed to tell them a lie— that they 
were very wise, and that their course was a very 
proper one, etc. He, therefore, in his endeavor to be 
candid, and to serve the truth, risked their disappointment 
and displeasure; and he was undoubtedly 
keen enough to know this in advance, and what result 
to expect. Nevertheless, as God's mouthpiece, he 
shunned not to declare the whole message, whatever 
its results might be as regarded himself and his work. 
Here are good lessons for all of the Lord's people. 
It requires comparatively little courage to be a soldier 
of the cross and faithful to the truth amongst those of 
like precious faith and obedience; but it requires great 
courage to resist improper honor of men when we 
know in advance that this resistance will not only deprive 
us of their honor and friendship, but make us 
ignoble in their sight, and turn them into enemies. 
True soldiers of the cross still have the same trial, 
and it still requires hardness— a hardening campaign 
of experience in the Lord's service— to endure these 
things and come off joyful in the Lord. The babes 
in Christ, the weak, the untried, those who have not 
passed through trials and experiences and development 
of character, are not hardened, and could not 
stand such experiences. Hence it is that the apostle 
advises the Church that even proper exaltation to a 
service in the Church should not be accorded to a 
novice, lest he should be puffed up and thus be injured 



himself, as well as become injurious to others. 
(I Tim. 3:6.) It requires time and seasoning to know 
how to either rightly accept and appreciate the honors 
of the brethren or others along proper lines, or to decline 
honors and dignities along improper lines. 

The Apostle pointed out to his hearers that in 
times past God had been permitting all the nations to 
walk in their own ways. He had interfered particularly 
in the affairs of only the one nation, Israel; all 
the others had been permitted to take their own 
course, except in so far as they might be crossing 
some feature of the divine plan. Thus the Prophet 
expressed the matter to Israel, "You only have I 
known of all the families of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) 
The reference to "time past," implies the change of 
dispensation which had just occurred in connection 
with the death of Jesus and the cutting off of Israel 
from any special favor, and the throwing open of the 
gospel call to all who had ears to hear;— to the Jew 
first and also to the Greek. Now God was sending 
a message of instruction to all the nations, that they 
should turn from such vanities and should recognize 
the only living and true God, and his Son who had 
redeemed the world, and whom he had ordained 
should in due time become its King and ruler, to put 
down sin and death, and bless with his reign of righteousness 
all the families of the earth. The Apostle 
points out that altho God had left the nations without 
the instructions of the Law Covenant the 
Prophecies, he had given them some indications of 
his care in making provision for their necessities,— 
causing the sun to shine and the rain to fall upon the 
just and the unjust, upon the evil and the good. 

The sudden change of public sentiment, the result 
of the Apostle's explanations and plain statements 
of the truth, led the Lystrians to look at the 
missionaries with very different eyes, now that they 
were, according to their own declarations, common 
men like themselves. We may even suppose that they 
felt rather mean about their own superstition, which 
had so quickly aroused them to do reverence to men 
who repudiated it and acknowledged their unworthiness 
of it. It was while the populace was in this spirit 
that certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium came 
thither, explaining to them that the missionaries were 

R3012:page 154 

impostors, working upon the credulity of the people, 
"turning the world upside down," raising questions 
about theology, and disturbing the minds of the people. 
The populace was ready for just such leading 
in the reverse direction, and disposed to feel somehow 
that if these men were not really Jupiter and Mercury 
they were pretenders and falsifiers who had deceived 
them and should be put to death. As a result, Paul 



was stoned, and dragged outside the city, and left for 
dead. 

How erratic is the natural mind, in its condition 
of ignorance and superstition! How easily the priest 
of Jupiter could lead the ignorant in one wrong 
course, to make gods of men,— and how readily he 
could lead them again in an opposite direction! But 
altho the greatest of all the apostles, and one of the 
most remarkable orators and logicians the world has 
ever known, was in their midst, how few, comparatively, 
he could and did influence in the right direction 
—for the truth and for righteousness, in obedience to 
God. The world is in many respects the same world 
that it was then, altho civilization and general intelligence 
have done considerable to lift it out of that abject 
benightedness which leads to idol worship,— altho 
Mohammedanism, Confucianism, churchianity and a 
certain kind of Christianity, have put a veneer of respectability 
and reason and common sense upon the 
world, yet under this veneer the masses are still in a 
very unsatisfactory condition— disposed to be humbugged; 
disposed to appreciate those who would be 
boastful and pretend to be great; disposed to worship 
that which demands worship, rather than that which 
is worthy of it; disposed to misunderstand God and 
his plan, and to consider these from a devilish standpoint, 
rather than to appreciate the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of the love of God,— 
rather than to understand that as the heavens are 
higher than the earth, so are God's ways higher than 
man's ways, and God's plans than man's conceptions. 

But God was not through with the Apostle Paul; 
he was not stoned because of God's indifference, nor 
because of his lack of power to protect his servant. 
On the contrary, quite probably the Lord was teaching 
the Apostle some great lesson, valuable both to himself 
and to the Church, for whom he was a general 
minister,— and to whom even today he ministers in 
the matter of these experiences. Quite probably the 
Apostle, while being stoned, remembered afresh the 
death of Stephen, to which he had consented; and 
quite probably, too, the result was a fresh realization 
of his own unworthiness to be so prominent a representative 
of the Lord and of his truth,— a humbling 
of his heart before the Lord, profitable to him and 
to the Church also. 

Had the incident of the sacrificing not been thus 
followed by some trying experiences, who knows but 
that the Apostle might have felt a little of self-gratulation, 
such as would be natural to any man who, having 
honors thrust upon him, had voluntarily renounced 
them. He might have been disposed to glory 
in his strength of character; but his experiences led 
him in an opposite direction— as he himself subsequently 
wrote, "I will glory in tribulation." All of 
the Lord's faithful ones can learn good lessons here; 



can learn to trust to the Lord's providences in all of 

their affairs;— not only in those which seem to go 

favorably, but in those also which apparently are 

working disadvantage and disaster. The Lord said 

concerning Paul, when declaring that he was a chosen 

vessel for his service, "I will show him how great 

things he must suffer for my name's sake." From 

this lesson we may draw the inference that when the 

Lord's servants are permitted to suffer for his name's 

sake (not for wrong-doing, not for anger, malice, 

hatred, strife, evil-speaking, etc., but for his sake) it 

is an attestation of the Lord's favor, in the acceptance 

of his sacrifice— as in the type, Abel's sacrifice was accepted 

with fire. 

As the disciples stood about the prostrate form of 
Paul, supposing, as the others had, that he was dead, 
he rose up and returned to the city. We are not to 
suppose that all of the citizens joined in the mob 
which stoned him, tho we are to suppose that there 
must have been a general sympathy on the part of 
the majority, else such mob violence would not have 
been possible. It is quite probable, therefore, that 
the Apostle's return to the city was in a very quiet 
manner, so as not to unduly re-arouse the passions of 
the mob. The spirit of bravado which impels some 
people seems to have been absent in the case of these 
missionaries. They had the true courage and endured 
hardness as good soldiers in the way which the 
Lord approved; but we never see them tantalizing 
the people by boastful manner or words. They, and 
not others who misinterpret the divine will by an opposite 
course, should be our patterns, our examples, 
in such matters. 

Their entire public preaching at Lystra was at an 
end, and the next day the missionaries went to Derbe, 
a distance of 35 miles— which implies that the Lord 
wrought a wonderful miracle in Paul, in that, after receiving 
so severe treatment, a stoning unto apparent 
death, he was able on the next day to continue his 
journey. The Lord sometimes works marvelously for 
his people, as in this instance; at other times he leaves 
them to the general vicissitudes of life as other men. 

We are not informed that the Apostle made special 
prayer for his recovery, but are reminded of Timothy, 
who was one of the converts at Lystra, and to 
whom the Apostle, years afterward, wrote in his epistle 
that he should use some natural means "for his 
stomach's sake and his often infirmities"— without a 
suggestion of miraculous intervention, other than 
whatever the Lord might be pleased to give voluntarily 
without special request. And so it should be 
with us. We should use natural means for the reasonable 

R3013 :page 154 

care of our health or for recovery from sickness; 



not denying or ignoring the divine power, but 

accepting the divine providence in all of our affairs; 

rejoicing if, in the Lord's providence, our health and 

strength and opportunities for service are preserved 

to us; rejoicing also if they suffer impairment, especially 

if the impairment come in connection with the 

service of the truth; rejoicing, if the will of God be 

such, if we are quickly and miraculously healed, and 

rejoicing equally if, in the Lord's providence, we use 

natural means for the alleviation of our often infirmities, 

as the Apostle directed in the case of Timothy. 

The child of God, is to recognize that all of his affairs 

are in the Lord's hands and under his direction. In the 

meantime he is to seek to use his every talent and opportunity 

to the best of his judgment, according to the 

R3013 :page 155 

spirit of a sound mind, remembering that the Lord's 
will concerning us is that we should learn not to walk 
by sight, finding everything going favorable to us; but 
that we should learn rather to walk by faith, tho this 
necessitates that at times things should go unfavorably 
and that we should be without any special manifestations 
of divine protection or relief. 

No particulars are given regarding the ministry of 
the truth at Derbe. We may presume that it was 
without special incident. Having gone thus far, instead 
of proceeding and returning homeward by the 
nearer route, via Tarsus, Paul's home city, the missionaries 
determined to retrace their steps,— their motive 
in so doing apparently being their realization that 
the little groups of believers at Lystra, Iconium and 
Antioch in Pisidia would by this time need some encouragement 
and establishment in the truth;— that 
because of the fierce opposition in these places there 
would probably be more or less contention and 
trouble, and questions arising which the new converts 
would not be competent to solve. 

This was pastoral work; and in the homeward 
journey there is no intimation that the missionaries 
attempted further missionary work. They had no 
expectation whatever of converting all the people at 
these cities; they understood the plan of God too well 
to have any such expectations as modern mission 
workers seem to have. They knew very well that the 
mission of the gospel was, not to convert the world, 
but to choose or select out of the world a special people. 
(Acts 15:14.) They had witnessed the truth 
to these people, and had confidence that the Lord was 
behind them, and that such as had the hearing ear and 
the understanding heart (the only one, therefore, 
worthy of the truth) had already been reached by 
them, or would be reached through those who had already 
been enlightened. They accordingly contented 
themselves with the work of upbuilding the little 



flock,— encouraging them to make their calling and 
election sure to a place in the Millennial Kingdom 
which, in God's due time, in the age to come, shall 
be glorified, empowered, and then be used of the Lord 
in the world's blessing, the world's conversion, the 
world's uplift. 

The brethren of these various places were, doubtless, 
surprised that if the gospel was of God its servants, 
its ministers, should be so at the mercy of the 
forces of evil; and this may have tended to shake 
their confidence considerably, because the natural expectation 
would be that God would protect his servants. 
The Apostle explained this to the believers— 
that tribulations are necessary for the perfecting of 
the saints, for the trial of faith, for the testing and the 
preparation of those who would be joint-heirs with 
Christ in the Kingdom; and that after the permission 
of evil shall thus have served its purpose during this 
gospel age— the purpose of keeping the little flock 
separate from the world and polishing and refining of 
them for the Kingdom— then the time will come when 
Satan shall be bound,— when the righteous shall be 
persecuted no more, but reign as joint-heirs in 
Christ's Kingdom. 

Concerning the return of the apostles to these 
cities where they had previously been persecuted, an 
able writer suggests: "Precautions of secrecy they 
doubtless took, and cheerfully faced the degrading necessity 
of guarded movements, and of entering cities 
perhaps in disguise, perhaps only at late nightfall and 
early dawn. The Christians had early to learn those 
secret trysts and midnight gatherings and private 
watchwords by which alone they could elude the fury 
of their enemies." The missionaries returned, without 
further incident, to the Church whose special representatives 
on this journey they had been, and made 
their report to the Church at Antioch in Syria. 



R3013 :page 155 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER CELEBRATED. 



THE MEMORIAL celebration appears to have 

been quite general this year. More and 

more it comes to be a distinguishing sign of 

those who trust in the ransom;— as was evidently the 

divine intention. And why not? Why should 

those who "count the blood of the Covenant common 

[ordinary]" specially celebrate its shedding? 

Why should those who believe that our Lord was 

sinful flesh expect any greater results from his 

death than from the death of other men of the 



sinner race— knowing that Divine Justice cannot 

look upon any sin with allowance? Why, either, 

should those who deny that our Lord was "made 

flesh," and who, on the contrary, claim that he was a 

spirit being who merely used the flesh as a cloak, who 

deny that the spirit being died, and claim that only 

the "cloak of flesh" died,— why should they feel any 

special interest in commemorating such a farcical proceeding 

as the crucifixion of the "cloak"?— Why 

should they attribute any merit to that, or anticipate 

any virtue from it? 

Only those who see, as we do, that our Lord was 
wholly and solely for the time "the man Christ Jesus 
who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in 
due time," and who realize that he was not as other 
men, not contaminated with sin and the sinner race, 
but "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners," 
can see how he could be, and as the Scriptures 
declare was, a ransom-sacrifice, a corresponding price 
for the sins of the whole world;— that as the 
world was in Adam when he sinned and shared his 
sentence, so Adam being redeemed,— bought back 
from under the curse by Jesus, his substitute,— the 
benefits of that atonement must extend beyond Adam 
to all his posterity; insuring to all a possibility of return 
to divine favor under the Millennial Kingdom 
soon to be established for that purpose, by the 
Redeemer. 

In this doctrine of the ransom we have the firm 
foundation of all our hopes. (1) Its necessity lay in 
God's Justice and unchangeableness. 

(2) It evidenced his love toward those he had 
justly sentenced to death: so that, if ever tempted to 
doubt the Lord's love and care for us as his people, 
we can with the Apostle go back to the ransom and 
reason ourselves right again, saying, If God so loved 
us as to give his Son for us while we were yet sinners, 
much more will he love us and grant us all things 
needful,— now that we are justified by faith in his 
blood; yea, and begotten and sanctified by the holy 
spirit. 

(3) As its merits have already led to the call and 

R3013 :page 156 

acceptance of the "elect," it implies that ultimately all 
of the dead world shall be awakened, granted hearing 
ears and thus the opportunity of coming back into 
harmony with their Creator, during the Millennium 
of his grace;— "the times of restitution of all things 
which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy 
prophets since the world began."— Acts 3:19-23. 

(4) Naturally enough those who do not believe 

in the ransom do not believe in the promised restitution 
either. The ransom of something lost, forfeited, 
implies that it was valuable, and the promise of its 



restitution signifies the same; and both these words 
ransom and restitution contradict and are in violent 
conflict with all evolutionary ideas— respecting 
Adam's original imperfection— that he was so low that 
he could not fall and did not fall and did not need to be 
redeemed from a fall, and that restitution to his original 
condition would be a sad calamity instead of a 
blessing. 

To those who appreciate the divine plan of the 
ages the ransom and its memorial are sure to become 
more and more precious as the few remaining years 
of their pilgrimage roll around: each year will see 
them the more zealous to "do this" in remembrance of 
the death of the Lamb of God which taketh away the 
sins of the world;— which is the propitiation (satisfaction) 
for our sins (the Church's), and not for ours only 
but also for the sins of the whole world.— I Cor. 5:7; 
11:23-26; Jno. 1:29; I Jno. 2:2. 

The occasion was surely a very enjoyable one to 
all who participated in a right spirit. It could not be 
otherwise. If any true believer sought a blessing in 
commemorating, and failed to obtain it, let him inquire 
within, and find that it was because he had not 
first "purged out the old leaven;"— because envy, malice, 
hatred, evil-speaking or evil-surmising— works of 
the flesh and the devil— still had a place in his heart, 
which should, instead, have been filled with the Lord's 
spirit of love,— gentleness, meekness, patience, 
brotherly-kindness;— the love which is not puffed up, 
envieth not, thinketh no evil and is full of mercy and 
good works. If any find themselves to have missed 
the real communion, by reason of such "defilements" 
let them purge their hearts with the water of truth, 
the Word of God, and let them celebrate four weeks 
later— on May 18th, as was arranged for the typical 
Israelite who because of defilements was hindered 

R3014:page 156 

from keeping the feast at its appointed season.— 
Num. 9:10,11. 

The occasion was a very enjoyable one in Allegheny; 
—solemnity commingled with joy as we 
thought of our dear Redeemer's sufferings and ignominious 
death on our behalf; yet rejoiced in its 
blessed results already experienced by us and in prospect 
for the world. In few and simple words we recounted 
the meaning of the ordinance— in type and 
antitype. We viewed the unleavened bread, which 
symbolized to us our Lord's humanity, given as our 
ransom, that we by partaking of his merits might have 
justification and life imputed to us by the Father,— so 
fully as to permit us to be reckoned in with our Lord 
as members of the one loaf, the one body, and to be 
broken with him, sharing his sacrifice that in due time 
we may participate in the feeding of the whole world 



with this bread of life. We considered "the cup" 

similarly, as our Lord's consecrated blood (sacrificed 

life) sealing the New Covenant for the world of 

mankind. We partook of it thus, and also as joint-participators 

with him— pledged to be dead with him 

that we may also live and reign with him.— I Cor. 10:16,17; 

Rom. 6:8. 

About 335 were present at the Memorial service, 
and fully 300 of the number partook of the emblems 
with every evidence of intelligent sincerity;— witnessing 
to each other our faith in the Lord and his work 
for us, and our devotion to him and his even unto 
death, at any sacrifice;— his grace assisting, according 
to his promise. Endeavoring to preserve the blessed 
communion with our Lord we consented to forego 
usual greetings and conversation at the end of the 
service, and after singing, "What a friend we have in 
Jesus" we went silently to our homes,— full of holy 
joy and thankfulness. Twelve, prevented by illness, 
from being with us, were served subsequently by 
friends on their way home. 

THE CELEBRATION ELSEWHERE AS REPORTED. 

Some of the reports expected are a little slow in 
reaching us, but those received are encouraging. We 
give you a very few of these for your joy and encouragement, 
—believing that like ourself our readers 
generally esteem the interest manifested at the Memorial 
season a good index to the spiritual health of 
the Church. 

The fellow-members of the Lord's body everywhere 
were remembered in prayers by the Allegheny 
congregation; and letters received show that this appreciation 
of the oneness and fellowship of the Church 
was general. One hundred and seventy-five reports 
received up to this writing, show an average participation 
of 27. The average last year was twelve and 
the previous year 10. This is very encouraging, to 
us all, surely. The general tone of the reports too indicates 
fervency of spirit. We can, of course, give but 
a few extracts. 

page 156 

Dear Brother Russell: 

I am sure you will rejoice with us in that this year 
in Washington 50 (38 white and 12 colored) persons celebrated 
the Memorial Supper and partook of the emblems 
of sacrifice, as against twenty-six last year, our company 
having nearly doubled in numbers. The services were conducted 
by Bro. Thomson and were most impressive throughout. 
We were mindful of the friends elsewhere and united 
in prayer on their behalf, especially remembering the laborers 
in the Watch Tower office— yourself in particular. 
As time goes on we feel the greater need of coming together. 



So thoroughly do the friends here appreciate this 
means of grace that very rarely is one absent from a 
meeting. 
Praying the Lord's grace to be with you, I remain, 
Your brother on the altar of sacrifice, 
J. A. B. --Washington City. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

Five brothers and sisters whose trust is in the merit of 
the precious blood met at our home last evening at 7:30 and 
partook of the emblems of our Redeemer's broken body and 
shed blood. The Lord's blessing was with us; a blessed 
unity of the spirit prevailed; our prayers ascended to the 
throne of grace for a greater filling with the Lord's spirit 
for ourselves and all the family of God. 

We do feel that it is a great favor to be counted worthy 
to have a share in the sufferings of our Lord and Redeemer. 
Four others who met with us on previous anniversaries 
were detained this year on account of sickness and 
other causes. 

Assuring you of our continued love toward, and prayer 
for, you and all the office helpers, I remain, 

Yours in the love and service of Christ, 
F. H. R.-Catskill, N.Y. 



page 157 

My Dear Pastor in Christ: 

This has been a blessed day of sacred communion with 
the Master and his "brethren." From the first of the morning 
testimony meeting till the last hymn was sung at night 
was a continuous season of profound spiritual blessings and 
favors, such as we believe few if any of the friends have 
ever experienced before in this city. About sixty-five were 
in attendance at the morning service; and how refreshing 
it was to listen to the earnest, fervent words from various 
lips as they testified to the goodness and love of the Heavenly 
Father as conveyed to us through Christ in his gracious 
providences! 

During the afternoon a baptism service was performed, 
preceded by an able discourse on Consecration, showing 
how the water immersion beautifully symbolizes this, 
—our becoming dead with Christ,— sacrificing the old nature, 
our wills, our all; and henceforth to arise and walk 
in newness of life,— the life that is "hid with Christ in God." 
This was a very impressive service— twenty-one being immersed, 
thus witnessing to others that they are wholly and 
completely Christ's, to do the Father's good pleasure, even 
unto death. Eighty-six were present at this service. 

The Memorial Supper, commemorating our dear Redeemer's 
great sacrifice,— his broken body and shed blood, 
and the sublime honor and privilege granted us to share 



in his sacrificial suffering and death, was partaken of by 
seventy-two of the Lord's chosen ones. A feeling of absolute 
harmony and love prevailed. As the speaker portrayed 
our Lord's great sacrifice begun at the time of his baptism 
and completed on the cross, at Calvary, all seemed to realize 
very fully how great was the price given to ransom 
us from sin and death. 

With full and grateful hearts we gave thanks to God 
for the gift of his dear Son, and for his glorious invitation 
to become joint-heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer 
with him. 

Having partaken of the emblems we sang a hymn (No. 
23) which seemed to voice the predominating sentiment or 
spirit of the meeting most appropriately. 

The friends in various parts of the earth were remembered, 
and we trust that all realized clearly the near and 
dear presence of our Redeemer and King, Jesus the 
Anointed One. 

With much Christian love, I am truly yours in the patient 
waiting for the Kingdom. 

H. C. R.-New York City. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

Eighteen of the friends met at our hall this evening 
to celebrate the memorial of our Lord's death. We had a 
very impressive service; and I think we all had the same 
experience as that of one brother who said: "I understand 
the meaning of the service better than ever before." Six 
of the friends from this place symbolized their death with 
Christ by baptism this afternoon. We feel rejoiced in these 
evidences that the Lord is blessing our efforts to spread 
the truth, and feel more determined than ever to spend and 
be spent in His service. 

With Christian love, 

Yours in Him, 

C. P. B.-Lynn, Mass. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

The church in and near New Brighton celebrated the 
Lord's Supper last evening at the home of Brother Garver. 
The participants were only eight. Although few in number 
each one seemed animated with the same spirit, and all felt 
like saying with Paul "God forbid that I should glory save 
in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world 
is crucified unto me and I unto the world." The occasion 
was one of solemnity and blessedness, long to be 
remembered. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

B. C. R.-New Brighton, Pa. 



Dear Friends: 

There were just twelve at the Memorial Supper last 
evening. Several were hindered on account of sickness. 
Bro. Gaylord gave a good talk in the afternoon on the 
Memorial and Baptism. 
All seemed greatly interested and refreshed in spirit. 
Yours in our Blessed Redeemer, 

F. L. H.— Denver, Colo. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

Once more we have been permitted to commemorate 
our Redeemer's death. Twelve of us met together at the 
home of Bro. Watson, and we shall long remember the hour 
we spent together in sweet communion with our Lord and 
Savior in spirit. There was a beautiful spirit of harmony 
and of brotherly love, that could have come from no other 
source but from our Master's presence. One brother spoke 
very feelingly on the subject of the ransom, after which we 
all joined our voices in singing that beautiful hymn, No. 
122, then an opportunity was given for each one to express 
a thought, and every one spoke a few words. There were 
a few precious moments of hearts drawn together in loving 
sympathy, as we heard the experiences, the hopes and the 
joys of our brethren in the pilgrim way. 

A brother spoke on the "bread" as the food upon which 
the "new man" feeds and gathers strength, and grows. After 
the unleavened bread had been partaken of by each, 
another brother spoke briefly on the wine as the symbol of 
the life-blood poured out for us, and not for us only but for 
the whole human family. Then we partook of the "cup." 
After a prayer and thanksgiving we sang No. 259 and immediately 
went to our several homes. It was, by far, the 
most blessed meeting we have yet enjoyed, and we sincerely 
hope that the dear ones in Christ everywhere have been 
likewise blessed. 

Your brother in Christ, 

E. G. P.-Niagara Falls, NY. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

We had the best celebration of the Memorial Supper 
spiritually that was ever held here. In the afternoon we 
studied the text, "Watch and pray, etc.," and in the evening 
endeavored to learn a lesson on the oneness of the 
body of Christ, and that the disciple is not above his Master. 
Fifteen was the number of the partakers. The meeting 
was held at my house. In Christian love and fellowship, 
Yours, 

S. K.-Port Clinton, O. 



Dear Brother Russell: 



It is with thankfulness that I send the report of the 
Memorial Supper, as observed by the class at Cincinnati, O. 
There were thirty-seven present, and all partook of the 
symbols, in memory of the great antitypical Passover Lamb, 
slain for all that die in Adam. 

Among the number present were eleven who had never 
partaken of the memorial with us before. They all expressed 
themselves as filled with joy and love at the clear 
exposition of the subject, and most of them confessed that 
they had never seen the true meaning of it before. It was 
indeed a season of rejoicing for the class here. 

With love toward all in the "Tower" office and all 
God's children, I am, 

Yours in the love of Christ, 

E. F. R.-Ohio. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

Our little band of five (two brethren, three sisters), 
met last evening at the appointed hour, to remember the 
anniversary of our dear Lord's death. We had a very 
blessed occasion and humbly asked our dear Father that 
all of his dear "sheep," everywhere, would be blessed also. 
Each one of our little band is intensely desirous that this 
shall be the most faithful year in our consecrated life, 
and that our dear Father will continue to polish and prune 
us, that we may bear more fruit, and hope to be completely 
broken with Christ. "Brethren, pray for us!" 

Your brethren in the one glorious hope, the Church at 
Carbon Hill. 

W. H. W.-Carbon Hill, Ills. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

The Cleveland church met last night to commemorate 
our dear Lord's great sacrifice for us. Bro. Hess led the 
meeting and we spent an hour before the evening service 
in prayer and testimony. Many pledged themselves afresh 
to follow in His footsteps, and we remembered all the dear 
ones of like precious faith. Forty-nine participated in the 
Supper, and we indeed had sweet moments, which were rich 
in blessing. We closed with hymn No. 276 and retired 
silently. 

Yours with much Christian love, 
F. S.-Cleveland, O. 



page 158 

My dear Brother Russell: 

I was deputed to inform you, in accordance with the desire 
expressed in the "Tower" for such information, that 
the Church at Portsmouth, Va., observed the annual Memorial 



of our dear Savior's death last evening. 

There were present eight persons, including myself, 
who are trusting in the blood of our dear Redeemer and who 
have consecrated unto the death the old man with all his 
hopes, desires and ambitions. There was a feeling of deep 
solemnity; but holy joy pervaded each heart, and confession 
was made of and sorrow expressed for all short-comings 
in the past, and a renewal of our Consecration vows, 
with the fixed purpose and determination on the part of each 
one to continue striving for the Mark of the Prize of our 
High Calling, by the help of our now present Lord and 
King. 

Your brother in the Blessed Hope, 

W. W. M. --Portsmouth, Va. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

The Church of Boston and vicinity observed the annual 
memorial of the Lord's Supper in the usual manner last 
evening, at our regular place of worship, one hundred and 
thirty-eight adults being present and participating. 

In the afternoon a baptismal service was held at People's 
Temple, at which thirty-two friends symbolized their 
consecration by water baptism. 

Yours in the blessed hope, 
H. L. A. -Mass. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

Our Memorial meeting was a most solemn one in 
which fifty-one participated. 

To say that our hearts were full of praise and thankfulness 
hardly expresses our feelings. The deep solemnity 
of the occasion seemed to impress each one as we symbolically 
renewed our vows of consecration to our dear 
Lord— all present seemed to realize the position and the 
necessity of continuing the race more and more earnestly 
as the time is so short and also the great necessity of 
a oneness of heart and mind seemed to pervade the whole 
assembly. 

Yours in our Master's service, 

E. S.— Toronto, Canada. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

It was the privilege of the church at Detroit to assemble 
last evening, and partake of the emblems which symbolize 
our participation in the death— sacrifice of our dear 
Lord and Master. Seventeen were present. 

As some members living at a distance were delayed, 
we listened to the testimony of several who have been consecrated 
sons of God for many years. While the individual 
experiences varied, yet the result was the same in all— the 



submerging of the will in the will of God, that He might 
be all in all. 

As there were four present who had never before partaken 
of the Memorial with us, our leader spoke at some 
length regarding the significance of the bread and wine. 
He showed, that all believers who partake of these symbols 
in sincerity of heart, are benefited, but that to us there is 
a fuller, deeper significance than the world can ever understand: 
that in the "cup of blessing" we participate in 
the blood of the anointed one and that we are a part of 
the loaf broken and given to the world that they may be 
fed, in the next age. 

That in partaking of these emblems, we declare the 
Lord's death till he come in kingdom power, and to ourselves 
renew our covenant to be buried with Him, that we 
may be with Him in the resurrection of the first-born, and 
share with Him in His glory and power. 

The thought that we share in our Lord's sacrifice, not 
merely that we may win the prize to be won by the overcomers, 
but that as a part of the seed of Abraham we may 
share in the work of "blessing all the families of earth" in 
the next age, gives a broader and grander aspect to our 
sacrifice, and helps us in our daily struggle to overcome 
the old fleshy nature, that the new and Christlike character 
may take its place, and that all God's purpose may 
be fulfilled. 

May God bless and preserve you and your co-laborers 
in spreading the "glad tidings" abroad. 

With much love from the members of our Church here, 
I remain, 

Sincerely in Him, 

F. C. S. --Detroit, Mich. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

We wish to inform you of the precious season enjoyed 
at the Memorial Supper here for the first time as a church. 
There were eight present and all partook of the emblems 
of Christ's body and blood. One, an earnest seeker for 
truth, came a distance of fifty or more miles. 

This sister had read Vol. I., and came on purpose to 
get more light and help. Tonight after reading and searching 
the Scriptures she made this remark, "I would have gone 
round the world to have heard what I have heard tonight." 
And as we closed our reading for the night, she had her 
Bible open and read for her testimony the 103d Psalm, 
"Bless the Lord, O my soul," etc. 

With deep gratitude, we remain, 

Yours in the glorious hope, 

H. E. F.-Ithaca, N.Y. 



Dear Brother Russell: 
The friends of truth here observed the Lord's Memorial. 



We were blessed spiritually, and I think all felt 

the importance of the occasion, and that it was good to be 

there. Twenty-nine partook of the elements representing 

our Lord's broken body and shed blood. Having the pleasure 

of several brethren and sisters from adjoining towns, 

our numbers were increased above our usual attendance. 

The Church here unites in expressing their Christian 
love to you. We all pray that our Heavenly Father may 
strengthen and keep you, enabling you to give to His loved 
ones the "meat in due season." 

Your brother in the glorious hope, 
C. H. A. --Baltimore, Md. 



R3014:page 158 

THE NEW BIBLES THOROUGHLY APPRECIATED. 



ALTHOUGH we have not yet been able to fill 

all the orders for the new Bibles— sending 

them out as rapidly as the binders can furnish them— 

nevertheless, we have heard from quite a number who 

have received them that they give great satisfaction. 

page 158 

We cannot do better perhaps than give you extracts 
from a few of these letters as follows:— 

Dear Brother Russell:— I have received that beautiful 
Bible. I am in ecstasies about it. I am profoundly grateful 
to our Father, yourself and all those connected with its 
making and perfecting. It is indeed a wonder. I did not 
expect half as much when I first read of the work you were 
going to undertake. It is a great blessing indeed to all 
interested in present truth, and who are fighting the good 
fight of faith, and urging on toward the mark of the High 
Calling. 

Yours in love, fellowship and service, 
W. H. P. -Toronto, Can. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

The wide margin Bibles for the Washington congregation 
sent in lot to my address were received this morning 
and some of them I have already delivered. Those who 
have seen them are perfectly delighted and say they would 
not take many times the price for them. It would do you 
good to hear the satisfactory remarks concerning these remarkable 
Bibles— the only ones of the kind in existence— and 
to note the beaming face and glad light in the eyes of the 
beholder. If I were tendered twenty-five dollars for mine 
I should not entertain for a moment the thought of parting 



with it if I could not secure another, altho I had already 
marked one of my Bibles in this way from the copy 
at the Watch Tower office. I have found that Bible more 
helpful in Bible study than all the other helps combined, 
hence know from experience how helpful this Bible will be 
to students of the Word. The Topical Index is an entirely 
new feature, and a happy surprise. It alone is worth the 
price of the book. I can in a sense realize the stupendous 
undertaking to prepare this work. We all owe you a debt of 

page 159 

gratitude for your solicitude on our behalf. I am sure the 
Lord will bless your effort and amply reward you. But 
you always declare that He already has rewarded you, and 
that you are striving to render some return for his goodness. 
To him be the praise in using you so admirably to 
the furthering of his cause. Brother, I cannot thank you 
sufficiently for this treasure. I prize it above everything 
I have. May the Lord continue to direct your mind and 
heart in this blessed service, and may your joy be full as 
you seek to know and do his will. My prayers are with 
you and for you as I know yours are ascending on my behalf. 
Continue to remember me at the throne of grace that 
my faith fail not. We are having splendid meetings with 
an average attendance of about twenty-five, and the Tower 
office force is always remembered in our prayers. 
Your brother in the love and service of the truth, 
J. A. B. --Washington, D.C. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

In behalf of Sr. Black and self, I wish to thank you 
for the new Bibles. Our hearts were strangely touched as 
we examined with considerable care the different features 
of the work; and we trust it will prove a new incentive to 
faithfulness. The value of the work is far beyond our 
sanguine anticipations. 

The literature is being read here with a good deal of 
appreciation and our work does not seem to meet with 
much opposition. What proportion of the results will be 
reaped early is in the hands of the Chief Reaper. 

We realize an ever-increasing joy in the privilege of 
engaging in this feature of Harvest work. All join in gratitude 
for your faithful service and in prayers for God's 
abundant blessing on every feature of the work now drawing 
so near to its close. 

Your brother in the One Hope, 
W. W. Black. 



Dear Brethren in Christ: 

My new Bible has arrived and I feel that my heartiest 
appreciation of your services in providing for us such a 



treasure is but a very small return for your kindness. The 

whole arrangement of the work is so neat, compact, comprehensive 

and first-class that it seems as tho no improvement 

could be made in the book. To have the help 

of such a volume adds greatly to the pleasure of study and 

research. The material of the Towers and Dawns is available 

now in a moment's time and this fact will be greatly 

appreciated by those of us who have not been in the truth 

for any great length of time. 

May the Lord use this book for the upbuilding of His 
Church in the truth, is my prayer. 

Your sister in the truth, 

L. S. W.-Ontario. 



My Dear Brother Russell: 

I today received my copy of the Bible, for which I 
have been looking, and praying. I have had time only for 
a general examination of it, but that examination has filled 
my heart with gratitude and praise to God for his wonderful 
help in the study of his Word. I could but fall upon my 
knees and express that gratitude to him for such a book, 
and to implore the life-giving power of his ever blessed 
spirit to shine upon it and our hearts as we descend to a 
deeper level of the great mine of golden truth. It impresses 
my heart very deeply, that he has restored my sight, 
for six months ago had the same book been put into my 
hands I could not have read a word, but now thank his 
dear name, I can feast on the good things there, and aid 
others to a like feast. Praise our great, loving and merciful 
Heavenly Father! And I feel that our thanks are due 
you for the great treasure you have (by the blessing of God) 
put into our hands. 

Yours in the love of the truth, 
W. F. E. -Maine. 



R3014:page 159 

We felt sure in advance that all the dear friends 
of the truth would appreciate having just such a copy 
of our Father's Word, and are glad that we were not 
mistaken. The publishers were astounded when they 
learned that the edition of 5,000 had been nearly all 
subscribed for in advance. It is now the turn of those 
who receive them to feel amazed that so splendid a 
book could be produced for the money. We are glad 
indeed to know of your appreciation of our efforts 
in your behalf; and now we trust that a systematic use 
of the new Bible will be instituted as quickly as possible 
amongst the friends. 

We trust that all of you will promptly acquaint 
yourselves with the various new features of this new 
Bible; and for a complete explanation we refer you to 



a description which follows its title page, under the 

heading, "Special Features of This Edition— Berean 

Bible Study Helps." Therein we offer some suggestions 

respecting Bible-study meetings. The regular 

leaders everywhere will have no difficulty in understanding 

the suggestions, and we believe that they 

will be found so helpful that speedily such meetings 

will be a part of the regular order amongst the friends 

in general. Indeed where there is no experienced 

leader, there should be no difficulty in conducting 

not only an interesting but a profitable and instructive 

service. If you cannot have a large meeting, remember 

the Lord's special promise to the twos and 

threes gathering in his name— claim the promise by 

fulfilling your part of it. "Forget not the assembling 

of yourselves together," as the Lord, through the 

Apostle enjoins,— and "so much the more as you see 

the day approaching."— Heb. 10:25. 

The custom of the nominal church systems, to 
have one member of the congregation do all the 
preaching, all the teaching, is one that has done 
much injury, in that it has given rise to a division of 
the church into classes— clergy and laity;— additionally 
it has laid too much work upon the few called the 
clergy to permit of their attention to things of this 
present life, providing things honest in the sight of 
all men; and by taking away from the majority of the 
Lord's people their responsibility and share in the 
ministry it has deprived them of a great blessing, and 
hindered their growth in grace and their development 
as servants of the truth. 

We are not opposing the preaching of the gospel 
by those who have the talent for it; but our thought 
is that the Lord never intended the meetings of his 
people to be all of the preaching kind. It was not so 
in the early church as the Apostle explains (I Cor. 12; 
I Thess. 5:11.) An effort should be made to develop 
whatever talent there is in any little company 
—to incite and draw out thought and expression respecting 
the divine plan as presented in the Word. 
Let those who have ability to preach do so in moderation; 
let them also help others to various shares in 
the service of the truth. As each seeks to grow in 
grace and to assist others, the Lord will open further 
and wider doors of opportunity— perhaps in near-by 
towns or in other quarters of the same city. The harvest 
is great and the laborers are few, and it should be 
the constant effort of all who are faithful to the Lord 
and to the cause, not only to serve one another, but 
to help one another into the service. We pray the 
Lord that the new Bible may be greatly blessed of 
him in this way— in helping many to engage in the 
ministry of the truth as leaders of Berean Bible 
classes. 



page 161 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. JUNE 1, 1902. No. 11. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 163 

"Making Void the Word of God" 163 

The Next Great Religious 

Awakening 164 

Navajo Indians 165 

Rome's Position in the Coming 

Conflict 166 

Bishop Quigley on Socialism 166 

Attaining Christian Liberty, 

Wherewith Christ Made Us Free 167 

Abiding in Divine Love, Conditional 171 

What are the Commandments? 171 

God's Supervision of His People 

and His Message 173 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



WE ARE NOT COMPLAINING, BUT- 

As the Editor goes from place to place holding "One 
Day Conventions," he finds that about one-half of those who 
greet him heartily are not Watch Tower subscribers;— many 
of them coming long distances, at considerable expense. 



There is encouragement as well as discouragement in this: 
it is encouraging to know that the 13,500 names on our 
lists are by no means all of those deeply interested in present 
truth. The discouragement comes with the thought 
that these dear friends surely need the twice-a-month visits 
of the Watch Tower to encourage and assist them in this 
evil day; and yet, that all we have done, or seem able to 
do, avails little in the matter of getting and keeping their 
names on our list. 

(1) We have offered credit on subscriptions as long 
and as often as desired, with the privilege of writing us at 
any future time requesting the cancelation of the debt. 
(2) We have offered the Watch Tower free to those requesting 
it, and saying that their circumstances do not justify 
their sending the money. (3) We have asked all the 
dear friends who do get the Tower, and who believe that 
it would benefit others, to draw it to their attention and get 
their subscription— cash or credit. 

We felt specially hopeful of the last of these recommendations 
in connection with the others; but only a 
few, comparatively, seem to have noticed the request or 
put forth any successful effort. What more can we do, to 
secure the other 13,500 interested friends for our list— for 
their spiritual upbuilding? We have well-nigh exhausted 
our ingenuity. No; we will not resort to "Premiums";— 
we should feel ashamed to offer our readers "premiums" 
for subscriptions. The Lord's approval and the privilege 
of helping to wash fellow-members of the "feet" class is 
premium enough, surely. We appeal to all who desire a 
service to the Lord and to the brethren to put forth another 
effort to gather to our lists all who are interested in present 
truth in any degree— either for a cash subscription or 
on either of the terms mentioned above. 

This is not a matter of personal, financial profit; for 
the Tower now belongs to the Society, and hence if more 
money were received than would meet the cost of publication, 
it would be spent in sending out God's light and truth 
to reach others as it reached you. Our whole concern is 
that what is being published may reach as many eyes and 
hearts as possible to encourage and bless them. 



R3015 :page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

MAKING VOID THE WORD OF GOD BY YOUR TRADITIONS. 
-MARK 7: 13. 



COMPARATIVELY FEW of the "common 
people" of Christendom realize how 
thoroughly the Word of God has already 
been rejected by the leading Doctors of theology. 



When, over twenty years ago, we pointed out from the 
Word of God that all classes of Christendom were 
about to be tested on the fundamentals of Christian 
faith, and that according to Psalm 91, a thousand 
would fall into unbelief to one who would stand faithful, 
some mocked— considering that no more absurd 
proposition could possibly be made. Apply this rule 
now to the 300,000,000 of Christendom and the number 
to stand would be 30,000. 

In our last issue we noted that some candidates 
for ministerial office in the Presbyterian Church had 
publicly disowned belief in Adam and Eve as the first 
parents of our race— considering that portion of the 
Scripture mythical, unreal, untrue; and how the Elizabeth 
(N.J.), Presbytery finally passed such an one,— 
who purposes to become a missionary. Since then the 
subject has been considerably discussed in the secular 
and religious press, and so far as we have noted, 
generally in sympathy with the unbeliever;— generally 
in condemnation of those who called in question the 
unbeliever's right to acceptance as "orthodox." This 
is truly a peculiar world: any one who believes in the 
Second Coming of our Lord to be the King of earth, 
as foretold in the Scriptures scores of times, is "off-color," 
"tainted" or "non-orthodox," according to the 
bias of his critics. The man who denies eternal torment 
as both unreasonable and unscriptural, and who 
calls for proof texts from the Bible (not parable 
and symbolic statements, but literal), or who denies 
that the Bible offers immortality in any sense or condition 
to the wicked, and asks for proof texts,— is denounced 
as a "heretic," as is also the man who declares 
that he believes in the Father and in the Son 
and in the Holy Spirit, and that these are at one, or in 
full harmony, but who denies that it can be true that 
they are one in person, or that the Scriptures so state, 
and invites proof texts. On the other hand, whoever 
professes to believe these things which the Bible does 
not teach, and which reason repudiates, and who denies 
the Bible record of creation, accepting instead 
the unscriptural theory of evolution,— that man is 
promptly labeled orthodox, and any unwilling to so 
concede are promptly denounced as unenlightened 
fossils. Surely this is what the Lord referred to as 
putting light for darkness and darkness for light- 
calling evil good, and good evil.— Isa. 5:20. 

The following is from the comment of the New 
York Independent, one of the leading "orthodox" religious 
journals of the world:— 

"We venture to say that there is not a competent educated 
professor of biology or geology in the obscurest 
Presbyterian college in the United States who believes that 
the Adam and Eve of Genesis were historical characters. 
One would have to rake all our colleges and universities 
with a fine-toothed comb to find such a teacher, and very 
few they would be. The belief, in scientific circles, of such 



an Adam and Eve is dead, and is no longer considered or 

discussed. Of course, the doctrine of a literal Adam lingers 

in popular belief, just as once did the belief in the world 

made in six literal days; but it is held by those who got 

their education a generation or two ago, or who never got 

any education at all. The older men in the presbyteries, especially 

those who have, for one reason or another, dropped out of the educative 

stress of pastoral life, have not learned what the colleges now 

teach; and it is they that oppose their large ignorance to modern 

knowledge." 

What plainer statement of present conditions 
could we ask? and from what higher authority could 
it come? Notice again the last sentence, which we 
have italicized: only old fogies— country preachers 
and the unlearned— any longer believe the Bible to be 
God's revelation. To the "cultured" it is a book of 
fairy tales mixed with pessimistic nonsense of weeping 
prophets who never dreamed of the grand time coming 
when the trust-giants shall hold full sway and 
bring in the Millennium of wealth and aristocracy. 
Not knowing so much as these modern teachers, 
"higher critics," the prophets dreamed and wrote of 

R3015 :page 164 

a second coming of Christ, and of the establishment 
of a Kingdom of God under the whole heavens;— of 
a lifting up of the poor and the needy and a humbling 
of the great;— of a laying of righteousness to the line 
and justice to the plummet. Well, we prefer to be 
with the Lord and the Apostles: we prefer to believe 
"all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 

The editor of the (New York) Mail and Express, 
not being a trained theologian and Doctor of Divinity, 
shows his "backwoods" ideas on the subject as 
follows:— 

"It is one thing to say that the story of Adam and 
Eve is a myth, and quite another to say that it is false. 
Embodied in the Scriptural account in the first chapter 
of Genesis is the most profound bit of wisdom, the most 
searching dip into the springs of human action in the face 
of the great mystery of life and divinity that surrounds us, 
the most vivid revelation of the power of God and the helplessness, 
yet hopefulness of life, that all the world's literature 
has brought down to us. It is fundamental in many 
ways. That the guardians of religious doctrine should seek 
to hold neophytes to a belief in it is not to be wondered at. 

"A myth is but old, old speech. All things are spoken 
in some shape before they are written. The myth is the 
spoken, elder Scripture. Not all myths are entitled to become 
Scripture; but this one was so entitled— and it is true. 
If anything possesses authority in this doubting age, this 
record does. There may be more wisdom in the act of simple 
dominies who require rigid adherence to its letter than 
in the proceedings of those who treat it with flippant doubt." 



This learned editor, in his anxiety to "straddle" 
the subject and to please both parties, has used the 
word myth in an unusual and unauthorized manner, 
which merely shows that he and others are well shaken 
in their credence of the Bible, tho not yet ready to 
abandon it completely. We quote the Standard Dictionary's 
definition of this use of the word myth, as 
follows:— 

"A fictitious or conjectural narrative presented as historical, 
but without any basis of fact; hence, an imaginary 
or fictitious person, object, or event; as Santa Claus is a 
myth. 

"The difference between legend and myth is now well 
known. ...The myth is purely the work of imagination, 
the legend has a nucleus of fact." 

"Synonyms, Antonyms and Prepositions," says:— 

"A legend may be true, but can not be historically verified; 
a myth has been received as true at some time, but 
is now known to be false." 

How long will it require for people to learn that 
the Bible is so thoroughly one, and its story one, that 
a repudiation of one part means the repudiation of the 
whole? For instance, some may reason that the truth 
or falsity of the story of Adam and Eve and their 
original perfection in their Eden home, has no bearing 
upon the general plan of salvation presented in 
the Scriptures; but in this they greatly err. If there 
was no fall from holiness and perfection, there could 
be no need of a Redeemer to ransom him and his posterity 
from such a condemnation; and the promised 
blessing of a restitution of man to Adam's primeval 
estate would be an absurdity. 

But let the good work go on. For, as the Apostle 
said in his day,— "There must be heresies also among 
you, that they which are approved may be made manifest." 
(I Cor. 11:19.) Much more is this the case 
now: the "harvest" time of separating wheat from 
tares having come this seems to be the Lord's method 
of hastening it in its due season. "None of the 
wicked will understand, but the wise shall understand." 
(Dan. 12:10.) The wise toward God, counted 
fools by the wisdom of this world, will begin to open 
their eyes to the true situation as this breach grows 
wider. They will begin to "inquire for the old paths," 
and then will be in the right condition to hear and 
heed the true Shepherd's voice and to comprehend 
with all saints the divine plan of the ages. These 
("not many") are hungry for it now, but are deterred 
by the misrepresentations of the shepherds of Babylon 
whom they trust too implicitly,— taking their word 
without proving it by the Word of the Lord. 

RUSSIAN SOLDIERS REFUSE TO SHOOT AT MOB. 



The following quotation from the London Pall 
Mall Gazette, indicates that already the great "European 
public school" (the standing army), is learning 
its lesson and getting ready for the coming conflict:— 

"During the demonstration in the Hazan Square, in 
St. Petersburg, a detachment of infantry was called upon 
to fire upon the crowd. The men thrice refused to obey, 
and were marched back to barracks, no inquiry being subsequently 
held. Similar incidents have occurred elsewhere. 
With universal service, the army is only the people in uniform. 
Any popular feeling must, sooner or later, touch the 
army, and if the soldiers cannot be depended upon to shoot, 
the game of absolutism is up." 

R3016 :page 164 

THE NEXT GREAT RELIGIOUS AWAKENING. 



The Rev. Dr. John Watson ("Ian Maclaren"), in 
a recent widely quoted sermon at the London Wesleyan 
Mission's anniversary, noted the fact that in late 
years great spiritual revivals have been lacking in 
England and that the present temper of mind is not 
prepared for such revivals. He went on to say that 
he believed we are on the eve of a great revival, but 
that it will be primarily a social revival, inspired by 
the religious spirit. What if God be calling on men, 
he asked, not to build more churches, but to secure 
better and purer homes for His people? To cleanse 
communities of liquor saloons and haunts of 
vice? To see that every man for whom Christ 
died should have a fair chance to do honest 
work with honest pay, and to have a home where he 
can live in decency with wife and children? May not 
these be the most efficient means to bring men into 
conscious fellowship with God? 

The Rev. Dr. Josiah Strong, of New York, takes 
the same position in his new book, "The Next Great 
Awakening." All great religious revivals in the past, 
declares Dr. Strong, have come as the result of 
"the preaching of a neglected Scriptural truth which 
was precisely adapted to the peculiar needs of the 
times." Wesley and Whitefield, in an age in which 
religion seemed to be given over to outward and formal 
observances, preached the need of "conversion," 
the conscious beginning of a new spiritual life. Charles 
G. Finney, at a time when "the divine sovereignty of 
God was held in such a way as to destroy all appreciation 
of human freedom," thundered forth "the neglected 

R3016 :page 165 

truth of man's free-agency and guilt, and the 
retribution due to sin." Moody, following close upon 



the Civil War, when "millions of hearts were longing 
for consolation," preached "the love of God." And 
now, declares Dr. Strong, the church is on the verge 
of a new spiritual awakening: 

"It is quite obvious that the great questions peculiar 
to our times are social. The industrial revolution has produced 
a social revolution; we have passed, within three 
generations, from an individualistic to a social or collective 
type of civilization. Relations which a hundred years ago 
were few and simple are now becoming many and complex. 
New questions concerning rights and duties are being 
asked. Society is gaining self-consciousness, which 
marks one of the most important steps in the progress of 
the race. We are beginning to see that society lives one 
vast life, of which every man is a part. We are gaining 
what Walter Besant calls 'the sense of humanity.' We are 
discovering that life is something larger and farther related 
than we had thought; and with this perception of 
wider and multiplied relations comes a new sense of social 
obligations. That is, a social conscience is growing, tho as 
yet it is uninstructed. 

"The wonderful increase of wealth and of knowledge 
during the past century has served to create a new discontent 
and to kindle a new hope. It has transferred the 
golden age of the world from the past to the future; and 
this golden age, yet to come, constitutes a new social ideal. 

"The social ideal of Jesus is precisely what is needed to 
inform and spiritualize and perfect this new social ideal, 
and the social laws of Jesus are precisely what is needed 
to educate the new social conscience." 

Dr. Strong interprets the "social laws of Jesus" 
under three main heads, as follows: 

(1) The Law of Service. Our substance, our time, 
our powers, our opportunities are all entrusted to us for 
service. Life itself is a sacred trust, and the whole life 
of every disciple of Christ is to be spent, like that of his 
master, in the service of the kingdom, and in hastening its 
full coming in the earth. 

(2) The Law of Sacrifice. The spirit of sacrifice gives 
all, and longs for more to fill the measure of the world's 

sore need. It is the high prerogative of conscious and intelligent 
man to offer conscious and intelligent sacrifice. 
He receives according to his need that he may give according 
to his ability; receives food that he may give strength, 
receives knowledge that he may give it forth as power. 

(3) The Law of Love. This is the supreme social law, 

the great organizing, integrating power, precisely as its opposite, 
selfishness, is the great disorganizing, disintegrating, 
anti-social power. Disinterested love is divine; it is the 
love that God is, and makes possible Christian service and 
Christian sacrifice. 

Dr. Strong proceeds to ask whether either church 
or society is making any serious attempt to realize 
these fundamental Christian laws, and he answers in 
the negative. "To be enthusiastic about the church 
in its present condition," he says, quoting the words 



of Professor Bruce, "is impossible." The church has 
become "a very respectable institution which must 
be 'sustained.'" It is doing "much to conserve the 
heritage of the past, but not much to mold the future." 
Dr. Strong continues:— 

"Let us suppose a church somewhere, whose members 
have such an enthusiasm for humanity that when they lie 
awake nights they are planning, not how to make money, 
but how to make men. Their supreme desire is to help the 
world in general and their own community in particular. 
They are striving daily to remove every moral and physical 
evil; trying to give every child who comes into the world 
the best possible chance; longing and working and praying 
and spending themselves and their substance to save men 
from sin and ignorance and suffering. Let us suppose the 
whole church is co-operating to this end. What a transformation 
such a church would work in any community! 
How it would 'reach the masses'! How it would grow! 
How it would be talked about and written up! Men would 
make pilgrimages to study its workings and its success. 
Yet such a church ought not to be in the least degree peculiar. 
This is simply the picture of a church whose membership 
is imbued with the social ideal of Jesus, and has 
taken seriously his social laws of service, sacrifice, and 
love; and this picture ought to be the likeness of every 
Christian church in every community. If it were, how 
many hours would it be before the kingdom would come 
with blessed fulness?"— Digest. 

INEFFECTUAL LABORS AMONG NAVAJO INDIANS. 



A Christian minister and his wife who left a Colorado 
pastorate six and a half years ago to do what 
they could to civilize and Christianize the Navajo Indians, 
gives the following report: 

"We cannot either civilize or Christianize this tribe 
of Indians. We are not sure we can accomplish that for 
a single one of them. We cannot overcome the barriers of 
ignorance, superstition, barbarian language and physical 
contour of the country, that in every way prevents practical 
and effective evangelistic work. We cannot go beyond 
individual and domestic adaptabilities and limitations, 
which in so many ways determine our place and our 
calling. 

"What we can do is to wait on God by prayer, believe 
his Word, follow him wholly, and try at least to prepare 
the way of the Lord in the hearts of the children, that he 
entrusts to our care. Perhaps, after a while we can have 
access to some of the older ones, through the children, or 
the children may be able to do it, when they have themselves 
learned the Gospel, and we have passed on to our 
reward. 

"Will not our friends all pray often, that the Word of 
the Lord may have free course and God be glorified among 



this poor heathen people? And the work that we do, be 
wholly unto his pleasing, and the accomplishment of his 
will? 

"We are not so much concerned over the question as 
to what good we can accomplish here, as we are about our 
own conformity to God's purposes and methods of work for 
us, and our appointed part in the fulfilment of his Word. 
It is his 'counsel that shall stand.' (Isa. 46:11.) He 'has 
spoken, and he will bring things to pass; He has purposed 
and he will do it.' If, therefore, we can only know, morning 
by morning, our place and work and really be co-laborers 
with him in the fulfilment of his purpose; and if 
we will honestly and loyally 'walk as Jesus walked,' intent 
only on pleasing our Father, we shall feel that we have at 
least approximated the fulfilment of our calling, though to 
human sight it may seem that we have spent all our 
strength for nought, and all our labor has been vain." 



We heartily sympathize with these dear fellow-servants 
in their disappointment, but believe that their 

R3016 :page 166 

efforts and labors have not been in vain;— that they 

themselves have been blessed, because they self-sacrificingly 

have sought to do the Lord's will— to be co-laborers 

with him. We trust that they and others like 

them may soon learn "the way of the Lord more perfectly"; 

—may soon learn of the Divine plan of the 

ages. Then they will see that the poor Indians are 

in no danger of eternal torment; but will in God's "due 

time" (during the Millennium— I Tim. 2:6) be brought 

to a knowledge of the truth in a way they cannot bring 

it to them now. The same great plan of the ages will 

show them that our Lord Jesus and his apostles did 

not carry the gospel to the most degraded nations, but 

to the most intelligent people they could find. And 

that the gospel is intended now only to select an 

"elect" or bride class as their Master's joint-heirs in 

the coming Kingdom— who, jointly with their Lord, 

shall "bless all the families of the earth." But their 

labor, honestly tho not wisely spent, shall not be in 

vain in the Lord. He is speaking now to all such, 

and they will hear and will know the great Shepherd's 



R3017 :page 166 
ROME'S POSITION IN THE COMING CONFLICT. 



In accord with the Pope's recent Encyclicals, 
Roman Catholic newspapers and clergy are seeking to 



unify all Roman Catholic societies, and to put them on 
more of a political basis; and are correspondingly opposing 
Labor societies and especially Socialism. The 
object evidently is to make every Catholic vote here 
count for the interests of Rome, as in Europe— only 
more so, on account of our more liberal laws. A 
prominent Roman Catholic bishop recently expressed 
in public the conviction that ere long Catholics will 
be in practical control of the United States government. 
Nor was this an idle boast. If the Romanist 
vote can be controlled solidly by their clerics they 
could ask almost anything they please of politicians 
and be sure of getting it,— from one party if refused 
by another. 

We are not to forget either that the Scriptures 
clearly show that Church influence (Protestantism cooperating 
with Catholicism) is soon to gain control 
of Christendom and rule the world with an iron hand. 
The combining of the Catholics may soon lead to 
semi-political combinations amongst Protestants- 
Good Citizenship Leagues, etc., for which Christian 
Endeavor, Epworth League and similar societies, are 
preparations. All this is in full accord with the desire 
now so prevalent to have a Church Trust or combine 
for the "control" of the world's spiritual interests. 
All this, as our constant readers well know, we consider 
part of the evil which the Lord is permitting, and 
which will result in the complete collapse of present 
institutions in anarchy;— preparatory to the establishment 
of the Kingdom of Heaven. 

BISHOP QUIGLEY ON SOCIALISM. 



As indicating the line of battle outlined, we quote 
from Bishop Quigley's address as printed in the 
Catholic Union and Times, Buffalo, N.Y., as follows:— 

"As a political party Social-Democracy is a recent importation 
from continental Europe. Here, as there, its 
avowed object is the creation of a new order of things 
totally destructive of the existing social, political, and 
economic conditions under which we live. The attainment 
of this new order of things is to be effected by political 
agitation in the main, but revolutionary and violent methods 
are freely urged by its leading advocates as soon as 
the masses shall be sufficiently organized to cope with the 
powers of capital and class. 

"Everywhere this movement is characterized by unbelief, 
hostility to religion, and above all, uncompromising and 
bitter hatred and denunciation of the Catholic Church. Its 
official programs, the platforms of its party conventions, 
the public utterances of its leading advocates, its newspaper 
organs and periodicals, breathe hatred and threats against 
revealed religion, its doctrines and institutions.... 

"Social-Democracy denies the existence of God, the immortality 



of the soul, eternal punishment, the right of 

private ownership, the rightful existence of our present 

social organization, and the independence of the church as 

a society complete in itself and founded by God. Therefore 

no Catholic can become a Social-Democrat. Therefore no 

Catholic can become a member of a Social-Democratic organization 

or subscribe for or in any way contribute to the 

support of a Social-Democratic newspaper organ." 

THE REPLY OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY. 



Under the caption,— "Shall the Church Rule the 
Labor Movement?" The Worker of New York City 
says:— 

"The bishop's charge is a sweeping one. We now challenge 
him, as bishop or as honest man, to prove, not the 
whole, but one-hundredth part of what he has alleged. He 
can not do it, for it is not true. Our national party platform 
is printed in this paper; let readers search there for 
'hatred, denunciation, and threats' against the Catholic 
Church or any other. We have in our ranks, not only men 
holding to the beliefs of Protestant churches, but men belonging 
to the same communion with Bishop Quigley and 
wearing the same cloth of priesthood. In the Socialist 
movement we ask no man his creed. We demand only his 
faithful adherence to the working class in its battle with 
the forces of capitalism.... 

"Bishop Quigley, let us advise you to reconsider your 
action. Your attack is an unprovoked one, for the Socialist 
party makes no attack upon you or your church or your 
beliefs. But if you persist in the attack, let us tell you that 
there is no organization on earth that can fight as we can. 
Bismarck has measured strength with us, and failed. Russian 
czars and French dictators have tried to crush our 
movement, and they have failed. You will not succeed. 

"There is nothing more fearful than the fires of religious 
prejudice and antagonism. We have sought to let 
them slumber till they should at last die out. Beware how 
you stir them up. The people of America are patient and 
good-natured; they endure much. But at heart— Catholic 
and Protestant and Jew and Atheist alike— they hold dear 
the principle of religious liberty and the separation of 
church and state. Once awake them and it will not be well 
for him who attacks that principle. 

"The Democratic party may be afraid of you, bishop. 
The Republican party may be afraid of you. But the Socialist 
party is not afraid of you, because it is right, because 
it stands for all that is best in American history and 
in the world's history, and because it knows that, the fiercer 
your attack, the greater forces will you rally to our side." 

R3017 :page 167 

A PECULIAR ITEM FROM A CATHOLIC JOURNAL. 



"How can we describe it so as to make it real! Some 
day this old earth will be perfect. Sin and wrong, passion 
and conflict, danger and weakness will be driven away, 
and only the good and the beautiful things will remain. 
Some day our powers will be unlimited and we can do just 
what we purely desire. No mistakes then in reaching the 
highest ideals! No failures in bringing the noblest sound 
with musician's finger, or the most glorious scenes from 
artist's brush! No misunderstandings or misconceptions, 
no criticisms to cut and hurt; for our work will be perfect. 
Some day our friendships will be rich and lasting and without 
disappointment, and heart will touch heart with an enduring 
love."— Rev. F. W. Tomkins. 

WHAT HIGHER CRITICISM HAS DONE. 



A writer in the Washington Post, summarizing an 
article on this subject in the Outlook, says, among 
other things, of the higher critics' useful (?) work,— 

"The divinity of Christ is retained, but in a new sense. 
He is divine just as all men have that spark of divinity, 
although not to such a marked degree. His divinity rests 
not on proof texts of doubtful interpretation, but on the 
evident manifestation of his whole life. 

"The plan of salvation is not founded on a vicarious 
sacrifice where God bargains to accept the punishment of the 
innocent for the sins of the guilty. Redemption is the result 
of repentance, a psychological process thoroughly logical, 
and in the light of human frailty perfectly adequate. 

"Our faith in future life is not less firm, although our 
conception of immortality is not so clear. The wonders of 
the hereafter, so vivid to the Indian, who believes in his 
happy hunting grounds, do not present themselves in a 
definite form, and this may seem to many a distinct loss. 
Its compensation is found, however, in the fact that we do 
not regard the attainment of heaven our only aim in life. 
Right for right's sake, with the barter element eliminated, 
cannot be less noble than living up to the best that is in us, 
with the hope of reward or the fear of punishment continually 
hanging over us." 



We can see no reason in the world why any infidel 
or agnostic in the world should object to Higher Criticism; 
but we do see every reason in the world why 
true Christians who trust for salvation in "the precious 
blood of Christ" should disown all fellowship 
and brotherhood with such unbelief. Yet some good 
men as well as many others, have fallen into this error: 
the only safeguard against it to a reasonable mind 



is the Divine Plan of the Ages. We must do all in our 
power to get it into the hands and heads and hearts 
of such before the error catches them; for those who 
once get the poison of human philosophy into their 
hearts, and reject the ransom, are, so far as observation 
goes, beyond help in the present age. 



R3017 :page 167 

ATTAINING CHRISTIAN LIBERTY. 

--ACTS 15:22-33. -JUNE 8, 1902.- 

"Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith 
Christ has made us free."— Gal. 5:1. 

CHRISTIAN LIBERTY is to be sharply differentiated 

from the liberty of license, lawlessness, 

anarchy; and this lesson furnishes a 

good illustration of this fact. To the Jews who had 

been under the Mosaic ritual and its washings, fastings, 

feasts, new moons, sabbaths and holy days, 

Christian liberty meant a release from a considerable 

measure of these institutions, many of which were 

typical and educational— suited to the "house of servants," 

but not appropriate to the "house of sons." 

To the Gentiles, to whom God had never given the 

Law, and who were therefore not under any of its provisions 

or conditions or requirements, but who were 

under certain superstitions, wrong appetites and customs, 

Christian liberty meant the abrogation of all 

R3018 :page 167 

wrong customs and superstitions, and, additionally, 
the imposing of a law;— not the Mosaic Law and its 
institutions and ceremonies, however, but "the Perfect 
Law of Liberty;" the "Law of the spirit of life in 
Christ Jesus"— restraints of the will of the flesh, under 
the law of love. (Jas. 1:25; Rom. 8:2.) We are not 
to be surprised that both Jews and Gentiles, coming 
from opposite directions into the Church of Christ 
and its perfect law of liberty, were somewhat confused 
and bewildered respecting its requirements and 
proprieties. 

It was nearly twenty years after the day of Pentecost 
that the conference noted in our lesson took 
place in Jerusalem. It was held for the purpose of 
reaching a decision respecting this very subject— the 
Law of Christ, its bearing upon Gentile converts, and 
upon Jewish converts— to what extent the Mosaic requirements 
were abolished as regarded the Jews, and 
to what extent the Law of Christ put restraints upon 
the converts from amongst the Gentiles, and to what 



extent these two classes, previously separated socially 

and religiously, by the requirements of the Mosaic 

Law, might now come together with full brotherly fellowship 

and affinity, without the violation of the consciences 

of any, and without unnecessary restraint 

of the liberties of any. 

The Church at Antioch had become the center 
of Christianity amongst the Gentiles, and Jews born 
in Gentile lands. Its Gentile surroundings, no less 
than its membership, tended to cultivate in it a broad 
spirit of Christian liberty;— some of its membership, 
under the influence of brethren who had come from 
Jerusalem, feared that it had gone too far in the matter 
of Christian liberty, and held that Gentiles, upon 
accepting Christ through faith, should likewise accept 
Judaism and the Mosaic Law, and come as fully 
under the conditions of these, including circumcision, 
as tho they had been born Jews. Certain brethren 
who had recently arrived from Jerusalem accentuated 
these fears, and as a result there was quite a dissension 
in the Antioch Church, amounting, as the Greek 
word shows, almost to a schism, a split. But the 
right spirit evidently prevailed; because, instead of 
splitting over a vexed question, each party respected 
the conscientious convictions of the other, and it was 
wisely determined to appeal the matter to the Church 
at Jerusalem for such words of counsel and advice as 
its leaders, the apostles and elders, should see fit to 
give. The Antioch brethren evidently had full confidence 
that God had appointed the apostles, and that 
their conclusion on the matter would ultimately be 
the correct one. At the same time, knowing that the 
brethren at Jerusalem were surrounded by the Judaizing 

R3018 :page 168 

influence, tending rather to narrowness of view 
as respected the Mosaic customs, they sent their two 
leading representatives, Paul and Barnabas, to present 
before the Jerusalem Council the views which 
seemed to the majority of the Church to be the correct 
ones,— that thus the entire subject might be fully, 
fairly, thoroughly investigated, and the mind of the 
Lord determined as accurately as possible. 

This was a beautiful spirit— the right spirit; far 
more commendable in God's sight and in the judgment 
of sound-minded men than any immoderate 
course they could have taken. People who take the 
immoderate course are generally those who do not 
have sufficient faith in the Lord as the real Head of 
the Church, and in his overruling providence in the 
affairs of those who are seeking to know and to do his 
will;— they are generally those who feel too much self-assurance, 
as did even the meek Moses, when he erred 
in smiting the rock in the wilderness the second time 
saying: "Ye rebels, must we fetch you water out of 



this rock?"-Num. 20:10. 

The truth has nothing to lose by fairness, openness, 
and a reasonable moderation and the turning on 
of all light obtainable. And while the Church at Antioch 
evidently had great confidence in Paul and Barnabas, 
they properly also had great confidence and 
respect for the apostles at Jerusalem, and reasoned 
that since these men all gave evidence that they were 
truly the Lord's special servants and mouthpieces, it 
would be strange indeed if meeting together and hearing 
all that could be said on both sides of the question, 
they could not arrive at a unanimous decision respecting 
the Lord's will, that would assure the Church 
in general. We commend this noble principle which 
is as applicable now as it was then. Today, however, 
as we cannot refer questions to the living Apostles, 
we must refer them to the recorded teaching of our 
Lord and the apostles,— seeking assistance in this 
amongst the brethren who appear to have the best 
knowledge of God's Word and the greatest insight 
into the divine plan. 

EN ROUTE TO THE JEWISH CONFERENCE. 

The journey from Antioch to Jerusalem brought 
Paul and Barnabas in contact with many of the household 
of faith, a few, here and there, in almost every 
city through which they passed. Of course, the brethren 
were glad to hear, as these ex -missionaries were 
glad to tell them, of God's favors upon their missionary 
labors in Galatia and vicinity; and altho the brethren 
reached were almost exclusively Jewish converts, 
it is with pleasure we read that the report "caused 
great joy unto all the brethren." (Acts 15:3.) This 
shows that they had the true Christian spirit— that 
they had largely, if not completely, lost the Jewish 
prejudice and jealousy, as concerned the giving of the 
gospel to the Gentiles. It shows us that with the majority 
of the previously Jewish brethren the contention 
for the Mosaic Law and ceremonies implied no 
opposition to the Gentiles themselves, but merely a 
confusion of mind concerning the Lord's will on these 
subjects;— they had not yet discerned the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of the divine plan, 
as they subsequently learned these, and came to appreciate 
the perfect Law of Liberty wherewith Christ 
make free indeed, in the true sense, all who become 
truly his. 

Arrived at Jerusalem, the representatives of the 
Antioch congregation were met with a hearty welcome, 
for such is the significance of the Greek word 
rendered "received," in verse 4. As they had given to 
the others en route, so the returned missionaries gave 
the Jerusalem brethren detailed accounts of the Lord's 
blessing upon their journey, telling what miracles and 
wonders he had wrought, that a considerable number 



had believed, and how loyal, faithful and enduring 
were some of these newly-found brethren in Christ, 
who had previously been aliens, strangers, Gentiles. 

There is some reason for believing that previous 
to this Paul and Barnabas and Titus had made a visit 
to Jerusalem, in which they did not, as now, appear 
publicly before the congregation to give their testimonies, 
but had secret conferences with the apostles 
and chief brethren, Paul explaining to them what he 
understood to be the perfect Law of Liberty under the 
New Covenant— the will and plan of God regarding 
the gospel amongst the Gentiles. It would appear 
that the apostles had been largely influenced by those 
presentations, altho they had not uttered any public 
testimony on the subject, nor engaged in any manner 
in the missionary work amongst the Gentiles. Apparently 
they had not considered it necessary to stir up 
the subject to any extent, and thus possibly to breed 
more or less of strife amongst the Jewish converts. 
Thus the subject had been left for some years for 
gradual development and enlargement of heart and 
mind on the part of the believers. This thought is 
based upon the Apostle Paul's statement in his letter 
to the Galatians, on this subject.— Gal. 2. 

But now the question of receiving Gentiles, and 
how they should be treated, and what were their obligations, 
etc., came up in a natural way, without forcing 
—rather, it forced itself for decision. The apostles 
and elders heard the reports of God's blessing 
upon the Gentiles, and offered no objection, evidently 
being quite in accord with the matter from the first; 
but, as was to be expected, there was dissatisfaction 
amongst brethren who previously had been Pharisees. 
This sect of the Jews was firmly set, not only for the 
Law of Moses and all of its ceremonies, but also for 
many additions and accretions to it; so that they were 
quite dissatisfied, we remember, with our Lord's observance 
of the Law, which we know was perfect. 
These, in all honesty, objected that the missionaries 
were too lax, too slack in their work, and that all believers 
should be required to be circumcised and to 
keep the Mosaic laws respecting fasts, new moons, 
sabbath days, washings, etc. 

Thus the question was brought forward, and a 
special meeting was appointed, at which the apostles 
and elders heard all that was to be said on the subject, 
—and we read that there was "much dispute." 
We do not want to say a word in favor of disputes, 
wrangling, etc., amongst the Lord's people. On the 
contrary, we understand the Scriptures to teach that 
wranglings in general are improper, out of order, injurious 
to the interests of the Church and of the truth; 
—because such wranglings and disputes are generally 
about things to no profit, but to the subverting or 
unsettling of the believers, and especially of those who 



R3018 :page 169 

are new or weak in the faith. But it is a different 
matter when the question is an important one, as was 
this under discussion; and at such a time dispute, in 
the proper manner, with the spirit of love, with force 
and yet with kindness, love and gentleness of word and 
manner, is most appropriate. 

We rejoice that there was such a spirit of broadmindedness 
in the early Church as is represented by 
this statement— we rejoice that when an important 
subject was to be considered, with a view to knowing 
the mind of the Lord, that there was fullest liberty 
granted for as much dispute or debate, in a proper 
manner, as was necessary to bring the whole subject 
before those who had it under consideration. There 
is a difference, however, between disputes and discussions 
inside the pale of faith and disputes outside 

R3019 :page 169 

that boundary. As the Apostle says, "He that is 
weak in the faith receive ye [do not reject him because 
he has not such full, strong, vigorous faith as we 
should like to see], but not to doubtful disputations" 
—do not receive him to dispute his doubts,— what he 
does not believe. Let him have a full opportunity for 
hearing the faith discussed; if his doubts do not then 
disappear probably he himself will disappear,— drop 
out of the assembly. In harmony with this we are not 
to recognize disputes respecting the foundation principles 
of the gospel of Christ. The Church is composed 
only of those who recognize the foundation— 
that Christ died for our sins, for our redemption from 
sin and from its penalty; and that all who would share 
his blessing must accept these simple facts of his 
death for us and his resurrection by the power of God 
for our ultimate deliverance;— and then in harmony 
with their desire to be his disciples they must make a 
consecration of themselves to him, to do his will and 
to serve his cause. These foundation principles of the 
Church of Christ are not subject to dispute. Those 
who reject these are not of the Church and should not 
be heard in the Church. They are intruders; doubtless 
wolves in sheep's clothing, of evil and not of good 
intentions and ultimate results. 

But as respects discussions amongst those who 
are truly the Lord's on any point of importances- 
opportunity for freedom of discussion, within reasonable 
limits, is absolutely necessary to spiritual health 
and progress. To shut it off means to crush proper 
activities of thought, and in many instances means 
to accumulate a force which would ultimately result 
in an explosion, which would be damaging in some respects 
at least. Let us remember, in this matter, the 
Golden Rule; and let us accord to others differing from 



us the same reasonable liberty, inside the boundaries 
of foundation principles, that we would like to have 
them accord to us, if our positions were reversed. 

The fact that the question at issue was— the obligation 
of Gentile converts to the Law, is not to be 
understood as signifying that the Law of Moses was 
recognized as being of binding force upon Jewish converts. 
All were bound to concede that the Law-Covenant 
had saved none— that Christ's fulfilment of it 
brought all under divine grace. It was more a question 
of usage— the Jews were used to circumcision 
which preceded the Law, used to abstaining from 
pork, not only merely because the Law forbade it, but 
because aside from the Law they considered it unclean. 
What the Jew did in the exercise of his liberty 
he thought the Gentile should be forced to do;— a 
very common error with many. It requires development 
to learn to use our consciences and liberty and 
to let others use theirs, even tho they differ. 

When a fair hearing had been granted to both 
sides of the question, Peter, one of the leading apostles, 
and doubtless the eldest, rehearsed his experiences 
with Cornelius; then Paul and Barnabas were 
heard, and James closed the discussion. All upheld 
the teachings and practices of Paul and Barnabas, and 
cited the leadings of the Lord's spirit, as well as the 
prophecies of the Old Testament in corroboration of 
this position which, doubtless, as above suggested, 
they had held tentatively for some time, tho they only 
now thought it necessary to make a public statement 
regarding it. The conclusion was satisfactory to the 
apostles and elders and the whole Church; and an answer 
in harmony with this was sent to the friends at 
Antioch, Syria, and throughout Silicia— the regions 
which had been affected by the Judaizing teachers. 
It is here that the lesson proper begins. 

To give weight to the letter, two of the prominent 
brethren of Jerusalem were sent with Paul and Barnabas 
and the letter, that they might confirm the letter 
orally, and thus establish the hearts of those who had 
been somewhat troubled by the false teachings. The 
letter first disclaims any authority for those persons 
who had, however honestly intentioned, taught error 
with truth, and confused the hearts of the believers on 
the subject of circumcision and the Law. It states 
also the conclusions of the conference, and commends 
Barnabas and Paul, calling them "beloved," and noting 
the fact that they had hazarded their lives in the 
Lord's cause. The decision rendered is expressed as 
being the mind of "the holy spirit and us." We may 
reasonably presume that the meaning of this is that 
the Church not only found the teachings of the Scripture 
and the leadings of the divine providence to be 
in favor of the acceptance of the Gentiles to Christian 
liberty, without becoming Jews or coming under the 
Law, but that this finding of the Lord's will was not 



against the wishes or prejudices of the apostles and 
elders at Jerusalem;— that it found a ready echo, a 
hearty response in their hearts. 

RECOMMENDATION RESPECTING OUTWARD CONDUCT. 

God's dealings and instructions commended 
themselves both to their hearts and to their reasons, 
and covered four points. (1) Abstaining from meats 
offered to idols, which might appear to be giving sanction 
to idol worship. (2) Abstaining from the eating 
of the blood of animals. (3) Abstaining from 
eating things that had been strangled, in which the 
blood would remain, which would imply the eating 
of blood. (4) The avoidance of fornication. 

In considering these rules we are to keep in memory 
the circumstances and conditions of the times, 
and the objects sought to be attained. (1) The idol 
worship which prevailed at that time had connected 
with it a great deal of sensuality, which would be contrary 
to the spirit of Christ in every sense of the word. 
(2) The object was to permit a ground of fellowship 
and brotherhood between those whose previous experiences 
and instructions had been lax, and those 
whose previous instructions had been rigid. And 
the things here required of the Gentiles were not 

R3019 :page 170 

merely features of the Mosaic Law, for the forbidding 

of the use of blood, and the explanation that it represented 

the life, was given long previous to Moses' 

day— to Noah after the flood, when he and his posterity 

were granted the privilege of eating meat, because 

of the changed conditions and the impoverishment 

of the race, and the need of more stimulating 

food. The use of blood was still more common then 

than now, being used not only in blood puddings, but 

also as a drink mixed with wine, as some today use 

beef extract blended with wine. 

The message was received in faith by all, and 
caused universal rejoicing in the Church. There was 
a general recognition of the Lord's providential care 
in the Church's affairs, and this faith and confidence 
in God prepared all parties to receive the message 
on this subject, which they believed God would assuredly 
give them, and which they had rightly looked 
for through the channels which God had previously 
been using for their blessing and edification. Thus 
we have a lesson respecting the proper course of the 
Lord's dear people today,— not to carry disputes, even 
on important matters (not fundamental) to the length 
of rupture, division, but, with hearts anxious to know 
and to obey the truth, inquiry should be made of the 
oracles of God, and the results, after a fair hearing of 
all the testimony, should be conclusive, satisfactory, 



and bring consolation— peace and joy— so that the 
unity of the faith in the bonds of love may continue 
within the walls of Zion. 

The two brethren who came as representatives of 
the Jerusalem Church were prophets, or public teachers, 
and, as was intended, they exhorted the Church 
in harmony with the letter they bore, and confirmed 
and strengthened them. Thus what might have been 
a serious rupture, resulting in much damage and in 
many roots of bitterness, antagonisms, etc., became 
really a means of increased blessing to all connected 
therewith, because wisely and properly handled. May 
such occasions be likewise treated by the Lord's people 
today, and with similar blessed results, under the 
guidance of the same Lord and Master who more than 
eighteen centuries ago guided by his Word and spirit. 

THE LIBERTY WHEREWITH CHRIST HAS MADE US FREE. 

Our Golden Text is a precious one. The value 
of true liberty amongst the Lord's people cannot be 
overestimated. It becomes a part of their very life. 
It was because, under a wrong conception of union, 
this spirit of true liberty was crushed out of the 
Church shortly after the apostles fell asleep in death 
that the "dark ages" resulted,— with all their ignorance, 
superstition, blindness, persecution, etc. The 
Reformation movement of the sixteenth century was 
but a re-awakening of the spirit of liberty mentioned 
in our text,— liberty to think inside the foundation 
lines of the doctrines of Christ;— liberty to believe as 
much or as little more, in harmony with this, as the 
mental conditions and circumstances will permit, 
without being branded as a heretic or persecuted by 
brethren, either in word or deed. 

Strange to say, a peculiar combination— of too 
much liberty and too little liberty— is creeping over 
nominal Christendom today. The too little liberty 
feature objects to any discussion of the doctrines of 
Christ, and the teachings of the apostles, for fear some 
differences of opinion should be manifested. This is 
an endeavor to have an outward "union" without a 
union of the heart and a union of the head. It is injurious, 
both to those who hold the error, which cannot 
be exposed, and injurious also to those who hold 
the truth and who permit themselves thus to be bound, 
and hindered from growth in grace and knowledge by 
the proper exercise of the liberties wherewith Christ 
has made his people free. The general trend along 
this line favors the covering over, the concealment, of 
truths as well as errors, in a wrong assumption that 
the appearance of union will serve the purpose of real 
union, and be really effective as respects the prosperity 
of the true members of the body of Christ. 

R3020 : page 170 



Such a false union, however, is coming and will be 
effected, and to such extent cause prosperity in the 
nominal church, but only for a brief season, when the 
time of trouble shall overwhelm all. 

On the other hand the too great liberty which we 
see drawing on, is that represented by the teachings of 
the higher critics and evolutionists. Their teachings 
are given in quiet, in the theological seminaries, at 
the fireside, in the daily interchanges, and in the pulpit; 
and any attempt to contradict these false doctrines 
is tabooed, as being calculated to stir up strife, and destroy 
the unity of the Church. Thus the too great 
liberty and the too great bondage are working together 
in the nominal church systems today, to 
thoroughly expel and ostracize the truth, and all who 
love it and wish to stand fast in the liberty wherewith 
Christ has made them free. It is calculated to install 
and multiply and qualify and honor the error, which 
so rapidly is gaining control, altho the control be generally 
denied. Let all who are the Lord's people, and 
who have tasted of the liberty wherewith Christ 
makes free, see to it that they stand fast in that liberty, 
and as soon as an attempt is made to restrain it, 
if not sooner, let them get out completely from all the 
bondages of human systems, that they may stand 
firmly and loyally with the Lord, our Redeemer, our 
Instructor, our King. 

The question may arise, Does this direction to abstain 
from meat offered to idols conflict with the Apostles' 
later teachings addressed to the Corinthians? 
(I Cor. 8.) We answer, No. The Apostle is not advocating 
the eating of meat previously offered to idols; 
but on the contrary, is answering some who so practiced. 
He is admitting the logic of their argument, 
that an idol being nothing but so much wood or metal 
or stone the meat could be neither benefited nor injured 
by the offering. But he shows that the restriction 
should be practiced in the interest of some of less 
logical mind who would be unable to comprehend this 
and who would thus be led to defile their consciences, 
and thus into sin;— which might abound more and 
more, eventually, to their destruction. For the voice 
of conscience must be obeyed: it is at our peril that it 
is violated— no matter how erroneous and superstitious 
may be its standards. Let conscience be educated; 
but let its ignorance never be violated. Every 
violation of conscience is so much of character destruction. 
All need to remember this in respect to 
their own consciences as well as in dealing with others 
—especially with children. 



R3020 :page 171 



ABIDING IN DIVINE LOVE, CONDITIONAL. 

"If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have 
kept my Father's commandments and abide in his love."— John 15:10. 

SINCE ALL MANKIND are alienated from 

their Creator through sin and its condemnation, 

the application of the text by any 

individual implies that previously he has come to 

a knowledge of God's grace in Christ, and has accepted 

his share of the same through faith and has 

thus had access to the love of God, as one of the sons 

of God, begotten by the holy spirit. This is an important 

matter overlooked by very many who think 

to keep themselves in divine love and under divine 

protecting care without first complying with the conditions 

of admission to membership in the Lord's 

family. There is but one doorway of entrance "into 

this grace wherein we stand and [as sons of God] 

rejoice in the hope of the coming glory," and that 

is the doorway of faith in and acceptance of the atonement, 

accomplished for us by our Redeemer at the 

cost of his own sacrifice at Calvary. Anyone attempting 

to climb into the family of God otherwise 

"the same is a thief and a robber"— a rejector of the 

only way and name under heaven given among men, 

whereby we must be saved.— Rom. 5:1,2; Acts 4:12. 

But our text, like all of the holy Scriptures, is 
addressed to the Lord's people, who once were "children 
of wrath even as others," but have come into 
divine favor through the appointed way; and it calls 
our attention to something that is necessary to us beyond, 
after our full conversion or consecration to the 
Lord. It implies that getting into God's love is by 
no means the end of the Christian way, but merely 
the beginning of it: after we are in the way the Lord 
gives us commandments as his sons, and expects us 
to manifest the spirit of loyal sonship by obedience; 
—full obedience so far as the heart or intention is 
concerned, and as complete obedience as possible so 
far as the control of the flesh is concerned. Whoever 
neglects either to learn or to obey the commandments 
of the Lord, thereby manifests a lack of 
the true spirit of sonship, and thus condemns himself 
as unworthy to be longer reckoned or treated as a 
son of God. Thus seen the commandments of the 
Lord to those who have consecrated themselves and 
enter his spirit-begotten family, are tests, proving 
them either worthy or unworthy of the divine favors 
and promises assured to the faithful overcomers. 

The object of these tests is manifest from the 
time we come to understand the divine plan of the 
ages— to comprehend how the Lord is now making 
selection of a royal priesthood to be joint-heirs with 
Christ the great King, and to join in the work of 
succoring, ruling, blessing and uplifting the world of 



mankind in God's due time, the world's "day of judgment," 

the Millennial age. We can readily see that 

divine law is necessary, in heaven and in earth, in 

order that God's will may be done— that righteousness, 

truth and love shall prevail; and it is manifest 

that whoever is not sufficiently in sympathy with the 

principles of righteousness expressed in the Lord's 

commandments, so as to will and to strive to obey 

them, would not be a fit person to be used of the Lord 

in enforcing the divine laws during the Millennial 

age, and assisting mankind in discerning their righteousness 

and the blessing which will follow their 

observance. 

WHAT ARE THESE COMMANDMENTS? 

Properly, we inquire, What are these commandments, 
the keeping of which is attended with such 
momentous results, and the neglect of which would 
mean the loss of our Redeemer's love and favor,— and 
hence, the loss of all the blessings specially prepared 
for those who love him? We answer, that our Lord's 
statement of these commandments briefly comprehends 
them all in one word, Love. Dividing the matter, 
we find that it has two parts— love for God and 
love for our fellows. Without this quality or characteristic, 
of Love, being so developed in us as to be 
the controlling influence of our minds, we cannot 
hope to abide in the Lord's favor. True, he does 
not expect to gather ripe grapes from the new vineshoot 
when first it makes its appearance; rather, the 
great Husbandman (I Cor. 3:9) waits for the gradual 
development of the fruit, if after the shoot has come 
forth he sees upon it the bud of promise, which 
quickly develops, manifesting itself as the flower of 
the grapes. Nevertheless, manifestations of a coming 
fruitage of love are expected of the Lord, quickly 
after our union with him; and any smallness of development 
of this fruitage would indicate a corresponding 
lack of love and appreciation on our part, 
and would mean correspondingly small love for the 
truth and its principles: hence, the Lord's love for 
us would be correspondingly less than if more rapid 
progress were made. 

Love would, necessarily mean the according of 
justice; because the law or requirements of the Lord 
are based upon justice, "the foundation of his throne." 
We are to view the commandments of the Lord from 
this standpoint, therefore, and to see first that our 
love for God is just,— must recognize that we owe 
him love, devotion, appreciation, because of what he 
has done and promises yet to do for us. Justice calls 
for our loving, reverential obedience to the Lord. 
It is the same with respect to our love for our fellowmen. 
Justice, as well as respect for our Heavenly 
Father's regulations, calls on us to do right to our 



neighbor,— to do toward him as we would have him 
do toward us. This is not more than absolute justice, 
and yet it is the very essence and spirit of the 
divine law of love. But while justice is the first feature 
of the commandment of love, it is not the end of 
its requirements: it requires that going beyond strict 
justice, our love shall prompt us to the exercise of 
mercy and forgiveness. And in thus exercising 
mercy, we are again but copying divine love; for our 
Heavenly Father not only deals with all his creatures 
according to justice but going beyond the lines of 
justice, in great compassion and mercy he provided 
in Christ Jesus a Redeemer for sinners. True, he 
did not provide this in violation of his justice; yet so 
far as we are concerned it is just the same as though, 
out of love and compassion, he had overridden justice 
in our assistance. Hence in our dealings with 
others, who like ourselves, are fallen and imperfect, 
we are to remember this feature and not only be just 
toward them but additionally to be merciful, generous, 
kind, even to the unthankful,— that thus we may 
be children of our Father in heaven. 

R3021 : page 172 

The Lord through the Prophet expresses this 
thought of how the law of love is divisible and covers 
all the requirements of Christian character; he says, 
"What doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, 
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy 
God?" (Micah 6:8.) That these are very reasonable 
requirements will be conceded by all; that God could 
not require less from those whom he is educating for 
the future judging of the world, is evident: and, yet, 
all three of these qualities specified through the 
Prophet, are comprehended in the one word love. 
Love requires that we shall deal justly with our 
neighbors, with the brethren, with our families, with 
ourselves; that we shall seek to cultivate our appreciation 
of the rights of others,— their physical 
rights, their moral and intellectual rights, their liberties; 
and that, appreciating these, we shall in no sense 
of the word, seek to abridge or deny them. 

To "love mercy" is to go even beyond loving justice, 
and signifies a delight in yielding personal rights 
and privileges in the interest of others, where no principles 
are involved. It implies readiness to forgive 
the faults of others— a disinclination to be too exacting 
in respect to others, as well as a desire to be 
very exacting in respect to our treatment of others. 
The humble walk with God is included, also, in the 
commandment of love; because, whoever loves his 
Creator and appreciates his provisions for his creatures, 
in natural and in spiritual things, will love and 
appreciate God in return. And having such a proper 
conception of the greatness of the Almighty and of 



his own littleness and insufficiency, except by divine 
grace, he will be disposed indeed, to walk humbly 
with the Lord— not seeking paths of his own, but, 
trustingly, seeking to walk in the path which the 
Lord has marked out— in the footsteps of Jesus. 

The same Apostle John who recorded our Lord's 
words of our text, commented further upon this subject 
of the love of God and of Christ, saying, "This 
is the love of God [i.e., proves or demonstrates our 
love of God], that we keep his commandments, and 
his commandments are not grievous." (I John 5:3.) 
This gives us the suggestion that the Lord not only 
expects us to keep his commandments of love to 
him and to the brethren, but that he expects also that 
in keeping these we should become so filled with an 
appreciation of the commandments and the principles 
that underlie them, that we would delight therein; 
not merely because they are God's commandments, 
but, additionally, because they are right, good, proper. 
This thought the Apostle expresses in the words, 
"And his commandments are not grievous." It is 
one thing to keep the divine commands or to seek 
to do so, all the while feeling more or less of restraint, 
lack of liberty, compulsion, duty, etc.; it is another 
thing to obey joyfully. 

It is not improper to expect something of this 
spirit at the beginning of our experience as the Lord's 
people, seeking to keep his commandments; but we 
should expect, also, that as we grow in grace and 
grow in knowledge and grow in love, all these feelings 
of constraint, duty, etc., would disappear; so 
that, instead, we should delight to do the Lord's will, 
delight to keep his commandments of love, delight to 
do justly, to love mercy, to walk humbly with God,— 
and that there should be a total absence of the feeling 
that the Lord's commandments are grievous, 
burdensome, irksome. This is the higher Christian 
development, and can only be found where the individual 
has become truly "a copy of God's dear Son," 
where the Father's spirit has developed and brought 
forth the ripe fruits of the spirit in abundant measure 
—meekness, patience, gentleness, brotherly kindness, 
love. 

Recurring to our text, we note that our Lord's 
words also imply the same thing;— the necessity for 
obedience to the commandments of love, and to such 
a growth ultimately as would separate them from any 
feeling of bondage or grievousness. Our Lord's 
words, showing this, are in the latter part of the text 
—"even as I have kept my Father's commandments 
and abide in his love." 

As we look back at the beautiful character of 
our Lord Jesus and see his love for righteousness, for 
truth, and his willingness to be obedient to his 
Father's arrangements— even unto death— we can 
perceive readily that our dear Master had a love for 



the principles which lie back of the Father's commandments. 

He obeyed the Father, not through restraint, 

not through fear, but from a perfect love. 

Recognizing the Father's commandments, but not as 

being grievous, using the language put by the 

Prophet into his mouth, his sentiment was, "I delight 

to do thy will, O my God, thy law is in my 

heart." (Psalm 40:8.) We are to understand the 

Lord, therefore, to mean, that in order to abide in 

his love we must reach such a heart condition as this 

which he had;— a love for the Father's ways, for the 

principles of righteousness and truth. We may abide 

in his love at first under other conditions, feeling 

through our love the restraints of his commandment 

of love, but as we grow in knowledge, we must grow 

in grace, and outgrow those sentiments, and grow up 

into the Lord's spirit and sentiment in this matter; 

so that obedience to the Lord will be the delight of 

our hearts, and any failure to do his will would cause 

a pain, a shadow, an earth-born cloud, to hide us 

from the Father's smile. 

Seeing the depths of our Lord's requirements, 
many will be inclined to say, Ah, yes, it is true that we 
must attain to such character-likeness of our Lord, 
but that transformation and renewing of the mind is 
not our part of the work but the Lord's: He must 
do this for us, else it will never be done. Partly right 
and partly wrong, we answer. It is true that when 
we consider ourselves, how weak and imperfect we 
are according to the old nature, according to the flesh, 
we have good cause for despairing and deciding that 
we never could accomplish such a great transformation 
from selfishness to love, in our own strength. 
It is true, also, that the Lord proposes to work in us 
—"both to will and to do of his good pleasure." 
(Phil. 2:13.) But it is just as true that we have a 
burden of responsibility in respect to this matter of 
overcoming. It is the Lord's part to provide the 
way, the truth, the life,— the means by which we may 
attain unto the condition to which he has called us; 
but it is our part to use the means and thus to attain 
the prize. 

The Lord has provided for our justification, our 
reconciliation to himself, our acceptance to sonship, 
our anointing with the holy spirit, our instructions 

R3021 :page 173 

with the word of his grace, the word of promise: He 
works in us, to will and to do, through these exceeding 
great and precious promises and the glorious 
prospects and rewards that attach to them; but the 
amount that he will work in us and the results that 
will be worked out through these promises, depend 
upon us. As it depended upon us whether or not we 
would come into the grace which he has provided for 



us, and as we could have kept ourselves out of the 

love of God by refusing or neglecting the offer of his 

mercy and love, so we could neglect the word of his 

promise, neglect the various means of grace which he 

provides for our strengthening, establishing and upbuilding 

in the knowledge and grace of the truth. 

And thus neglecting his provisions we would proportionately 

fail to abide in his love— fail to obtain the 

promised favors. The Apostle intimates this, saying:— 

"KEEP YOURSELVES IN THE LOVE OF GOD."-JUDE 21. 

What, then is the essence of what we have foregoing 
found to be the divine instruction upon this 
subject? It is this. (1) Our hearts from the very 
beginning are to appreciate the imperfections of our 
own flesh and to look away to the Lord for the needed 
assistance to abide in his love. 

(2) The exceeding great and precious promises 
must be studied, earnestly, that we may thus have 
them constitute in us "the power of God" for good- 
keeping us in the knowledge of the Lord and, through 
obedience, in his love. 

(3) This knowledge will profit us only as we 

put it in practice and seek to regulate our minds, our 
thoughts, our words, and so far as possible all our 
actions of life, according to this standard which God 
through his Word, established before us as an ideal. 
We are to remember that if we had all knowledge 
yet had not love, it would profit us nothing, but we 
are to remember, also, that in the divine arrangement 
it seems to be impossible that our knowledge should 
progress much in advance of our obedience to what 
we already know. 

(4) We are to appreciate every evidence which we 
find, in ourselves or others, of such growth in obedience 
to the law of God,— the law of love with its connections 
of justice and mercy and reverence. 

(5) We are not to expect the full results of joy 

in doing the Father's will in the beginning of our experiences, 

nor are we to feel discouraged if in the beginning 

the motive be, to a considerable extent, duty-love 

instead of a love for principles. We are to seek 

at the Lord's hand further blessing and further filling 

of his spirit of love. We are to seek to study and to 

appreciate the basic principles upon which the Lord 

governs the universe, and are to seek to bring our 

hearts into sympathetic accord with that law and 

principle and spirit of righteousness. We are to remember 

that much of our lack of appreciation of the 

principles of righteousness is due to our ignorance; 

and we are to expect that as we come to know 

the Lord and to understand his plan better, the eyes 

of our understanding will open the wider so that it 

will be possible for us not only "to comprehend with 

all saints," but to appreciate with all saints, the principles 



underlying and constituting the divine law of 
love. 

Thus we may daily and hourly keep ourselves in 
the Lord's love by obedience to, and a growing 
love for, the principles of righteousness. And we 
are to rejoice in every experience in life,— its trials, 
difficulties, sorrows, disappointments, etc., no less 
than in its pleasures, if by any or all of these means 
the Lord shall instruct us and give us clearer insight 
into our own deficiencies, and a still clearer insight 
into that perfect law of liberty and love which he has 
established, and to which he requires our full and 
loyal heart-submission. 



R3022 : page 173 

GOD'S SUPERVISION OF HIS PEOPLE AND HIS MESSAGE. 

-ACTS 16:6-15.-JUNE 15.- 

"Thou shalt be his witness unto all men."— Acts 22: 15. 

FOR HIS SECOND missionary tour Paul chose 

Silas for a companion. The original plan 

was that he and Barnabas should go together 

again, but they disagreed respecting the suitability of 

Mark to be their companion. The result was a division 

of the work, Barnabas taking Mark, and revisiting 

the brethren in the Island of Cyprus, while 

Paul went overland to the churches of Galatia, probably 

visiting en route his home city of Tarsus. Apparently 

Silas, whose home was at Jerusalem, found 

it necessary to go there to close up his affairs, before 

starting on the tour, and joined Paul later in Asia 

Minor. This inference is based upon the fact that 

Luke, the historian, says "he" instead of "they," at the 

beginning of Paul's journey; then uses the word "they" 

after Paul had been joined by Silas and Timothy at 

Lystra, and finally uses the word "we" when he would 

include himself;— Luke probably joining the company 

at Troas. 

The apostle's journeys amongst the churches of 
Asia Minor, planted in his previous tour, was for the 
purpose of their encouragement, strengthening, advancement 
in knowledge, and incitement to growth in 
grace. Doubtless also the Apostle experienced refreshment 
from contact with these fruits of his labor. 
At Lystra he found that the grace of God and the 
knowledge of the Gospel had reached a considerable 
development in a young man, probably about twenty-one 
years of age, named Timothy, whose father had 
been a Greek and his mother a Jewess,— the latter at 
this time, according to the Greek text, apparently a 
widow. 



Although devoutly raised, Timothy had never 
been circumcised according to Jewish regulations, and 
when it was determined that he should accompany Paul 
in his missionary work the latter caused him to be 
circumcised. To some this has seemed strangely inconsistent, 
in view of the fact that the Apostle at the 
same time was calling to the attention of the Christian 
brethren wherever he went the decision of the Council 
of Apostles at Jerusalem— to the effect that circumcision 
was not necessary to Christian brotherhood. 
We are reminded also that the Apostle would not 
consent to the circumcision of Titus, who was a Gentile. 
(Gal. 2:3.) In view of these things, why did 
he countenance the circumcision of Timothy? We 

R3022 : page 174 

answer that, properly understood, the Apostle's conduct 

was thoroughly consistent; circumcision was 

no part of the Mosaic Law, but was instituted with 

Abraham, centuries previous, and was intended as 

a mark or sign upon all the children of Abraham. The 

council at Jerusalem did not decide that no Jew must 

be circumcised thenceforth; but it did decide that circumcision 

should not be considered necessary to a 

Christian. The Apostle Paul's own argument on this 

subject is most specific: he says, "In Jesus Christ 

neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision; 

but faith which worketh by love.— Gal. 5:6. 

The thought is, that being children of Abraham, 
according to the flesh, is not sufficient to make us new 
creatures in Christ Jesus; and therefore circumcision 
of the flesh will not accomplish this. As the new creature 
is received of God as a member of the body of 
Christ through a living faith, he must as a new creature 
have the circumcision of the heart, in order to be 
a Spiritual Israelite, whether he was previously a 
Jew or a Gentile. Circumcision of the heart signifies 
a cutting off— a separation from the flesh, its aims, 
hopes, desires, etc. We see, then, that there could be 
no objection to the circumcision of Timothy— it would 
neither help nor hinder him spiritually,— if done 
with the clear understanding that it was only a figure, 
and not the real circumcision which constituted Timothy 
a member of the body of Christ, the Church. 
Timothy's mother being a Jew, he was a Jew,— even 
tho his father had been a Greek. And this fact becoming 
known to Jews in general with whom in traveling 
they would come in contact, inquiry might be made 
as to whether or not he had been circumcised. If 
the answer were No, the implication would be that he 
had never been a good Jew but a renegade. If the answer 
were Yes, it would remove this obstacle and grant 
him correspondingly greater influence with them— a 
closer access to their hearts. 

If there was one thing more than another characteristic 



of the Apostle Paul it was his honesty, his 

candor; and it is necessary that we should see his conduct 

in respect to Timothy and Titus in the proper 

light, in order to do him justice;— in order also to 

counteract a compromise spirit in some who consider 

that Paul's course in this matter justifies them in 

duplicity and compromising. It was in this perfectly 

legitimate way that Paul meant, "Unto the Jews I became 

as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews." (I Cor. 9:20.) 

That he had no thought of compromising the 

truth in any degree, is evident from his withstanding of 

Peter on one occasion, when the latter to some extent 

dissembled in dealing with Jew and Gentile believers. 

(Gal. 2:11.) This is manifest also in his letter 

to the Galatians, in which he most positively declares 

to those who had been Gentiles, that to them 

circumcision was not an optional matter as with the 

Jew; but that if they should become circumcised it 

would imply that they were not trusting wholly to the 

merit of Christ's sacrifice for their acceptance 

with God, their salvation; but were trusting partially 

to laws and ceremonies. His words to them are, "If 

ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.... 

Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of 

you are justified by the Law: ye are fallen from 

grace." (Gal. 5:2-4.) Let us likewise clearly distinguish 

between concessions in respect to forms, 

dress, ceremony, etc., which may properly be made to 

the prejudice or ignorance of those about us, and concessions 

of principles, which are not permissible to 

anyone under any circumstances. 

The journey through Galatia and Phrygia having 
been accomplished, the next question was respecting 
future labors,— other fields. The Apostle's intention 
was to "go into [lesser] Asia"— the region in which 
subsequently the seven Churches of Asia were located. 
But for some reason this was not the Lord's 
plan at this time; and so we read that they were prevented 
or forbidden (whichever way the word might 
be translated) to preach the Word there. We are 
neither informed why nor how. The Lord possibly 
had some other agent or better means or more favorable 
time for sending the word of his grace into that 
quarter, as well as some other work for Paul and his 
company. As soon as the missionaries discerned the 
Lord's leading in this respect they turned their attention 
northward, to go into the province of Bythinia; 
but again the Lord's spirit, power, influence, hindered 
their proposed plans. So they passed onward to the 
coast— to Troas— doubtless wondering at the Lord's 
providences, and speculating as to whether or not 
this meant that their work for the present was accomplished, 
and that they should return homeward. 
It was at this juncture that the Lord instructed them 
respecting their journey, by means of a vision or 
dream, in which Paul saw a man dressed in the garb 



of Macedonia, standing before him, and beseeching 
him, saying, "Come over into Macedonia and help us!" 

In these verses we have three positive, distinct 
statements, showing the Lord's supervision of his 
cause and of his servants. And when we remember 
that our God changes not, that he is the same yesterday, 
today and forever, it gives us assurance that he 
is still careful and interested as ever in his work, and 
in the affairs of all his servants. It gives us assurance 
that the harvest work in the end of this age is not going 
haphazard, as it extends hither and thither from 
one to another, by letter, by tract, by book, by word, 
to the uttermost parts of the earth. What a comfort 
there is for the Lord's people in this! How completely 
overwhelmed we would be if we were to lose 
sight of this fact, and feel the weight and burden of 
the responsibility of the work pressing us down! In 
proportion as we are able to exercise faith, trust in 
the Lord in regard to the work, in that same proportion 
are we enabled to joy in the Lord and to possess 
the peace of God which passeth all understanding;— 
and to have it ruling in our hearts, controlling our 
lives and keeping us balanced, not only regarding the 
things of this present time, but also concerning the 
glorious outcome,— things to come. 

This faith is largely a matter of education, too; 
for instance, as we observe the Lord's providential 
care, as taught us in this lesson and other lessons from 
his Word, we are more and more enabled to apply the 
same care and the same promises to ourselves. Nothing 
will calm our fears more than this, and enable us 
to be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might; 
and in our confidence that he will ultimately bring off 
his work victorious. "This is the victory that overcometh 
the world, even our faith." "Lord, increase 
our faith." The Apostle's confidence in the Lord's 
supervision of his work enabled him to read the lessons 

R3022 : page 175 

of his time, and to act accordingly with full faith 
respecting the results. The Lord could have directed 
him otherwise, and could direct us also otherwise than 
as he does— could speak to us audibly, if he chose. 
We are, therefore, to presume that it is for some wise 
purpose as concerns the development of our faith that 
he requires his followers to walk by faith,— not by 
sight and sound. 

As soon as the Lord's guidance was recognized 
no time was lost, and matters in general seemed to 
co-operate for the journey of the missionaries into 
Macedonia. They went direct to Philippi, the principal 
city in that vicinity. Apparently they found no 
Jewish synagogue there, but outside the place they 
found a spot on the river bank where services were 
customarily held. This place is supposed to have been 



a temporary shed, such as, it would appear, was not 

R3023 : page 175 

unusual where the numbers were insufficient to erect a 
synagogue. It is possible, too, that this city, being directly 
under the Roman government, prohibited synagogues 
within its walls. 

We note the course of the apostles here, in the 
presentation of the gospel. They did not go to the 
chief magistrates of the city, and say, Please direct 
us to your most degraded population, the wickedest 
people you have in this city, for we wish to preach the 
gospel to them and reform them. On the contrary, 
they evidently made inquiries respecting people who 
already knew God, and reverenced and worshiped him; 
and however small their number and unimposing their 
meeting place, thither the Apostle and his companions 
went. He knew, as many at the present time 
seem not to know, that God's work now is not that of 
reforming the world, is not a "slum work," but a seeking 
and gathering of the "jewels;"— a mission for 
those who are hungering and thirsting after righteousness; 
—a hunt for those whose hearts are tender and 
broken, and therefore ready for the balm of Gilead, 
the gospel message of redemption and deliverance 
from sin and its penalty. Whatever others may do, 
let us follow the Scriptural precedents— let us be 
laborers together with God in his work; the results 
will justify this course, when this age shall have fully 
ended, and the things now hidden to so many shall 
be revealed, and they shall learn that God's ways were 
not their ways, nor his plans their plans, but that his 
were higher, broader, grander, as the heavens are 
higher than the earth— that his time for the reformation 
of the world is future, and that the present is his 
time for selecting the Kingdom class which shall 
bring about this reformation. 

The text of the Apostle's discourse is not given. 
We know, nevertheless, quite distinctly what his message 
was. He had only the one message; viz., that 
God's promises made to Abraham were beginning 
to be fulfilled; that Messiah had come and had paid 
the ransom-price for the world, as its sin-offering, and 
that now forgiveness, reconciliation to God, and a 
privilege of joint-heirship in the Kingdom, was being 
offered, "to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile;"— 
and that whosoever accepted the call in honesty of 
heart, and was faithful to it, would have not only the 
joy and peace of the Lord's spirit and blessing in the 
present time, but also a share in the glory to follow by 
and by. 

In the audience was a woman from Thyatira, of 
the very district (Asia Minor) into which the Apostle 
was not permitted to enter and preach. She was in 
Philippi, probably temporarily, engaged in merchandising 



—a seller of purple— perhaps of purple 
dyes, or possibly of purple-dyed cloth. Dyeing and 
dyes had not reached present development, and the 
processes were generally secret, and profitable to those 
who understood them. It is presumed, therefore, that 
Lydia was well to do in this world's goods, as well as 
rich toward God in faith. Like the Apostle, she had 
sought out the place of prayer, and now the Lord had 
rewarded her and answered her prayers by sending 
her the truth for which she had been hungering and 
thirsting. She and some of her household believed, 
and were promptly baptized in confession of their 
faith;— possibly on this very Sabbath day in which 
she first heard. 

Where the heart is in a condition of readiness, 
obedience does not need to be delayed, nor does it 
require long to decide to be on the Lord's side, and 
to be obedient to the voice of the good message which 
he sends us. This attitude of Lydia's heart is noted 
in the lesson, in the words, "whose heart the Lord 
had opened." We are not to suppose a miracle 
wrought in her case, to open her heart to the truth; 
we are rather to suppose that it was in her case as it 
is in the case of all the Lord's people; that none are 
ready for the truth unless the Lord has prepared their 
hearts. And O, how much this preparation of heart 
means!— often trials, disappointments, difficulties, 
etc.— the processes by which the Lord breaks up and 
mellows and makes the soil of our hearts fit for the 
receiving of his truth and grace. No doubt Lydia, 
after receiving the truth, looked back at past experiences, 
severe ordeals, etc., and could praise God for 
the leadings of his providence by which her heart 
had been "broken" and humbled and made ready for 
the seed of truth— ready to appreciate, not only the 
good things which God hath in reservation for them 
that love him, but ready also to appreciate his promised 
watch-care in their affairs in the present time, 
guaranteed to work out blessings to those who abide 
in his love. 

Having received the truth, and some of its joy, 
Lydia not only confessed the Lord, but sought means 
to serve him. She could not join the Apostle's company 
as an evangelist of the good tidings, but she 
could entertain and serve Paul and his associates, and 
did so. No doubt she received more than compensation 
for the expense and trouble, in spiritual riches 
and refreshment;— but nothing in the narrative implies 
that even this laudable selfishness actuated her. 
Apparently her sole desire was to serve the Lord, and 
she saw the opportunity for this in rendering service 
to his representatives. She esteemed it a privilege, 
and so expressed herself, saying, "If ye have judged 
me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house 
and abide." 

When we remember the Master's own words, 



"He that receiveth you, receiveth me; and he that 

receiveth me receiveth him that sent me," we can 

see that Lydia took no extreme view of her privilege 

and opportunity in connection with this service. Her 

whole question was whether the Apostle and his companions 

would honor her dwelling with their presence. 

The same principle is true and applicable today, and 

R3023 : page 176 

conduct similar to that of Lydia is always to be considered 
a favorable sign indicating deep love for the 
Lord and for the good tidings. The messengers of 
the good tidings must necessarily always be associated 
in our minds with the message which they bear, 
and the great King whom they represent. 

Our Golden Text calls for just a word of comment. 
It represents the Lord's message to Paul. It 
can be understood only when we remember that up 
to that time God's message was not sent to all men, 
nor to all nations, but merely to the men of one nation, 
the Jews. Henceforth it was open to all;— to be 
delivered to all, as they might have ears to hear it. 
This explanation will be found a key also for various 
other Scriptures, referring to all people, all nations, 
and the preaching of the Gospel to them during the 
present age. It is to and for as many as "have an 
ear to hear"— we are to let such hear. Tho these will 
in all be but a "little flock;" yet it is the Father's good 
pleasure to give to this little flock the Kingdom under 
which all the families of the earth shall be blessed and 
brought to an accurate knowledge of the truth.— Luke 12:32; 
I Tim. 2:4, Diaglott. 



page 177 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. JUNE 15, 1902. No. 12. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 179 

The Unrest in Russia 179 

Concessions to Young People 180 

Social Emancipation Leads Not 

to Godliness 180 

The Progress of Ritualism 181 

Presbyterian Creed Revision 181 

The Text of the New Creed 181 

Let Us Put On the Armor of Light 187 

High Time to Awake Out of Sleep 189 

The Armor of Light 189 



Interesting Questions Answered 191 

page 178 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



LINEAR BIBLES TO GREAT BRITAIN. 

Our British friends desiring the new Bibles are requested to 
send their orders and remittances direct to the home office, Allegheny, 
Pa., U.S.A. Bibles sent to foreign countries will not 
contain pictures. We were obliged to omit these so as to bring 
the Bibles within the postal weight limits. Price 91- and 13/- 
according to binding, include postage. 

THE NEW BIBLES-EXTRA COPIES, ETC. 

We are glad to announce that all orders for the new Bibles 
are now filled. If you have ordered and paid for any which 
have not yet reached you, please inquire at your express office, 
if you have one, otherwise at your post-office, and if not there, 
write us at once full particulars;— when ordered, amount of 
money sent, and whether by money order or registered, or how. 

Quite a number ordered Bibles when first announced, who 
have not yet sent in the money for them. If such desire us 
still to hold their books for them, they will please send us postal 
cards at once stating whether they prefer the $2.00 or the $3.00 
grade, and how long they desire us to hold them;— when they 
will be ready to pay for them. We will hold them for you to 
the end of the year if need be, though we obligated ourselves 
to pay promptly for all, in order to secure the low prices. 

Many letters come asking whether the writers may order 
additional copies of this work. We answer, Yes; you are welcome 
to them as long as they last. We will lay aside such as 



are requested to be held and all the others may go out forthwith. 
The sooner they are in the hands of the Church the sooner 
they will do their designed work, and the greater that work: 
"the time is short," and this help is needed everywhere. 



Some have inquired respecting the double readings in certain 
places where there seems to be little difference in the 
wordings. We answer that the upper reading represents the 
Common Version and the lower the Revised Version— even 
when the difference is merely in the spelling or italicizing of a 
word or a change in the punctuation. The aim of the Linear 
Bible is to present the two versions complete and distinct in 
one Bible; and the work is faithfully accomplished. 



R3023 : page 179 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE UNREST IN RUSSIA. 



UNDER THIS heading the London "Spectator" 

(a very conservative journal) gives further details 

of recent occurrences and grounds for 

expectation that some sort of a revolution in Russia 

is rather to be expected soon. It represents the Czar 

as the helpless and unwilling tool of the Russian nobility, 

and points out that the latter may feel forced to 

go to war in order to awaken "patriotism," and keep 

its hold on the government. Evidently Russia will 

hold together as a great nation for some time, for it 

seems indicated as one of the leading actors, up to the 

close in the great time of trouble impending. We 

give some extracts from the "Spectator," (May 3) 

which go to show that the least enlightened of the 

civilized peoples of the world is awakening and getting 

ready for the great affray,— as follows: 

"Accounts of the unrest in Russia grow more serious. 
It is stated that the sufferings of the peasantry in the 
South, the most populous and richest division of the Empire, 
involve actual hunger, and that in the provinces of 
Pultawa and Kharkoff the peasants have proclaimed 'war 
to the castle.' Eighty residences of landlords have been 
sacked, and the local officials are so terrified that the Minister 
of the Interior, M. Plehve, has gone himself to the 
disturbed districts to brace up the bureaucracy. The artisans 
everywhere are clamouring against their employers, 
who, poor people, find orders so short that they recently 
appealed for Government help, and circulars have been 
discovered directed against the 'foreign devils' who as 
foremen and overseers try to execute the owners' commands. 



The students have, it is said, circulated a forged 
ukase bestowing the land on the peasantry, and the leaders 
of the artisans have formulated their demands, which 
are the ordinary demands of English workmen, with the 
significant exception that they ask for a day of ten and 
a half hours. It is reported, moreover, that the 'moral 
tone' of the non-commissioned officers can only be trusted 
when they are peasants, and that peasants of sufficient 
cultivation are not always in the ranks. Altogether, there 
is an ominous stirring among the dry bones, society in St. 
Petersburg and Moscow is divided, and there are furious 
dissensions among the group around the Czar. 

"The unrest is more serious even than we thought. ..As 
far as we can ascertain, the case stands thus. There has 

R3024 : page 179 

been all over Southern Russia, where, be it remembered, 
the mass of Russian cultivators, have since the emancipation 
elected to live, a fall in prices so serious that the 
peasant cannot pay either his taxes or his debts, which 
nevertheless are relentlessly exacted. 

"There have always been agitators in Russia, and just 
now they are very numerous, the educated having convinced 
themselves that they must convert the cultivators 
before anything will be done to modify the system. They, 
therefore preach insurrection as a panacea, and are holding 
out to the peasants the hope that the land, which they, 
like Irishmen, believe would belong to them if right were 
done, will be restored by decree. They have even, 
if a correspondent of the Morning Post may be trusted, 
resorted to an expedient not without precedent in Russian 
history, and have forged a ukase from the Czar bestowing 
the land upon them by what they themselves regard 
as a supreme fiat. 

"UKASE OF HIS MAJESTY THE EMPEROR NICHOLAS." 

"My grandfather now resting in God, the Emperor 
Alexander, by abolishing serfdom gave you peasants liberty, 
and at the same time divided the land among you. 
The magnates of the land, however, were discontented 
with this, and they brought the land again into their possession, 
and thus robbed you. The country which, for a 
needy wage, you cultivate in the sweat of your brows is 
your own land, and the corn in the barns of your oppressors 
is your corn. I love you, and as I desire to be a 
just Emperor I allow and command you to demand back 
your property and to divide it among yourselves as your 
legal possessions. If they refuse to give it to you peaceably, 
then take it from them by force, together with the 
cattle in their stalls and the corn in their barns." 

"In the peasant's eyes this is simple justice, and he demands 
the land of the stewards, who, and not the landlords, 
manage the estates. Being refused, and probably mocked, 
he seizes any arms he can find, and proceeds to destroy the 



R3024 : page 180 

chateau and its papers. ...If their feeling spread 
to the Army the cataclysm so long dreaded for Russia 
would have arrived, and the Empire so slowly and so 
strongly built would be thrown into the crucible." 

The same journal elsewhere says:— 

"THE UNREST OF THE CONTINENT." 

"The dry bones are stirring on the Continent in a way 
which, even if the ultimate result should prove not to be 
great, should keenly interest all politicians. We write 
in this country about Continental 'Socialists,' and 'Collectivists,' 
and 'Radicals,' and 'riotings,' but those familiar 
words do but obscure the great general movement actually 
going on. Everywhere, except perhaps in Switzerland, 
those who work with their hands, including in all countries 
the agricultural labourers, and in some a large section 
of the peasants besides, are expressing with violence three 
ideas: one that they are overworked, another that they 
ought to have, and therefore will have, more physical comfort 
in their daily lives, and a third that they can alter 
neither toil or payment for toil until they become an effective 
force in the government of the country. The cause 
of the rapid growth of the first idea is still obscure, for 
men who are not yet old can remember when the governing 
notion of the immense majority was that a working 
man when not eating or sleeping was bound to be at work, 
—a notion which still rules throughout the greater part of 
Asia. We fancy the change is one consequence of the small 
modicum of education which has at last filtered down to 
the bottom, but of the revolt against the traditional opinion 
there can be no doubt whatever." 

CONCESSIONS TO YOUNG PEOPLE. 



CHICAGO, April 25. -"If the clergy of the Methodist 
Episcopal Church expect to keep their young men and 
women in the field, they must do away with their restrictions 
against card playing, dancing and attendance at the 
theaters. If they are not allowed to follow the dictates of 
their conscience they will attend churches where they will 
be allowed to do so or they will not attend church at all." 

This, in substance, was the declaration set forth at the 
dinner last night at the Union League Club, attended by 
sixty-five prominent Methodist ministers and laymen of 
Chicago. The proposition received general discussion, in 
which Bishop J. W. Hamilton, L.D. Condee and Robert 
Quayle took leading parts. Mr. Quayle said:— 

"If we do not take active steps toward arousing interest 
in the church on the part of our young men and women we 



shall stand alone in our old age; there will be none to take 
the burden from our shoulders when we pass away. If we 
seek to bind the young people down too closely or draw 
too tight a rein we cannot hope to keep them with us. 

"I recommend that all laymen and clergymen to whom 
the interests of the Methodist Church are dear organize 
around this question and insist that at the next general 
conference the present regulations and restrictions be removed.' 
--Washington (D.C.) Star. 

SOCIAL EMANCIPATION LEADS NOT TO GODLINESS. 



We often hear of the prosperity of Australia, and 
of its people being farther advanced along lines of 
social emancipation than are others;— indeed, that in 
it the poor man's interests receive greater consideration 
than in any other land on earth. A reasonable 
question is, To what extent are these blessings working 
out spiritual advantages? The following article, 
sent us by a brother who resides there, and who endorsed 
the sentiments expressed, is from an Australian 
journal, the Northern Advertiser. It shows deplorably 
immoral conditions,— such as we must expect 
everywhere in proportion as prosperity, short 
hours and idleness prevail. Evidently that feature 
of the curse which declares, "In the sweat of thy face 
shalt thou eat bread," was necessary to our race in its 
fallen condition. 

We could not hope that a Millennium of the kind 
generally wished for and expected by the world, 
would be a real blessing. Our confidence inspired by 
God's Word is, that when those blessings and releases 
which he has promised, come, the Kingdom of God 
will be here in power; and that it will enforce righteousness 
and a proper use of the liberties and blessings 
it will bring;— until all shall have had full opportunity 
to develop characters. Then whoever shall not 
have reached the place of loving righteousness and 
hating iniquity, will be cut off in the Second Death. 

The fact that present-day blessings are producing 
an increase of crimes and a lowering of moral standards, 
is in full accord with the Scriptural portrayals 
of the ending of this Gospel age.— 2 Tim. 3:13. 

The article follows:— 

"The increase of crime, not only in the State of Western 
Australia, but also all over Australasia, is a matter of deep 
regret to the community as a whole and must cause those 
responsible for the moral and religious well-being of the 
people profound pain as well as distress. Crime is rampant 
everywhere, and the cases that are tried in our law courts 
only too plainly manifest the corruption of society and the 
loss of moral influence in restraining from vice. There 
is no effect without its cause, and hence the cause of the 



moral decadence of our people should command careful 
and prudent inquiry. 

"That our boasted civilization is only a sham it would 
be idle to deny. The list of crimes which weekly fill the 
newspapers of the Commonwealth is only too direct proof 
of the low standards of our people, socially and morally. 
Vices that would disgrace pagans are common amongst us, 
and crimes that make us hang our heads with shame are 
committed with comparative impunity. Laws, both human 
and divine, are scouted and openly violated. The principles 
of honor and good faith are ignored and ridiculed. Theft, 
embezzlement, fraud, forgery— without mentioning more 
revolting crimes— are seemingly the appreciated pastime 
of a numerous class that live and thrive in our midst. The 
guide of conscience is apparently lost. People take oaths 
now-a-days without any reference to conscience. Moral 
responsibility is not generally recognized, and, as a consequence, 
our downward grade is yearly becoming more 
and more pronounced. Drunkenness, of course, is prevalent 
everywhere, and Bacchus is worshipped in every city, 
town, hamlet, or camp in Australasia. Excessive drinking, 
no doubt, leads to crime, but drunkenness will not 
account for the low state of civilization which is perceptibly 
ruining Australian society. The cause which is effecting 
such dire calamities must have a deeper depth than 
even drunkenness itself, baneful as that vice is in its 
effects. 

"No one can view the moral state of Australia without 
feelings of dismay. Christianity, it cannot be gainsaid, 
is fast losing its influence, and in its place we are substituting 

R3024:page 181 

a gross form of paganism, and being dominated by 
a corroding system of infidelity which, if not arrested, will 
compass the complete destruction of society. Crime in 
Australia is alarmingly on the increase, and if the friends 
and admirers of Christian civilization do not make a bold 
attempt at stemming the visible torrent of vice, there is 
a danger of their being carried away in the fast approaching 
cataclysm of shocking immorality." 

THE PROGRESS OF RITUALISM. 



The New York Sun commenting on this subject, 
says:— 

"On Easter Sunday the Washington Heights Baptist 
Church (New York) started the innovation of a vested 
choir of sixty voices, with cassock and cotta and the women 
wearing also mortar-board hats. That is, the vestments are 
the same as in Episcopal churches. The introduction of 

R3025 :page 181 



such a choir into the Metropolitan Methodist Temple, a 
year ago, proved so successful, apparently, that the example 
has been followed by other Methodist churches, one 
at Chicago having come into line recently and 
conspicuously. 

"This is very suggestive because the two Protestant 
churches which in the past were always most distinguished 
by the extreme simplicity of their worship and their church 
architecture, and were most violently opposed to anything 
like mere estheticism in religious services, were the Baptist 
and the Methodist. They were plain people, and all 
worldly display in raiment and in social life, was eschewed 
by them. Methodists were enjoined by Wesley, in his 
'General Rules,' to 'evidence their desire of salvation' by 
refraining from 'putting on of gold and costly apparel.' Like 
austerity of life was the Baptist rule, and the meeting-houses 
of both denominations were usually without steeples 
or any other marks of a distinctively ecclesiastical 
architecture." 

"Will these ritualistic Baptist and Methodist churches 
stop with vested choirs merely? Will they not go on, 
naturally and logically, to the adoption of other features of 
the liturgical churches they are imitating? We are likely 
to see the cross introduced, and perhaps the time will come 
when the plain communion table will give place to a veritable 
altar, with all its religious significance. This is, therefore, 
a serious innovation, suggestive of a radical doctrinal 
transformation in the future. We have seen how ritualism 
in the Episcopal church has advanced to a bold teaching of 
the Real Presence." 

On the same subject, endeavoring to solve the 
significance of the movement, the Independent (N.Y.) 
says:— 

"In our Roman Catholic and other sacramentarian 
churches the ritual grows out of the faith and can be thus 
justified, but the new ritualism being adopted in our non-liturgical 
churches is of another order. It seems to have 
two different explanations. To some extent it may, as 
Professor Goldwin Smith lately said, indicate 'the growth 
of a vacuum in the region of religious belief, which music, 
art, flowers, and pageantry are required to fill.' Men and 
women who do not really believe very much yet want a 
quasi-religious sentimentality which can pass for religion. 
The form of godliness may be kept where its power is lost, 
and the form must be enlarged where the power is reduced. 
Even light may be 'dimly religious'— very dimly— 
and music and vested choirs and responses and all the 
succession of forms may persuade one that he has had a 
religious hour, when it has only been quieting and soothing, 
and has marked the loss of real faith and religious force." 



R3025 :page 181 



PRESBYTERIAN CREED REVISION. 



THE PRESBYTERIAN General Assembly 

recently convened, in New York City, and 

has received and adopted the report of its 

Creed Revision Committee. All broad-minded 

thinkers will sympathize with our Presbyterian 

friends in their endeavor to hold to their 

Westminster Confession of Faith as an infallible 

document, and yet to adopt an explanation 

of it as a supplement, that will be more 

reasonable and that they can confess with less 

twinging of conscience. We rejoice with those who 

have some conscience left that can be twinged: 

the wonder is that after years of stultification conscience 

is not so toughened as to be beyond twinging. 

Our best wish for them would have been that 

they had been still more noble— that they had possessed 

consciences whose twingings would not have 

allowed them even to "enjoy the pleasures of sin 

for a season"— the sin of misrepresenting the Divine 

character and plan and of misrepresenting 

their own hearts— for the sake of name and place 

and emoluments. 

Anyway, we are glad to note some of the 
changes now made, though we regret the dishonesty 
attaching to the whole matter in the claim that the 
new creed is exactly the same as the old one, only 
differently stated. Ex-President Lincoln's words 
should be remembered by the Assembly; viz., "You 
can fool all the people sometimes, and some of the 
people all the time, but you can't fool all the people 
all the time." 

THE TEXT OF THE NEW CREED. 



We give below the text of the revised creed with 
brief comments on each division of it in brackets. 
Italics are ours. 

Article I. -Of God. 

We believe in the ever-living God, who is a Spirit, and 
the Father of our spirits; infinite, eternal and unchangeable 
in His Being and perfections; the Lord Almighty, most 
just in all His ways, most glorious in holiness, unsearchable 
in wisdom and plenteous in mercy, full of love and 
compassion, and abundant in goodness and truth. We 
worship Him, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, three persons 
in one Godhead, one in substance and equal in power and 
glory. 

[We can assent to this fully except the last sentence, 



which space forbids us to reply to here; our 
showing of the Scriptural teaching upon the subject 
of the Trinity is to be found in Millennial Dawn, vol. 
V.] 

Article II.— Of Revelation. 

We believe that God is revealed in nature, in history, 
and in the heart of man; that he has made gracious and 
clearer revelations of Himself to men of God who spoke 
as they were moved by the Holy Spirit; and that Jesus 
Christ, the Word made flesh, is the brightness of the 
Father's glory and the express image of His person. We 
gratefully receive the Holy Scriptures, given by inspiration, 

R3025 : page 182 

to be the faithful record of God's gracious revelations and 
the sure witness to Christ, as the Word of God, the only 
infallible rule of faith and life. 
[We can endorse this statement heartily.] 

Article III.— Of the Eternal Purpose. 

We believe that the eternal, wise, holy and loving purpose 
of God embraces all events, so that while the freedom 
of man is not taken away nor is God the author of sin, 
yet in His providence He makes all things work together 
in the fulfilment of His sovereign design and the manifestation 
of His glory; wherefore, humbly acknowledging 
the mystery of this truth, we trust in His protecting care 
and set our hearts to do His will. 

[This surely is a wise statement which it would be 
difficult to improve upon.] 

Article IV. -Of the Creation. 

We believe that God is the Creator, Upholder, and 
Governor of all things; that He is above all His works and 
in them all; and that He made man in His own image, 
meet for fellowship with Him, free and able to choose between 
good and evil, and forever responsible to his Maker 
and Lord. 

[We can endorse this statement too; but wonder 
how the large and growing number of evolutionists in 
the Presbyterian denomination can endorse it without 
mental reservations and twinges of conscience. If 
Adam was created in God's image, was meet for companionship 
with him, and free, and capable of deciding 
his destiny by his actions, he surely was far removed 
from being a monkey-man;— and surely, too, 
far superior to his posterity today, all of whom are 
sadly deficient in the divine image and qualifications 
for companionship with their Creator. Even the 
saints, with their much advantage every way, are still 
lacking in these respects, and are accepted of God 



only on a basis of faith in their Redeemer.] 
Article V.-Of the Sin of Man. 

We believe that our first parents, being tempted, chose 
evil, and so fell away from God and came under the power 
of sin, the penalty of which is eternal death; and we confess 
that, by reason of this disobedience, we and all men 
are born with a sinful nature, that we have broken God's 
law, and that no man can be saved but by his grace. 

[This important truth is also well expressed. 
Eternal death [cessation of life], not eternal dying, 
nor eternal life in torment, is "the wages of sin." 
(Rom. 6:23.) Hence Jesus Christ "by the grace of 
God tasted death for every man"— "poured out his 
soul unto death" for us.— Heb. 2:9; Isa. 53:12.] 

Article VI. -Of the Grace of God. 

We believe that God, out of His great love for the 
world, has given His only begotten Son to be the Saviour 
of sinners, and in the gospel freely offers His all-sufficient 
Salvation to all men. And we praise Him for the unspeakable 
grace wherein He has provided a way of eternal life for all mankind. 

[We are glad for this statement, that God's love 
is for the whole world and not merely for the "elect" 
Church; and that "all men" are provided an "all-sufficient 
salvation." Good! very good! It only remains 
to remember the Apostle's word, "How shall they believe 
on him of whom they have not heard?" to prove 
that the "due time" for the majority of our race to be 
saved, by acceptance of the only name given under 
heaven or amongst men, must be in the Millennium. ~ 
Acts 4:12; I Tim. 2:6; Rom. 10:14.] 

Article VIL-Of Election. 

We believe that God, from the beginning, in His own 
good pleasure, gave to His Son a people, an innumerable 
multitude, chosen in Christ unto holiness, service and salvation; 
we believe that all who come to years of discretion 
can receive this salvation only through faith and repentance; 

R3026 : page 182 

and we believe that all who die in infancy, and all 
others given by the Father to the Son, who are beyond 
the reach of the outward means of grace, are regenerated 
and saved by Christ through the Spirit, who works when 
and where and how He pleases. 

[This statement is the blindest and least satisfactory 
of all the Articles. It is God's election, not man's 
that is discussed; hence the word "innumerable" here 
must be understood to mean that to God the "elect" 
are either not numbered or beyond numeration or 
both. Surely this is inconsistent with divine foreknowledge 



and predestination,— without which the 

word "elect" would be meaningless. On the contrary, 

the Scriptures represent the elect as being, not only 

numerable but, numbered and limited;— in all a "little 

flock," the very reverse of innumerable. In Revelations (14:1-5) 

the number of these "very elect" "overcomers" 

is given as 144,000; and in chap. 7:1-4 the 

same ones are shown as filling up the special election 

first opened to Fleshly Israel (Rom. 1 1:7, 17-19), and 

the same number is given. It is another class altogether, 

not the "elect" "little flock" who shall inherit 

the Kingdom, that is subsequently described as "a 

great multitude which no man could number," or 

whose number is known to no man. (Rev. 7:9.) These 

latter never sit with the Lord in his throne as "joint-heirs," 

but are "before the throne;" neither are they 

the Temple of "living stones," but are honored in permission 

to serve God in his temple.— Rev. 7:9-15. 

The difficulty with the theory of our dear Presbyterian 
friends is that they misapply the election to 
salvation. True, the elect will all be saved, but they 
are not elected to salvation. There is but one ground, 
or condition on which any can now be saved; namely, 
by faith attested by obedience to the extent of ability. 
God is not unjust that he should make some short 
cut, or easier condition for the "elect." Rather, indeed, 
though the standard of salvation now and forever 
must be the same— perfect love— the holy spirit 
or disposition of the Redeemer— the non-elect, the 
world in general, will in their time of trial (the Millennium) 
have easier conditions of attaining to the divine 
standard than have the elect during this Gospel 
age. 

Our dear friends need to see that the divine plan 
has heights and depths, lengths and breadths which 
Brother Calvin and his associates never dreamed of; 
namely, that favor of God which they obscurely refer 
to by saying that those "beyond the reach of outward 
means of grace, are regenerated and saved by 
Christ through the Spirit who works when and where 
and how he pleases." The world as a whole is now 
"beyond the reach of outward means of grace" and 
there are no other; "for there is none other name under 
heaven given among men whereby we must be 
saved." But when we begin to seek for "when" and 

R3026 : page 183 

"where" and "how" the spirit of God will work for the 
world's reclamation we find it all clearly stated in the 
Scriptures. 

The Apostle says that God's grace in Christ for 
all shall be "testified in due time." (I Tim. 2:6). The 
Prophet points us to the Millennium as that due time, 
and assures us that then the knowledge of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth as the waters cover the 



great deep;— and then there shall be no longer need 
to "teach every man his neighbor and every man his 
brother, saying know thou the Lord! for all shall 
know me from the least of them unto the greatest of 
them saith the Lord." (Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34.) The 
Apostle Peter declares that this grand and universal 
"refreshing from the presence of the Lord," shall 
come at our Lord's second advent which shall be followed 
by "times of restitution of all things which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets 
since the world began." St. Peter tells us just "how 
humanity is then to be blessed; saying, "For Moses 
truly said unto the fathers [not fulfilled in Peter's day 
nor since, but as sure as God's Word], 'A prophet 
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 
brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things 
whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come 
to pass that every soul which will not hear [heed, 
obey] that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among 
the people'— Second Death— Acts 3:19-23. 

Our Lord himself tells "how" his grace will work 
or operate by and by, at his second advent. His 
words are "All that are in the graves shall hear his 
voice and shall come forth; they that have done good 
[the faithful, the "elect"] unto the resurrection of 
life [the First Resurrection— "they shall be priests of 
God and of Christ and shall reign on the earth.— Rev. 20:6]; 
and they that have done evil [shall come forth] 
unto resurrection by judgments." (See Revised Version.) 
Jno. 5:28,29. This resurrection then is the 
hope of all except the saints, the elect. When they 
come forth from the tomb during the Millennium 
they will not be fully alive, for full life means perfection. 
None will live again in that proper sense of perfect 
life, complete freedom from death, until the Millennium 
is finished. It will be an age of uplifting, or 
restitution, in which the revivifying influences of the 
"trees of life" and the "river of the water of life clear 
as crystal, proceeding out of the throne," shall be for 
the non-elect; for the world of mankind in general- 
all of these who will may take of the water of life 
freely and live forever; while those who refuse those 
life opportunities will, as the Apostle declares, "be 
destroyed from among the people." 

The "how" of this great work of God for the whole 
world is further explained by our Lord; saying, of 
that future invitation to the symbolical trees of life, 
and the water of life which will flow from the glorified 
Millennial Kingdom, "The Spirit and the Bride say 
Come, and let him that heareth say, Come! And let 
him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let 
him take the water of life freely." The election will 
be over and past then and the elect will be the glorified 
"Bride" whose work it shall be, in unison with the 
Spirit of God, to invite the whole world to share God's 
grace. 



The "elect" are not the "Bride" yet, but only the 
chaste virgin espoused to Christ and waiting on the 
Heavenly Bridegroom to make her, at his second coming 
his bride and joint-heir. Neither is there a "river 
of water of life" now flowing; but merely "wells of 
water springing up" in the "elect." Neither is there 
this general invitation to "whosoever wills;" for now 
the God of this world still blinds the eyes and closes 
the ears of all but the comparatively few;— deceiving 
nearly the whole world. It will be after Satan shall 
be bound for the thousand years, that he should deceive 
the nations no more, that the promised blessings 
upon the non-elect, who are now being "passed 
by," shall be fulfilled. Then all the blind eyes shall 
be opened and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped.— 
Isa. 35:5. 

The Apostle Paul clearly shows that the "elect" 
are the "seed of Abraham"— Christ the head, his 
church the body. He declares also what is most obvious; 
namely, that the fulfilment of the promise to 
Abraham of which his "seed" "the elect" are heirs, 
is still future; and that promise is, "In thy seed shall all 
the families of the earth be blessed." The "elect" are 
"the holy nation, the peculiar people, the royal priesthood," 
called now to offer sacrifices that thereby they 
may specially attest their loyalty to God and his righteousness 
and crystalize their character-likeness to 
their Redeemer, and thus be qualified to be the kings, 
priests and judges of the world during the Millennium 
—the world's judgment day or trial day. Speaking of 
the "elect" the Apostle asks, "Know ye not that the 
saints shall judge the world?"— I Cor. 6:2. 

The "Elect" are tried, tested judged along a very 
"narrow way"— of opposition from the world, the 
flesh and the devil; the world's way of the Millennial 
age is designated a "highway" of holiness, free from 
stumbling stones so that the wayfarer though unsophisticated 
need not err therein. (Isa. 35:8,9; 5:27.) 
The path of the "elect" is a dark way, a night time, 
in which they need constantly the Word of their Lord 
as a "lamp to their feet;" the path of the non-elect in 
the Millennium will be radiant because the Sun of 
Righteousness shall arise with healing in his beams 
and drive away completely the darkness which now 
covers the earth, and the gross darkness which covers 
the people— drive away the miasma of sin, error, 
ignorance, prejudice, selfishness, etc. Ah yes! the 
elect may rejoice with the Prophet saying,— "Weeping 
may endure for the night,— joy cometh in the 
morning!"— Psa. 30:5. 

"The elect" who now during this Gospel night of 
sin and ignorance are to be "burning and shining 
lights," and are exhorted not to hide their lights under 
a bushel, but to set them upon candlesticks— to 
let the light shine out to the extent of their ability 
and thus to glorify their Father in heaven— are all 



to come together by and by, are all to be changed 
from human to spirit beings, like the Redeemer, and 
then they with him shall constitute the great Sun of 
Righteousness whose shining is to bring so great 
blessings to the world. See the Lord's own statement 
of this: The wheat are the children of God— "children 
of the Kingdom;". ...During this Gospel age 
wheat and tares— true saints, the "elect," and mere 
professors, the tares— are to grow together until the 
end or harvest of the age.... Then the wheat are 

R3027 :page 184 

to be garnered and "shine forth as the Sun in the 
Kingdom of their Father. "-Matt. 13:43. 

If all who pray "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be 
done on earth as it is done in heaven," could see that 
God's great plan for the world's salvation is as yet 
only beginning, that it will not properly begin until 
the Millennial Kingdom of Christ comes, then they 
would be prepared to see clearly that during this 
Gospel age God is merely selecting or electing from 
among men the Kingdom class, and fitting and preparing 
them for their grand and glorious service as 
the world's missionaries— prophets or teachers; 
priests, or helpers; kings, or rulers; judges, or disciplinarians. 
From this standpoint the doctrine of election 
is grand indeed, but from no other standpoint] 

Article VIII.— Of Our Lord Jesus Christ. 

We believe in and confess the Lord Jesus Christ, the 
only Mediator between God and man, who, being the Eternal 
Son of God, for us men and for our salvation, became 
truly man, being conceived by the Holy Ghost and born 
of the Virgin Mary, without sin; unto us He has revealed 
the Father, by His Word and spirit making known the perfect 
will of God; for us He fulfilled all righteousness and 
satisfied eternal justice, offering Himself a perfect sacrifice upon the 
cross to take away the sin of the world; for us He rose from the 
dead and ascended into heaven, where He ever intercedes for 
us, in our hearts, joined to him by faith, He ever abides forever 
as the indwelling Christ, over us, and over all for us, He rules; 
wherefore, unto Him we render love, obedience and adoration 
as our Prophet, Priest and King, forever. 

[This is a splendid confession of the truth whose 
Scripturalness rejoices us. We would have preferred 
a little clearer and fuller expression than "He ever 
intercedes for us in our hearts." It is true in an indirect 
sense that the spirit of Christ in our hearts intercedes 
for holiness as against the weaknesses of the 
flesh: we prefer to suppose that the comma after 
hearts is a typographical error and should be omitted, 
thus expressing the Scriptural thought that our Redeemer 
"maketh intercession for us" with the Father. 
This omits the old and erroneous thought of intercession 



expressed by the hymn:— 

"Five bleeding wounds he bears 

Received on Calvary; 
They pour effectual prayers, 

They intercede for me; 
Forgive him, oh forgive! they cry, 

Nor let the ransomed sinner die." 

No; the thought is that having paid to Justice the 
ransom price for the sins of the whole world he has 
ascended to the Father and is there ready to apply 
of his merit to the covering of our share in Adamic 
condemnation, and also for our unwilled sins present 
and future, the results of Adamic weaknesses and depravity. 
His entire work is one of intercession,— 
now for his church, the household of faith, the anti-typical 
Levites, and by and by for all the people- 
all who when the knowledge and opportunity are 
granted will desire to come unto the Father by Him. 
Intercede signifies go-between: our Lord Jesus became 
the Mediator of the New Covenant and thus the "go-between" 
who took the responsibilities of the sinner 
Adam (and his race) and paid to Justice the price and 
now stands ready to apply the benefit of his sacrifice 
to all who will accept it upon New Covenant terms.] 

Article IX. Of Faith and Repentance. 

We believe that God pardons our sins and accepts us 
as righteous solely on the ground of the perfect obedience 
and sacrifice of Christ, received by faith alone; and that 
this saving faith is always accompanied by repentance, 
wherein we confess and forsake our sins with full purpose 
of and endeavor after, a new obedience to God. 

[Another excellent statement to which we can 
give our heartiest assent.] 

Article X.-Of the Holy Spirit. 

We believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord and Giver of 
life, who moves everywhere upon the hearts of men, to 
restrain them from evil and to incite them unto good, and 
whom the Father is ever willing to give unto all who ask 
Him. We believe that He has spoken by holy men of God 
in making known His truth to men for their salvation; 
that, through our Exalted Saviour, He was sent forth in 
power to convict the world of sin, to enlighten men's minds 
in the knowledge of Christ, and to persuade and enable 
them to obey the call of the gospel; and that He abides 
with the church, dwelling in every believer as the spirit 
of truth, of holiness and of comfort. 

[This is a most peculiar statement and quite unscriptural. 
The Scriptures do mention the holy spirit 
or power of God moving or acting upon the waters 
during the creative period (Gen. 1:2); and they also 



speak of its moving holy men of old to speak and to 
write divine messages (2 Pet. 1:21); and they also 
speak of its operation upon the Church, the elect, but 
nowhere is it said to be imparted to any other than 
God's consecrated children. It shall be in you, the 
Church, as God's power, witness and anointing, and 
through its operation in you, through your words and 
conduct, it shall convince or convict the world of 
sin, of righteousness and of a coming of judgment or 
judicial recompense. Space here does not permit of a 
full discussion of this great theme: we refer our 
readers to "The At-one-ment between God and Man" 
--Vol. V., of Millennial Dawn, chapters VIII-XL] 

Article XL -Of the New Birth and the New Life. 

We believe that the Holy Spirit only is the author and 
source of new birth; we rejoice in the new life, wherein 
He is given unto us as the seal of sonship in Christ, and 
keeps loving fellowship with us, helps us in our infirmities, 
purges us from our faults and ever continues His transforming 
work in us until we are perfected in the likeness 
of Christ, in the glory of the life to come. 

[This peculiar statement is confusing however it 
be read. There is no Scriptural declaration that the 
Holy Spirit is our father but rather that the Father 
begot us by his holy spirit to newness of life— to be 
new creatures in Christ Jesus, perfected in the First 
Resurrection. If this is the thought of the first 
sentence it is Biblical, otherwise not. With the remainder 
we must be in hearty agreement.] 

Article XII.— Of the Resurrection and the Life to Come. 

We believe that in the life to come the spirits of the 
just, at death made free from sin, enjoy immediate communion 
with God and the vision of His glory; and we confidently 
look for the general resurrection in the last day, 
when the bodies of those who sleep in Christ shall be 
fashioned in the likeness of the glorious body of their 
Lord, with whom they shall live and reign forever. 

[This statement emphasizes the general confusion 

R3027 : page 185 

of thought on this subject prevalent in all denominations. 

Our fleshly bodies are continually changing— 

science declares that a complete change is effected 

about every seven years. It seems very absurd to 

think that the last atoms of matter were any better 

than those previously sloughed off, or than any other 

"dust" for resurrection purposes, when it must be 

confessed that divine power is the all-essential of resurrection, 

anyway. It is peculiar reasoning, too, that 

urges that Adam and Abraham and David and Paul 

have been in heaven for centuries in perfect bliss without 



bodies, and even to claim that death set them 

free, and then to speak of "the hope of the resurrection" 

of their bodies, at the last day. If they were imprisoned 

while in them and if they are supremely 

happy without them, the doctrine of resurrection as 

a hope is absurd. And if they needed the molecules of 

dust to make them still happier than they are why 

should God delay the matter until the last day? 

The fact is that all this absurdity belongs to a misunderstanding 
of the grand doctrine of resurrection 

taught in the Bible. The Bible does not teach a resurrection 
of the body, but of the soul. It declares 
"The soul [being] that sinneth it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4,20.) 
It declares that because of sin all souls 
die, and that to redeem our souls our Lord became 
a man, a human soul, or being, and "poured out his 
soul unto death," "made his soul an offering for sin." 
(Isa. 53:10,12.) The Bible further shows that it was 
our Lord's soul that was resurrected on the third day, 
"His soul was not left in hades"— the death-state. 
(Acts 2:27.) So, also the Apostle treats the subject, 
declaring, "It [the soul or being] is sown [in 
death] in weakness; it [the soul] is raised in power." 
In the resurrection God giveth it a body as it hath 
pleased him. -I Cor. 15:43,38. 

Our word soul signifies "sentient being," a cessation 
of which we call death. The Adamic sentence 
was death, which would have been the final end of us 
all but for the redemptive work of Christ. That redemptive 
work is not yet completed— the price has 
been paid, but the recovery of man out of death awaits 
the time appointed of the Father. Meantime the 
dead are no longer thought of nor spoken of as dead 
(extinct) by God who purposes their resurrection, the 
resuscitation of their beings, or souls; hence the frequent 
use in the Scriptures of the very word used by 
the creed-revisers in the above article; namely, 
"sleep," when referring to the dead.— "Them also 
which sleep in Jesus." (I Thes. 4:14.) "We shall not 
all sleep, but we shall all be changed." (I Cor. 15:51) 
"Whether we wake or sleep." (I Thes. 5:10.) "He saith 
unto them, Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go that 
I may awake him out of sleep. ...Then said Jesus 
unto them plainly [coming down to their comprehension] 
Lazarus is dead." (John 11:11,14.) "The maid 
is not dead, but sleepeth." (Mat. 9:24.) "David after 
he had served his own generation by the will of God, 
fell on sleep." "David is not ascended into the heavens." 
(Acts 2:34; 13:36.) Martyr Stephen "cried with 
a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. 
And when he had said this he fell asleep." (Acts 7:60.) 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc., good and bad "slept 
with their fathers." 

R3028 : page 185 



The Revision Committee's statement is in harmony 
with the above when it speaks, not of the bodies 
sleeping and being awakened at the last day, but refers 
to "the bodies of those who sleep in Christ." But 
if they sleep in Christ waiting for their bodies, how 
can it be also true that "they enjoy immediate communion 
with God and the vision of his glory"? Do 
the Revisers wish us to understand that the holy dead 
dream or that they are somnambulists? 

The Scripture proposition is clearly stated, "The 
dead know not anything." "His sons come to honor 
and they know it not, to dishonor and they perceive it 
not of them;" "for there is no work nor device nor 
knowledge nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou 
goest." (Eccl. 9:5,10; Job 14:21.) From this standpoint 
the importance attached to the resurrection in 
the Bible is reasonable and our Lord's words respecting 
the resurrection have fresh meaning,— "All 
that are in their graves shall hear his voice and come 
forth"— the approved the "elect" to the life-resurrection, 
and the unapproved world in general to the 
judgment-resurrection.— John 5:28,29. 

Article XIII. -Of the Law of God. 

We believe that the law of God revealed in the Ten 
Commandments, and more clearly disclosed in the words 
of Christ, is forever established in truth and equity, so 
that no human work shall abide except it be built on this 
foundation. We believe that God requires of every man to 
do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with his God; 
and that only through this harmony with the will of God 
shall be fulfilled that brotherhood of man wherein the 
kingdom of God is to be made manifest. 

[An excellent statement; but it might have been 
improved in our judgment, by a declaration showing 
that the Law Covenant made with Israel of which the 
Ten Commandments was the basis, has given place 
to the New Covenant, mediated by Christ and based 
upon an ability-obedience to its basic law of love.] 

Article XIV.— Of the Church and the Sacraments. 

We believe in the holy catholic church of which Christ 
is the only head. We believe that the church invisible consist 
of all the redeemed, and that the church visible embraces 
all who profess the true religion together with their 
children. We receive to our communion all who confess 
and obey Christ as their divine Lord and Saviour, and we 
hold fellowship with all believers in Him. 

We believe the sacraments of baptism and the Lord's 
supper, alone divinely established and committed to the 
church, together with the Word as means of grace; made 
effectual only by the Holy Spirit, and always to be used by 
Christians with prayer and praise to God. 

[Here we have another excellent statement seemingly 



full of breadth and liberty in Christ; but it can 
be interpreted narrowly enough: and past experiences 
and our general knowledge of human nature 
lead us to fear that it will generally be given this narrow 
interpretation; viz., to make the words "our 
communion," i.e. our fellowship, to mean those only 
who will heartily and honestly accept the Westminster 
Confession of Faith and accept these articles, 
foregoing, as a later statement of the same meaning. 
Any who by thus joining our Church and who by thus 
coming behind our creedal fence separates himself 
from all other Christians we will fellowship. 

We agree that there is but one Church invisible, 
and one Church visible; but why then have different 

R3028 : page 186 

brands, different "communions;"— professedly different 
"bodies" of Christ? Were our Lord or his Apostles 
Presbyterian or other sectarians? And if not, 
have we any Scriptural authority for such divisions 
which separate the members of the body of Christ? 
Why not come out of all sects and creeds and stand 
together as at first on the one foundation, that Christ 
died for our sins and rose again for our justification, 
and that all so accepting his work and fully consecrating 
themselves to him to do his will constitute 
his elect Church? 

Article XV.— Of the Last Judgment. 

We believe that the Lord Jesus Christ will come again 
in glorious majesty to judge the world and to make a final 
separation between the righteous and the wicked. The 
wicked shall receive the eternal award of their sins and 
the Lord will manifest the glory of His mercy in the salvation 
of His people and their entrance upon the full enjoyment 
of eternal life. 

[We are glad to note this acknowledgement of 
faith in our Lord's second coming, so prominently 
taught throughout the Bible. Could these dear 
friends get a more correct view of the resurrection 
they would see that our Lord's coming is as the Life-giver; 
and that none of his redeemed can enter into 
life eternal until he comes to receive them unto himself, 
from the prison-house of death in which they 
sleep. "Your life is hid with Christ in God [in divine 
power and promise]; when Christ, who is our life, 
shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in 
glory."-Col. 3:3,4. 

The glad welcome of the Lord's second advent, 
so noticeable in the New Testament, is not found generally 
among Christians of today for two reasons; 
one, we have just mentioned; the other is because of 
false views respecting the judgment our Lord comes 
to perform. When father Adam was in Eden he experienced 



his first trial or judgment, and for disobedience 

he was condemned to death— a sentence 

which his posterity has shared, dying mentally, morally 

and physically— a groaning creation under divine 

sentence or curse. What would Adam and all of his 

children specially desire of the Lord? 

Their prayer would surely be: Lord, that we might 
have another trial, another judgment;— peradventure 
our experiences with sin may have taught us such 
lessons that we would be fully obedient hereafter and 
abide forever in thy favor. But the Lord's Word assures 
that we could not succeed if granted another 
trial under similar conditions; because we, although 
experienced now, are fallen and imperfect, and cannot 
do the things which we would wish to do. Furthermore, 
he shows us that Justice is the foundation of 
his throne and that having declared us sentenced to 
death he cannot justly revoke his own sentence. 

Then, while we wonder and despair, the Lord reveals 
to us his plan for our salvation, wonderful in 
its completeness. (1) He provided for our redemption 
by the death of his Son who took Adam's place, and 
by redeeming him redeemed all of his race who lost 
in his failure. Thus God shows us his law and justice 
inviolate. Nor was this effected by an injustice 
to his Son, whose full consent was first secured by 
"the joy that was set before him." (Heb. 12:2.) The 
obedient Son has been abundantly rewarded— "God 
also hath highly exalted and given him a name above 
every name."— Phil. 2:9. 

But why this redemption of Adam and his race? 
What is its ultimate object? We answer that it is 
God's response to the 6000 years' prayer of our race; 
—Lord that we might have another trial or judgment. 
God proposes to answer that prayer in a better way 
than any except himself could have devised,— as he 
declares: "My thoughts are not your thoughts, 
neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord; for 
as the heavens are higher than the earth so are my 
ways higher than your ways and my plans higher 
than your plans."— Isa. 55:8,9. 

Foreseeing that fallen man could not obey the divine 
law, which requires the full measure of a perfect 
man's ability, God has not only redeemed our race, 
but proposes also in "due time" to establish the Redeemer 
as the King over all the earth, to rule and 
judge and regulate the world, and bring order out of 
present confusion and darkness and sin, and by corrections 
in righteousness gradually to raise men up, 
up, up, to perfection and the divine likeness in heart. 
This time of resurrection, also called the "times of 
restitution," is to be the world's "day of judgment," 
in which each member of Adam's fallen race, redeemed 
by the precious blood, shall taste of divine 
mercy and have the fullest opportunity that could be 
reasonably asked for re-attaining all that was lost in 



Adam; and meantime for developing such characters 
as would be fully approved by God as fit for the gift 
of God— everlasting life through Jesus Christ our 
Lord;— all others, failing under those favorable conditions 
being re-condemned,— judged worthy of the 
Second Death from which there will be no recovery. 
This is the Lord's declaration: "God hath appointed 
a day ["One day with the Lord is as a 1000 
years."— II Pet. 3:8.] in the which he will judge [grant 
trial to] the world in righteousness [equity] by that 
man whom he hath [afore] ordained [the Christ]; 
whereof he hath given assurance [ground for hope] 
unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the 
dead. (Acts 17:31.) This is the "resurrection by judgment" 
to which our Lord refers. (John 5:29.) No 
wonder then that the prophet David rejoiced so in the 
prospect of the world's coming judgment day; saying 
(IChron. 16:31-34):- 

"Let the heavens be glad, 
And let the earth rejoice; 
And let men say among the nations, Jehovah 

reigneth. 
Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; 
Let the fields rejoice, and all that is therein. 
Then shall the trees of the wood sing out 
At the presence of Jehovah, 
Because He Cometh 
To Judge the Earth! 

O give thanks unto Jehovah; for he is good; 
For his mercy endureth forever!" 

Does someone inquire why the Day of Judgment 
should be put off— why it did not begin at once, as 
soon as the sacrifice of Calvary was finished? We 
answer, that God hath appointed a day— the seventh 
or last day of the week for this judgment— the 
world's great Sabbath of rest after the 6000 years of 
sin and death, and that is sufficient. But we are glad 

R3029 : page 187 

to see just why our Father so "appointed"; viz., because 
in the interim he designed the calling and perfecting 
of the Church, the saints, the "elect," to be 
joint-heirs with the Redeemer and share his glory and 
work— his ruling, judging and blessing of all the families 
of the earth. 

For further discussion of this subject we must 
refer our readers to Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., Chap. 8.] 

Article XVI.— Of Christian Service and the Final Triumph. 

We believe that it is our duty, as servants and friends 
of Christ, to do good unto all men, to maintain the public 
and private worship of God, to hallow the Lord's day, to 



preserve the sanctity of the family, to uphold the just authority 

of the state, and so to live in all honesty, purity 

and charity that our lives shall testify of Christ. We joyfully 

receive the Word of Christ, bidding His people go into 

all the world and make disciples of all nations, and declare 

unto them that God was in Christ reconciling the world 

unto Himself, and that He will have all men to be saved and to come 

to the knowledge of the truth. We confidently trust that by His 

power and grace all His enemies and ours shall be finally overcome, 

and the kingdoms of this world shall be made the kingdom 

of our God and of His Christ. In this faith we abide; in 

this service we labor, and in this hope we pray. Even so, come 

Lord Jesus. 

[We are specially glad that the two Scripture citations 
we have italicized have been made prominent 
in the Revised Confession. These may assist some to 
see that the election of the Church is for the purpose 
of bringing the whole world to a knowledge of the 
truth in order to their everlasting salvation. If it 
was the thought of the Revisers that the Church in 
her present condition can accomplish this, let them 
reflect that nineteen centuries have accomplished little 
for the world in general in the matter of knowledge 
of the Lord. Let them reflect, too, that even in 
this day of missionary effort, statistics show that the 
whole annual Church increase including all even 
nominally Christians, is less proportionately than the 
natural increase of the human family; so that if the 
hope expressed, that the kingdoms of this world will 
become the kingdoms of our Lord, means a hope of 
converting the world, it is a blind and baseless one. 
The Scriptural thought, as shown by old MSS. is 
quite a different one; namely, that the dominion of 
this world [is to] become the dominion of God and 
of his Christ. If the entire world were brought into 
the condition of earth's best kingdoms it would still 
leave much, oh! so much, to be desired and prayed 
for— "Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth 
as it is done in heaven." Hence we pray this prayer, 
and expect and patiently wait for that Kingdom which 
will now speedily be introduced by "a time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation." "Even so, 
Come, Lord Jesus."] 



R3029 : page 187 

LET US PUT ON THE ARMOR OF LIGHT. 

-ROM. 13:8-14. -JUNE 22.- 

"Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, 
and let us put on the armor of light." 

NOT THE NATURAL man, but the new creature, 



is addressed in this lesson. The natural 
man is a bundle of selfishness— personal 
selfishness— family selfishness— sect and party 
selfishness— clan and national selfishness. True, the 
organs of the brain representing love are not wholly 
lacking in any member of the race, and so far as they 
exist may be reckoned as representatives of the 
original mental image of God, in which man was created. 
But even such fragmentary elements of love 
as still remain are warped and twisted and diverted 
into selfish channels;— self love, family love, fatherland 
love, patriotism. The natural man does not realize 
this selfish character of the natural heart as does 
the new creature; because the latter, being begotten 
by the spirit of truth, the holy spirit of love divine, 
finds now a wide difference between his old kind of 
love and his new ideal. While this distinction may 
be clearly recognized from our start in the Christian 
way, nevertheless, our discernment at first between 
the selfish loves of the natural man and the divine 
love are indistinct and indefinite, as compared with 
the clearer views and sharper distinctions realized as 
we grow in grace, in knowledge and in the spirit of 
love divine, and come to know definitely the love of 
God which passeth all [human] understanding. 

The Apostle exhorts these new creatures, justified 
by faith in Jesus Christ, called of God and begotten 
of the holy spirit, to grow as rapidly as possible in 
their appreciation and heart-sympathy with the 
Lord's spirit of love. These should realize that they 
are debtors to the Lord to an untold amount, because 
of his love and mercy extended toward them 
in Christ; and they should see, also, that having thus 
received the Lord's grace and the spirit of it, they 
are to have so broad and so generous a feeling toward 
all mankind that they will desire first of all 
to pay off every obligation, of every kind, and to 
"owe no man anything." 

The Apostle declared that he was a debtor both to 
the Jews and to the Greeks; and looking at matters 
from a similar standpoint, we may say likewise, that 
we are under many obligations to many people. We 
owe a real debt to our parents, through whom, in 
God's providence, we have come into being; we owe 
a debt to the community and commonwealth in which 
we live for the measure of peace, order, social convenience 
and advantages every way, which we, in 
common with others, share; we owe a debt to our 
nation at large in consideration of the many blessings, 
liberties, advantages, etc., which come to us 
through it by divine providence. And above and beyond 
all these debts to our fellow creatures, we recognize 
a debt and obligation to our Creator— not only 
for earthly life, its blessings, its privileges, its opportunities, 
such liberties as we enjoy; but still more for 
our redemption with the precious blood, for our 



knowledge of the same, for our call to joint-heirship 
with our Lord, for the begetting of the holy 
spirit, for the assistance and encouragement of the 
Word and its exceeding great and precious promises 
which strengthen, encourage, and direct us in the 
way of life eternal. 

True, some arguments may be made on the other 
side of the proposition, but these are not for us; we 
had no claims, we had no riches, we had nothing until 

R3029 : page 188 

we had a being. We might perhaps wish that our 
parents might have been more wise, and that therefore 
we might have been born with a more liberal endowment 
mentally, morally and physically; we might 
perhaps wish that our community and commonwealth 
were still more advanced, still more beneficent, still 
more liberal than they are; we might perhaps wish 
that our nation had still better laws and still better 
regulations than it has; we might perhaps wish that 
our Creator had favored us with natural and earthly 
things still more than he has favored us. But, as before 
stated, we are debtors for all that we have; it is, 
therefore, appropriate that we should be thankful for 
everything that we do possess and enjoy, temporal 
and spiritual; and that we should realize that while 
it is our privilege to do for others and to assist others, 
to encourage and bless and help others, nevertheless, 
being debtors for all that we have, we have no 
grounds on which to claim more. 

A realization of the subject, from this standpoint, 
should tend to make all of the Lord's people, all of 
the "new creatures in Christ Jesus," very contented, 
very appreciative, very thankful for mercies, both 
temporal and spiritual. Seeing that in all these respects 
we are debtors, we should seek to discharge 
our duty toward all our beneficiaries: toward God the 
fountain of every good and perfect gift toward our 
nation, toward our commonwealth and community, 
toward our parents. We should see to it not only 
that none of these are injured by reason of our living 
in the world, but that our lives shall in some 
measure and degree testify to our appreciation of 
them all, and directly or indirectly be a help, an assistance, 
toward the best interests of each and all 
with whom we have to do. This is but simple justice 
—justice demands that we pay our debts, that we 
owe no man anything. 

But we are to go beyond this just discharge of 
our obligations and are to love God and our fellow 
man— to seek not only to do our duty, to pay our 
share of the taxes and burdens and responsibilities 
of life and social order and parental protection and 
comfort, but love is to prompt us according to our 
best judgment, guided by the new mind, the Lord's 



spirit, to do something more than mere duty might 
demand— to sacrifice something in the interests of the 
Lord's service and in the blessing and comforting of 
our fellow creatures, as the spirit of the Lord may 
direct through his inspired Word. 

He that loveth all others so that he is constantly 
seeking to do them good, is following the holy law, 
the perfect will of God. It is less a question of outward 
conduct than of heart intention, though undoubtedly 
the heart intention will generally find appropriate 
expression through the lips and through 

R3030 : page 188 

the actions of life. The Lord, however, knows the 
imperfections of our judgments and the weaknesses 
of the flesh, and therefore, very graciously under the 
New Covenant accepts the perfection of our intentions, 
of our wills, as instead of the absolute perfection 
of our every word and deed. Thus "The righteousness 
of the law is fulfilled in us who walk not 
after the flesh, but after the spirit"— and as nearly up 
to the spirit as possible. 

"THOU SHALT NOT" 

The Apostle explains that the commands of the 
decalogue were merely attempts to bring down to the 
natural man's comprehension the real spirit of the 
divine law. And yet the prohibitions of that law, 
"Thou shalt not," in respect to various things that 
would be injurious to the neighbor, could never fully 
express the comprehensiveness of the divine will. 
The prohibitions of the decalogue were proper 
enough for the "house of servants," but when the 
"house of sons" was instituted (Heb. 3:5,6), and 
when these sons were begotten of the holy spirit so 
that they could appreciate the law of Love, it was 
substituted, as higher every way and more comprehensive 
than the prohibitions of the decalogue. Thou 
shalt not commit adultery; Thou shalt not kill; Thou 
shalt not steal; Thou shalt not bear false witness; 
Thou shalt not covet;— because all these things 
would be contrary to the law of love under which 
alone the "new creature" is placed. 

But the new law of the New Covenant— Love— is 
so much more comprehensive than the decalogue 
which was the basis of the Jewish Covenant, that as 
the Apostle says, if there be any other commandment, 
any other thing that should be prohibited, any 
other things contrary to the law of God, it is briefly 
comprehended in the declaration "Thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself." The law of love marks as 
transgressions many things which would not have 
been violations of the decalogue: for instance, the 
decalogue commanded the house of servants not to 



bear false witness against a neighbor; but the law of 
love indicates to the house of sons that they should 
"speak evil of no man" even if such witness would 
not be false; it instructs them further, that even if it 
be necessary to tell an unpleasant truth— if it becomes 
duty or obligation of law— even the truth is to be 
spoken in love without acrimony, hatred, malice, envy 
or strife. Oh, what a valuable lesson it would be to 
the house of sons if they could all equally grasp this 
comprehensive thought,— if their obligations not only 
to each other and to their families and friends, but 
also to their neighbors and their enemies— to love 
them, to so consider their interests and their welfare 
in general, that they would do nothing and say 
nothing to the contrary; but gladly at the sacrifice of 
their own convenience, assist them in any and every 
way,— "Doing good unto all men as we have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith!" This 
is loving our neighbor as ourselves— not as he loves 
us. 

THIS IS THE GOLDEN RULE-LOVE. 

Since love works blessings to the neighbor and 
seeks his welfare, it follows as a matter of course that 
"Love worketh no ill to his neighbor." Will we not, 
as the Lord's consecrated people, seek to put this lesson 
into practice in our daily lives? Will we not 
learn to consider the words of our mouths, and to 
remember that we can smite and injure a brother or 
a neighbor with the tongue as truly and more seriously 
than with our hands? Will we not learn that 
in even mentioning anything uncomplimentary respecting 
a brother or a neighbor, we are surely working 

R3030 : page 189 

him ill, doing him an injury,— injuring his reputation 
and standing— however true the uncomplimentary 
thing may be; and that in so doing we are 
violating the law of God, the law of love? Will we 
not learn that the only instance in which we would 
have a right to mention an uncomplimentary thing 
would be in the event of our seeing a brother or a 
neighbor in danger of injury by another and thus out 
of love for him be called upon to warn him of the 
source of danger? 

This warning we should be sure was necessary, 
before giving it; and it should be couched in such 
language as sincere love for the dangerous one would 
dictate. Will we not learn to think charitably of the 
words and actions of others, and to suppose their intentions 
good, until we have positive evidence to the 
contrary: and will we not learn that then we should 
go to the offender, alone, according to Matt. 18:15; 
subsequently, if occasion require and the matter seem 



to be of vital importance, taking with us two others, 
fair and impartial in judgment, that in the presence 
of the wrong-doer they may hear from him as well as 
from us and give their judgment or opinion. And 
even if they agree with us and the wrong-doer is not 
yet corrected and the injury to us is still unabated, 
we are still not at liberty under the law of love to 
make mention of the case to others, but to call a 
meeting of the entire congregation and there, with 
the condemned one present, to have a hearing and a 
judgment of the Church in respect to the matter. 

Let us learn much more thoroughly the meaning of 
this expression "Love worketh no ill to his neighbor"; 
and again, "Speak evil of no man." Love is the fulfilling 
of the law; and our hearts, at least, must fulfill 
this law— whatever mistakes of tongue or deed we 
may unintentionally make— else we cannot hope to 
be reckoned as having reached the "mark" for the 
prize for which we are called to run with patience. 
It will require patience in dealing with ourselves and 
bringing our hearts into conformity with this divine 
law, but it is necessary, and the sooner and the more 
perseveringly undertaken, the greater and surer will 
be the blessings, and our ultimate acceptance to 
joint-heirship in the Kingdom. 

HIGH TIME TO AWAKE OUT OF SLEEP. 

The Lord's people may know now just where we 
are on the stream of time, but this matter was sealed 
up and hidden until "the time of the end," as the 
Lord informed Daniel: hence the Apostle and early 
Church could only speak of the time question from a 
general standpoint. They knew that time was passing, 
that the day of deliverance was drawing nearer 
and nearer, and was thus surely closer at hand than 
when they had first believed. If the world's seven 
thousand years be considered as a week, and the Millennial 
age reckoned as the seventh day— the Sabbath 
or rest day— then the preceding six days constitutes 
the night time, in which sin abounds, in which "darkness 
covers the earth and gross darkness the people"; 
—in which the true children of God as candles are to 
set themselves upon the candlestick (and not to put 
their light under a bushel) to give light to all in 
darkness about them. It is the time mentioned by 
the Prophet in which "weeping endures for the 
night," because sin abounds and because the wages 
of sin, death, and its comcomitants of sickness, pain 
and trouble prevail; but if weeping endures for a 
night of six thousand years," the Prophet also assures 
us, that "joy cometh in the morning" of the 
(seventh) Millennium when "the Sun of righteousness," 
the Lord of glory, shall shine forth and chase 
the darkness away, and cause the earth to be filled 
with the light of the knowledge of the glory of God. 



From this standpoint the 6,000 year night was far 
spent in the Apostle's day, and whether he realized 
this fully, or whether he wrote as he did prophetically, 
under inspiration, no matter; his declaration was 
strictly true; the night was far spent because over two 
thirds of it had passed. The Apostle wrote this letter 
somewhere about the year 4188 A.M.— about 1812 
years of the night remaining before the Millennial 
dawning. 

The Apostle's words were true, as uttered, and his 
exhortation was appropriate then; but how much 
more appropriate is that exhortation to us who are 
now living;— to us who already see with the eye of 
faith the Day Star, and the first rays of the Millennial 
morning's light. "Let us therefore cast off the 
works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of 
light." He who casts off the works of darkness, 
thus intimates that he is no longer in sympathy with 
the things of darkness, the things of sin, of selfishness, 
of injustice. He who puts on the armor of 
light not only intimates that he has enlisted on the 
side of God, of righteousness, truth, uprightness, 
light,— but he also intimates, in putting on an armor, 
that he realizes that he will be obliged to contend, 
to battle with the forces of darkness, which will oppose 
him now that he has enlisted on the side of the 
light, as they never before assailed him when he was 
one with them either in heart or in hand. 

THE ARMOR OF LIGHT. 

This armor of light the Apostle elsewhere describes: 
Its helmet of salvation represents intellectual 
protection, which we all need from the time we join 
the Lord's standard;— we need to know something, 
to have our sanctified reasons guided through the 
Word of the Lord. The breastplate of righteousness 
we need also— not the filthy rags of our own righteousness, 
but the righteousness of God in Christ— 
the justification from sin which God has provided 
through the sacrifice of his Son. Our faith in the 
ransom is all important to our protection in this 
battle. The shield of faith is another part of our armor, 
absolutely necessary; without it, the fiery darts 
of the Adversary might frequently reach us, between 
the joints of our breastplate of imputed righteousness, 
and our helmet of intellectual appreciation. The 
sword of the spirit, the Word of God, is also absolutely 
indispensable for our protection against the 
wiles of the Adversary and his deluded followers; 
otherwise they would come close up to us and smite 
us notwithstanding our armor. We should be comparatively 
at their mercy without the sword of the 
spirit, used in conjunction with the shield of faith, the 
breastplate of imputed righteousness, and the helmet 
of knowledge. But with all these we shall, by the 



grace of God, be able to fight the good fight of faith 

R3031 :page 190 

and be enabled to come off conquerors and more 
than conquerors through him who loved us and 
bought us with his own precious blood. For although 
we will have nothing to spare but will still 
have need of Christ's grace, imputed to make up for 
our deficiencies, nevertheless since we are his, all of 
his is ours, and not only are we complete in him, but 
abiding in him shall have an abundant entrance into 
the everlasting Kingdom. 

Let us "walk honestly as in the day." It is not 
yet day, the shadows of night still linger; injustice 
and sin are everywhere about us; it is, therefore, much 
more difficult now to walk honestly than it would be 
if the day had fully come, and all the temptations and 
allurements of darkness were thoroughly banished by 
the bright shining of the Sun of righteousness. 
Thank God! the world in general during the Millennial 
age will have an opportunity for walking in the 
full light of the Millennial day, up the highway of 
holiness, unto its grand consummation, perfection and 
eternal life. We praise God on their behalf, that not 
only will the darkness be gone and the evil influences 
be restrained, but that all stumbling-stones will be 
gathered out of the way. But as we are still in the 
night-time, we still need the lamp of the divine Word 
to guide our steps. There are still stumbling-stones, 
there are still inducements from the Evil One toward 
sin, unrighteousness, selfishness, envy, malice, hatred, 
strife. 

And yet ours is a time and condition in some respects 
to be appreciated more highly than that 
which the world will occupy during the Millennial age; 
because to us who are "called" now, during the night 
season, to walk by faith and not by sight— to walk 
contrary to the course of this world— to walk in love 
and not in selfishness,— to us "are given exceeding 
great and precious promises" of glory, honor, immortality, 
if we prove faithful in following the Captain 
of our salvation, who assures us not only that he 
has trodden the way before us and left us his footprints 
that we should walk in his steps, but, additionally, 
that he will be with us, an ever present 
helper in time of need. This matter of walking 
honestly at the present time, therefore, signifies considerable; 
—to be honest with God, to love him with 
all our heart, mind, being, strength; to be honest with 
ourselves, honest with our neighbors, honest with the 
brethren— to exercise toward all the law of the spirit 
of love, to love them as we love ourselves. 

We are not to indulge in the revelries and drunkenness, 
the lasciviousness and debauchery of the 
grossest sinners, nor are we to indulge in these things 



in the more refined figurative sense of reveling in 
worldliness, fashion and ostentation, and in living 
wantonly and illicitly in worldliness or sectarianism. 
We are to remember on the contrary, that we are not 
of this world, that we are citizens of the heavenly 
Kingdom, that we are betrothed to the Lord Jesus 
as his Bride and are to be separate from the world, 
pure in heart, undefiled by wrong union with Babylon. 
(Rev. 14:4.) As new creatures in Christ we 
are neither to indulge in the strifes and envyings of 
the national sort, leading to wars, nor of the commercial 
sort leading to injustice and unkind competition; 
neither are we to indulge in strifes and envyings 
amongst the brethren; but are in honor to prefer one 
another wherever the conditions and talents permit, 
contending, earnestly as well as lovingly, only when it 
is for the faith once delivered to the saints. 

These strifes, envyings, self-indulgences and improper 
associations, are to be put away from us, as 
so much of "the works of darkness" still clinging to 
us, notwithstanding our having become the Lord's 
people, "a royal priesthood;" and as another statement 
corresponding to that concerning the armor of 
light, the Apostle says, "Put ye on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill 
the lusts thereof." Putting on Christ implies a 
change of the will, which when renewed, desires to 
be Christ-like; but it implies also such a change of 
the outward appearance, conduct, habits of life, etc., 
as will enable us more and more to rightly represent 
our Lord before men, as his ambassadors. Thus are 
we changed, into our Lord's likeness of character, as 
day by day we get clearer views of his glorious character 
and seek to copy it,— until, by and by we shall be 
actually changed in the First resurrection and made 
actually like him.-2 Cor. 3:18; I Cor. 15:42-51. 

"And make no provision of the flesh to fulfill the 
lusts thereof." Ah, yes! how often the Lord's people 
have made a mistake on this point. Although the 
heart, the new mind, be thoroughly consecrated to 
the Lord, we still have the fleshly bodies and they 
still have their natural appetites and these call out 
loudly to us that they should not be ignored. They 
insist upon their rights, etc.; but the Apostle instructs 
us that having started to walk after the spirit, 
as new creatures, we should make no provision for 
gratifying the flesh;— we should not shape our affairs 
so as to yield to any of the demands of the flesh which 
we recognize to be contrary to the will of the Lord. 
In proportion as we yield to the improper desires of 
the flesh, in that same proportion the flesh will prosper 
and the spiritual new nature will languish. In 
proportion as we deny all the illegitimate appetites of 
the flesh and mortify them, put them to death, in that 
same proportion will we grow strong in the Lord and 
in the power of his might. As the Apostle again 



says, "The flesh lusteth [desireth] against the spirit 
[the new will or mind] and the spirit against the 
flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so 
that ye cannot do the things that ye would."— 
Gal. 5:17. 

QUARTERLY RE VIEW -JUNE 29. 

"A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of my people Israel. 
—Luke 2:32. 

A review of the lessons of the past quarter will undoubtedly 
prove interesting and profitable to all. 
The design of the committee selecting the lessons 
seems to have been to bring prominently before our 
minds the thought first, of how Jerusalem became the 
general center from which the Gospel light, as lamps 
in a dark place, was carried in various directions; and 
secondly, how one of these places receiving the light 
from Jerusalem— Antioch— became itself a center 
from which the Lord sent forth Paul and Barnabas, 
who in turn lighted other lamps, in other places, and 
thus spread abroad the knowledge of the Lord— especially 

R3031 :page 191 

in Asia Minor, and even unto Europe. The 
same principle still applies;— God still uses human 
agencies. He who now receives the light of truth 
is to be the agent, channel, representative of God in 
carrying the same to others still in need of it. 

Our Golden Text sets forth the thought that Christ 
is the light of the world. Not yet is the Sun of righteousness 
shining in glory, and dispelling earth's darkness; 
not yet is it enlightening all the Gentiles; not 
yet has Christ become the glory of his people Israel. 
He is, nevertheless, all through this Gospel age, a 
great light to all those whose eyes are opened that 
they may see it. This light is still shining in the 
darkness and the darkness comprehends it not; but 
blessed are our eyes for they see; and correspondingly 
the responsibility of the light is with us. Let 
us walk as children of light, even before the day 
dawns, rejoicing also in the blessings that are ultimately 
to come to all the families of the earth through 
God's Anointed. 



R3031 :page 191 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



THE CURSE UPON THE EARTH. 



Question.— What do you understand to be the 
significance of the statement in Gen. 3:17, "Cursed is 
the ground for thy sake"? 

Answer.— To our understanding the Lord is not 
here expressing a curse against the ground, bringing a 
blight upon it, but is merely stating a fact, that the 
earth at the time was in an accursed or unfit condition 
for man. He explains that its condition is for man's 
sake, implying that had it been more favorable for 
man to have had the earth in a better condition, the 
Lord would have so arranged matters. In other words, 
the earth had never been in a perfect condition up to 
that time, and would not be fully ready for man's 
occupancy for seven thousand years; but the Lord, 
foreknowing the fall into sin, and the penalty he would 
prescribe, arranged that man should be introduced to 
the earth as a felon, and should, as a culprit, do such 
penal service in the premises as would not only bring 
him valuable lessons and experiences, but would be the 
divine agent for bringing the earth up to the perfection 
of the Garden of Eden by the time that God foresaw 
would be the proper period for it to be in such a condition. 
From this standpoint you perceive that the 
statement of Genesis has a special force when it says 
that "God prepared a garden eastward in Eden." Had 
the whole earth been in a perfect or Edenic condition, 

R3032:page 191 

the preparation of the garden for man's use would 
have been unnecessary; neither would it have been in 
harmony with divine economy to have first brought 
the earth to perfection, and then to have blasted and 
blighted it; rather, by the method adopted, God is 
showing his foreknowledge of whatsoever has come 
to pass. 

The curse is lifting from the earth, in proportion 
as man is gaining victories, intellectual and chemical 
and mechanical, over it, by which he is subduing it. 
These are under divine guidance, and undoubtedly will 
greatly increase throughout the Millennial age, and as 
they increase the curse will to that extent disappear, 
until by the close of the Millennial age, with human 
perfection, there will also be earth-perfection. 

THE JUDGMENT OF "THE PRINCE OF THIS WORLD. 



Question.— To whom or what do you understand 
our Lord's words in John 12:31; 14:30, to refer? Is not 
the Diaglott foot-note on this verse a misconception? 

Answer.— We understand the "prince of this 



world" here mentioned to be the same elsewhere denominated, 

"the prince of the power of the air who 

now worketh in the hearts of the children of disobedience." 

From this you will see that we would not 

at all agree with Wakefield's suggestion, as given in 

the Diaglott foot-note. 

In reference to John 12:30,31, our thought is 
that the "prince" there referred to is Satan also. Satan 
and his rulership of disorder and sin had received no 
particular sentence or rebuke from the Lord up to this 
time; indeed, the appearances were that either God's 
law or God's creatures were imperfect, and hence that 
sin was unavoidable. But when our Lord Jesus, by his 
obedience and sacrifice, upheld the law, and made it 
honorable, and proved that it was within the range of 
a perfect man's ability to keep it, he thereby "condemned 
sin in the flesh," and, incidentally, condemned 
Satan's entire rule. And not only so, but by the purchase 
of the world of mankind with his own life, he 
secured the legal control of the world, or the right to 
bring it from under subjection to sin and Satan, back 
into harmony with God. In this sense of the word 
"this world," or the order of things then in vogue, 
and still in vogue with the world, was condemned, 
sentenced to overthrow, from the time that our Lord 
Jesus was lifted up, finished his work of redemption, 
and was accepted of the Father as the purchaser and 
King of the earth, the Second Adam. "Now shall 
the prince of this world be cast out:" The casting out 
of Satan followed the redemptive work by Christ. He 
is cast out so far as the Church is concerned; for we 
are not to allow Satan or sin to bear rule in our mortal 
bodies, but are to esteem ourselves free from his yoke, 
that we may serve the Lord. Moreover, the influence 
of the truth is more and more liberating in the world 
of mankind, breaking the shackles of superstition. 
But the great overthrow of Satan, and the great liberation 
of mankind has been delayed, waiting for the 
gathering out of the elect, the full lifting up of the 
whole body of Christ. As soon as this is accomplished 
the sentence upon Satan and his government, passed 
eighteen-hundred years ago, will go into effect thoroughly. 
Satan's house and household will be spoiled, 
wrecked, and a new Prince and his associates will take 
the Kingdom and possess it forever. 

SHE SHALL BE SAVED. 



Question.— Do you understand I Tim. 2:15 to be 
literal? 

Answer.— Yes, we understand that the Christian 
mother may reasonably expect to be saved (preserved) 
from much of the anguish incident to motherhood;— 
to this end her mind should rest fully upon the Lord, 



his love, his care— dread should be dismissed, and thus 
some of the chief factors of anguish would be removed. 
Feeling intensifies nearly all the difficulties and trials 
of life; and with the Christian perfect love for God and 
the complete realization of the Lord's love for him, 
should cast out all fear, and produce, instead, the peace 
of God which passeth all understanding, not only in our 
hearts, but also in large measure in our flesh. 



page 193 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIII. JULY 1, 1902. No. 13. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 195 

Not Merely a Rewording, but a 
New Creed 195 

"Calamities— Why God Permits 

Them" 196 

"Love— Making a Difference" 197 

"Give Us This Day Our Daily Bread" 200 

God First— In the Decalogue 202 

Interesting Questions Answered 206 

In My Flesh Shall I See God 206 

Various Readings of Old MSS 206 

Changed from Glory to Glory 206 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

Every letter you send through the mail may be a more 
or less potent messenger of the truth, even on its outside, 
by the use of these envelopes. They catch the attention 
not only of those to whom they are addressed, but postmen 
and others have an opportunity, and often the curiosity, to 
read their message of peace;— the gospel in a condensed 



form. Price 25c per hundred post paid. 

METHODS OF SERVICE. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 
than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the DAWNS at 25 cents each, 
cannot be for money -making: that it is merely another way of 
preaching the truth. No other religious books are sold at any 
such price. Indeed few subscription books sell for less than two 
to three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are invited 
to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 

HOW ABOUT YOUR BIBLE? 

We have now filled all orders for the new Bibles,— so far 
as our records show. If you have paid for one of them and 
have not received it make inquiry for it at your express office, 
and if still not found write us full particulars of the order;— the 
date, the amount and whether the money was sent by registered 
mail, or by express or money order. Give name of your express 
office. 

We have many inquiries as to the possibilities of getting 
more of these Bibles. We answer, that we still have some and 
those who desire them are welcome to them so long as they last. 
In French seal, $2. in Persian Levant, silk sewed and leather 
lined, $3.— carriage prepaid. 



R3032 : page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
NOT MERELY A REWORDING, BUT A NEW CREED. 



AS MANY PRESBYTERIAN MINISTERS 
will, undoubtedly, claim that their new 
creed is precisely the old one except that 
it is worded in more modern language,— that they 
never did believe in "non-elect infants" and never 
professed to so believe, etc., etc., it is well that we 
now record the utterances of some of these brethren 
who having so long felt uneasy about professing 
untruths and vowing to teach them to others, are 
now overjoyed by the relief of the new confession. 
We give extracts below from Rev. Donehoo's first 
sermon after the adoption of the new creed (evidently 
the gentleman's own report) from the 
"Pittsburg Post," May 26. 



REJOICES OVER THE CREED REVISION. 

The pastor of the West End Presbyterian Church yesterday 
morning delivered a sermon on the following 
text: II Thess. 1:8. "We are bound to thank God always 
for you, brethren, as it is meet, because that your 
faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity of every one 
of you all toward each other aboundeth.' 

"The time was when it was regarded as the very essence 
of orthodoxy to believe that religious discovery 
had reached its utmost limit with the deliverances of the 
Westminster divines, and that further investigation into 
the realms of truth exposed the audacious investigator to 
the charge of disloyalty to the standards, and made a 
man unworthy of the confidence or even fellowship of his 
more orthodox brethren. This is not ancient history, but 
sober facts occurring within a score of years and closing 
on last Thursday with the practically unanimous 
adoption of the committee report on creed revision in 
our General Assembly in New York city. The highest 
court of our church, composed of men who argued and 
voted against such a thing, gulped down revision with 
a relish which seemed to indicate that it was not such 
an unpleasant dose, after all. 

"It is in no spirit of triumph over a prostrate foe that 
I allude to these things, but simply because I cannot repress 
my joy that the mists have cleared away, and that 
a brighter day has dawned upon the church. It is to me 
an especial cause for rejoicing that I can stand up in 
the pulpit and offer salvation without any mental reservation, 
and without any stipulation that the one to 
whom the offer is extended must first of all be one of 
that select number who had been chosen from all eternity 
to be the object of God's sovereign compassion simply for 
'His mere good pleasure.'... 

"I am glad besides that the ambiguous declaration 
about 'elect infants dying in infancy' being saved— (as 
though it was possible for any other than infants to die 
in infancy)— while a very painful silence is allowed to 
hang around the fate of other babes that breathe and 
gasp, and die ere they had made acquaintance with joy 
or sorrow, sin or goodness— is now to be explained as 
teaching, what a formidable party in the Westminster 
Assembly opposed with such persistence that they forced 
the Assembly to place this ambiguous statement in the 
Confession (that they believed in the damnation of unelect 
infants) that God's election embraces all that die 
in infancy in His purposes of grace. I am glad of that. 

"Henceforth may we not hope that men will preach 
God, not as He would be if they could have had their way 
about it, and not acting as they would have done if they 
had been in His place, but, as He has revealed Himself in 
His Word and providence, a God of infinite mercy and love, 
who is not willing that any should perish, but who would 



have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of 
the truth?" 

Rev. L. P. Crawford, of Pasadena, Cal., says in 
the California press:— 

"When I was ordained there were three things that I 
would not subscribe to. To these three points I said 
'No.' The first was this, in Chapter III: 

'"By the decree of God, for the manifestation of His 
glory, some men and angels are predestined unto everlasting 
life, and others foreordained to everlasting 
death!' 

"I said: 'I can't go it— I'll have to be made over.' 

R3032 : page 196 

"Dr. Adams asked me: 'Is there anything else, young 
man?' 

'"Yes, sir, there is,' I said. If where it speaks of 
elect infants, it is to be implied that there are infants 
that are not elect, then I don't believe it.' 

'"Anything else, young brother?' asked Dr. Adams, 
and I remember it as well as if it was yesterday. 

"'Yes,' I said. 'If it is meant that I am to be held 
responsible for Adam's sins, in the sense that I can be 
punishable for them, then I don't believe it.' 

'"Well, my dear brother,' said Dr. Adams, 'There are 
a good many of us in the same fix;' and they licensed me. 

"Now, these three points that I refused to subscribe 
to are the principal ones taken up in the revision." 

We are glad that the General Assembly has 
given these brave men their liberty at last; tho we 
confess we would have admired them still more if 
they had been courageous enough to have promptly 
and vigorously obeyed the voices of their consciences; 
—if they had refused to lend one mite of 

R3033 : page 196 

their time or influence to God-dishonoring and 
conscience-searing confessions for the sake of human 
endorsement. We cannot suppose either that 
God was pleased to have Drs. Adams and Crawford 
privately and secretly confess their disbelief 
to each other while practicing deceit toward the 
other hundreds of thousands of Presbyterians;— 
many of whom, unlearned "laity," trusted their public 
profession too confidingly, and looked not beyond 
them to the Lamp of God's Word. 

But if the boldest are not to be too much praised 
what shall we say of those who have seemed to 
have no consciences, or whose reasoning faculties 
are so dull that even in the light of this twentieth 
century they are such "blind guides" that the old 
Confession is still good enough for them? We say 



that only very young or bewildered or stupid sheep 
will any longer accept the ipse dixit of such Shepherds. 
We advise that their every expression be 
scrutinized in the light of God's Word, as more 
likely to be false than true. We bring no railing 
accusation against any of them, but merely state 
facts and their own confessions. As we understand 
the Word, the Lord will rebuke them shortly, in 
the approaching great time of trouble. But, alas for 
the poor blind sheep who are following them into 
that ditch! 

"CALAMITIES-WHY GOD PERMITS THEM." 



The Chicago Tribune has kept record of the 
calamities of the year and makes the following 
report:— 

"Nature has not been so busy with her forces 
of devastation for many years past as she has been 
during the first five months of the present year. 
Volcanic eruptions and earthquakes have destroyed 
48,450 lives, storms 704, tornadoes 416, cyclones 
220, floods 333, avalanches 228, tidal waves 103, 
snow-slides 39 and waterspouts 12, a total of 50,505 
lives destroyed by nature's elemental disturbances. 
If to this were added the lives lost by agencies 
over which man has more or less control, such as 
fires, mine disasters, explosions, railroad accidents, 
and vessel wrecks, it would be increased to over 
60,000, and this takes no account of individual lives 
lost in this country, which would bring the grand 
total up to about 100,000 lives lost in the short 
period of five months." 

The Boston Watchman (Baptist) says of the divine permission 
of calamities: 

"This problem baffles the author of the Book of Job, 
and all the discoveries of science and the light of the 
Christian revelation do not resolve the thick darkness 
that settles about it. When trouble comes for which we 
can see no moral antecedent and no good result, the irrepressible 
cry bursts from every human heart, 'Why?' 
And there is no answer but the answer of Job: 'Tho 
he slay me, yet will I trust in him.' 

"From our point of view the events of life are often 
wholly irreconcilable with our faith in the divine goodness. 
And yet we do not lose our faith. We believe that 
God is working out for us and for the race purposes of 
goodness that we cannot understand. That, it seems to 
us, is the Christian attitude toward this problem. Christianity 
does not resolve it, while it makes many other 
solutions of it untenable. But Christianity, in its revelation 
of the Father, inspires a confidence in Him that is 
not shaken by our inability to understand His way." 

The Truth Seeker says:— 



"It was the Lisbon earthquake which shook Voltaire's 
faith in a God who governs, who pervades all places and 
ages, and who has established a direct relation between 
himself and mankind. He was compelled to ask, What 
was my God doing? Why did the Universal Father crush 
to shapelessness thousands of his poor children, even at 
the moment when they were upon their knees returning 
thanks to him?" 

In view of the fact that the world is now in 
transition— from "the present evil world" to the 
"new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness,"— 
from the reign of sin and death under "the 
Prince of darkness" to the Millennial reign of the 
great Life Giver— it will not surprise us at all if 
the next twelve years shall prove to be full of horrors. 
The conditions now prevailing in the earth 
are not such as will be appropriate during the Millennium, 
and the changes will mean great disturbances 
of celestial and terrestrial affairs pertaining 
to our earth. These will naturally occasion great 
suffering and loss of life unless divine power be 
miraculously interposed for humanity's protection; 
and we see no reason to expect such interposition. 
On the contrary, we understand the Scriptures to 
teach that the divine plan is so timed that these 
physical disturbances will constitute a part of the 
great chastisement which the Lord designs shall 
break the proud hearts of men preparatory to his 
offer to all of the Balm of Gilead— restitution. — 
Acts 3:19-21. 

One effect of these calamities will surely be the 
overthrow of the faith of many,— of all who are 
merely nominal believers, whose faith led them to 
no love for the Lord and to no study of his Word 
and to no self-consecration to good works. Of 
these, as the Prophet has declared:— 
"A thousand shall fall at thy side 

Ten thousand at thy right hand."— Psa. 91:7. 

Of this time and its peculiar work not only in 
the convulsions of nature, but also in its social, financial 
and religious convulsions, the Lord's Word 
declares: "Forasmuch as this people draw near 
unto me with their mouth, and with their lips do 

R3033 : page 197 

honor me, but have removed their heart far from 
me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept 
of men: Therefore, behold, I will proceed to 
do a marvelous work and a wonder among this 
people;. ..for the wisdom of their wise men 
shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent 
men shall be hid." "None of the wicked shall 
understand; but the wise [the taught of God] shall 
understand. "-Isa. 29:13,14; Dan. 12:4,9,10. 
We are now in the little season appointed of 



the Lord for the sealing of his servants in their 

foreheads— intellectually. It behooves us therefore 

to give heed to the sealing of our own heads and 

hearts by availing ourselves of the assistances 

which the Lord now provides. Failure to do this 

and the giving of heart and time to the world or 

pleasure and self means disrespect to the great 

Teacher, and love of the present world rather than 

of that which is to come; and the reward of such 

a course is— to be left in darkness with the world. 

(I Cor. 4:2; Matt. 25:30.) Another duty of the 

hour, that will be appreciated only by the faithful, 

is the gathering together unto the Lord (out of sectarianism 

and darkness) of the Lord's jewels, the 

elect whose eyes of understanding have not yet 

been opened to present truth. These calamities, 

which will overthrow the faith of some, will stir 

up the truly consecrated to a closer investigation 

of the divine Word and plan, and thus prove helps 

not hindrances, even as all things work together for 

good to them that love God. 

Now is the time to be on the alert to render 
assistance to this class of our "brethren" still asleep 
and in darkness but now awakening and needing 
sympathizing hearts and helping hands. Our late 
issue of the tract "Calamities— Why God Permits 
Them," may prove a help, an entering wedge to 
something more elaborate— to some volume of 
Millennial Dawn. Order these to use as sample 
copies, freely. 



R3033 : page 197 

"LOVE-MAKING A DIFFERENCE." 

"Keep yourselves in the love of God. ..and of some have compassion, 
making a difference; and others save with fear, pulling them 
out of the fire."— Jude 21-23. 

WITH OUR MINDS all unbalanced through 

the fall, resulting from original sin,— tho not 

all fallen exactly in the same direction,— it 

is not surprising that we frequently find ourselves 

and other brethren in Christ in more or less confusion 

respecting the application of certain principles 

laid down in the Word of God. For instance, we are 

instructed that love is the fulfilling of the divine law; 

and that love of the brethren is one of the evidences 

of our having passed from death unto life; and that 

if we love not our brother, whom we have seen, it is 

a sure evidence that we do not truly love our 

Heavenly Father, whom we have not seen. (Rom. 13:10; 

I John 3:14; 4:20.) In their endeavor to 

measure up to these requirements of the divine 



standard, some are in danger of erring in an opposite 
direction— in danger of manifesting a brotherly 
love where it should be withheld, and that in 
the interest of the brother. Let us note the different 
kinds, or degrees of love which the Heavenly 
Father exercises and manifests. 

First, we have the love for the world. "God 
so loved the world that he gave his only begotten 
Son" to die for us. (John 3:16.) Second, in a much 
higher and special sense, "The Father himself 
loveth you"— you who have accepted Jesus Christ 
as your Redeemer, and who, in his name and 
strength and merit have consecrated yourselves to 
him— you are seeking now to walk not after the 
flesh but after the spirit. (John 16:27.) But that 
this special love of God can be lost in part, or eventually 
wholly, is clearly set forth by the Apostle's 
statement, "Keep yourselves in the love of God". 
(Jude 21.) If any, after having tasted of the good 
Word of God, the powers of the world to come, and 
being made partakers of the holy spirit, etc., shall 

R3034 : page 197 

walk after the flesh and not after the spirit, we 
may be sure that such will proportionately lose the 
love of God;— and, if he persist in this course, as a 
result will ultimately be "none of his." For, instead 
of loving such, who through their knowledge and 
attainments and disobedient course have become 
wicked, the Lord declares that he is "angry with 
the wicked," and that "all the wicked will he destroy." 
-Psa. 7:11; 145:20; Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-29. 

As sons of the Highest, who are seeking to be 
like unto our Father in heaven, and like unto the 
copy which he has set before us in his dear Son, 
our Lord, we are to have for the world in general 
that broad sympathetic pity and mercy-love which 
would delight in doing any and everything possible 
to be done for their uplifting, in accord with the 
divine program, in the divine time and order. Like 
our Father and our Elder Brother, we are to love 
the brethren "with a pure heart, fervently"— with 
sincerity. This love for the brethren is nothing 
like the love for the world. It is not the pity-love, 
nor mere generosity. It is far more; it is brotherly 
love. All of the children of God are brethren, as 
new creatures; all these brethren have hopes, ambitions, 
interests and promises linked together in 
the Lord Jesus and in the heavenly Kingdom in 
which they hope to share. All these brethren are 
joint-heirs, fellow-heirs one with the other and with 
the Lord. They are partners; their interests are 
mutual and co-ordinating. 

Additionally, they have a special mutual sympathy 
of compassion; for while, as new creatures, 



they are rich in divine favor and promises, they 

all have serious weaknesses, according to the flesh— 

draw-backs; altho the Lord is not reckoning with 

them according to the flesh, but according to the 

spirit, the intention, the heart desires, nevertheless, 

they each and all have besetments arising from these 

weaknesses and imperfections of the earthly tabernacle, 

which cause them to "groan," and to sympathize 

one with the other in their groanings. As 

the Apostle says, "We which have the first-fruits 

of the spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, 

waiting for the adoption, to wit, the deliverance 

of our body"— the complete Church. Thus the 

sons of God have a further mutual sympathy and 

R3034 : page 198 

love and care for each other, an interest in each 

other, helpfulness toward each other, which is entirely 

beyond and above and outside of any feelings 

which could possibly be appreciated by the 

world or exercised toward it;— because the world 

has no such conflict between the old nature and the 

new; no such covenant of sacrifice; no such acceptance 

in the Beloved; no such union of heart 

and purpose and aim and spirit. Oh, yes! the exhortation 

to love as brethren, fervently, is one 

which appeals to us specially. 

But now we come to another point. Our love 
for the brethren cannot be exactly of the same 
measure and exactly of the same intensity or fervency 
toward all. There is something which guages 
or regulates it. What is it? It is that we love God 
and the glorious principles of righteousness, which 
are represented in his character; and we love our 
Lord Jesus from the same standpoint, as being the 
very exemplifications of all that is good, noble, true, 
just, generous, loving; and our love for the brethren 
must, of necessity, be in proportion as we find the 
brethren to be copies of our Lord. We do not 
mean copies in the flesh, but viewed from the Lord's 
standpoint; copies in spirit, copies in heart, copies 
in motive, copies in intention, copies in loving zeal 
for righteousness, truth, etc. Thus, as we grow in the 
love of God and in the love of Christ and in the love 
of the principles which they represent, we grow also 
in love toward all men and toward the brethren, but 
particularly toward those who are growing most in 
likeness to the Lord. This is not partiality; this is 
not doing to others different from what we should 
wish them to do to us. This is following the Lord 
Jesus' example; for we find that amongst his apostles, 
even, all of whom were chosen, there were 
three specially beloved; and of those three one is 
specially noted as "that disciple whom Jesus loved." 
He was specially loved, because he was specially 



lovable; and so with us and the brethren. We 
should love them all warmly, fervently, but of necessity 
with varying degrees of fervor, and the fervor 
should increase with each in proportion as we 
note his growth in heart-likeness to our Lord. 

And if this be so, what shall we say of those 
who, after having come to a knowledge of the truth, 
and after having tasted and appreciated its goodness, 
fall away into sin?— of those who cease to walk 
after the spirit, and begin to walk after the flesh? 
Can our love for them burn with the same fervency 
as before? By no means; it should not do 
so. As the Apostle says in our text, we should 
make a difference. In doing so we are following the 
example of our Heavenly Father; for we have just 
noted that only by walking after the spirit can any 
of us keep ourselves in the love of God. Only by 
following the same course, therefore, should any be 
able to keep himself in the love of the brethren. Any 
deflection should bring corresponding loss of brotherly 
love and fellowship. 

This making of a difference is really essential to 
the purity and progress of the Church. If we make 
no difference between those brethren who walk 
after the spirit and those who walk disorderly, or 
after the flesh, we are taking away the very premium 
and blessing which the Lord intended should go to 
those who walk after the spirit; and we are giving 
a premium, which the Lord did not intend should 
be given, to those who walk contrary to his Word, 
after the flesh. It is as much our duty to withdraw 
fellowship from those who are unworthy of it as it is 
our duty to grant fellowship, and that with fervency, 
to those whom we see to be walking in the 
footsteps of Jesus. We are not to think that it is 
love that is prompting us to take the wrong course 
of encouraging wrong-doers,— it is not love, but ignorance; 
and the remedy for ignorance is to learn 
of the Lord, from his Word and from his example. 

The Apostle Paul calls our attention to our 
duty respecting the brethren, and how we should 
conduct ourselves toward them under varying circumstances, 
saying that faithful brethren should 
be esteemed very highly in love for their works' 
sake; that other brethren who are unruly should 
be warned; that those who are feeble in their mental 
comprehension of the truth should be strengthened; 
that those who are weak should be helped, 
supported; and that we should exercise patience 
toward all. -I Thess. 5:12-14. 

We are at present specially referring to the proper 
attitude to be observed toward unruly brethren 
—they are not to be treated as those who are esteemed 
very highly in love for their works; otherwise 
they would be encouraged in being unruly. 
On the contrary they are to be warned, cautioned, 



—in love, truly, and with patience, but not with 
marks of the same love and esteem as tho they were 
walking orderly in the footsteps of Jesus and in 
harmony with the directions of his Word. The 
marks and evidences of our love and esteem must 
be sincere; and must be in proportion as we see 
in the brethren evidences of the right desires of 
heart,— to walk after the spirit of the truth. The 
Apostle Paul intimates how our disapproval ought 
to be shown, in cases which seem, in our judgment, 
to be of sufficient importance to demand a manifestation 
of disapproval. 

Evidently the Apostle did not mean that the 
brethren should be watching each other for an occasion 
of fault-finding in every word and every act; 
but that, on the contrary, they should be so full 
of love one for the other that trivial matters would 
be entirely passed over, as merely of the weakness 
of the flesh, and not at all of intention, of the heart. 
The matters to be considered worthy of manifestations 
of disapproval and warning are, rather, those 
which are so open and manifest on the surface as 
to leave no room to question the fact that they 
are displeasing to the Lord, and injurious in their 
influence upon the brother or upon the household 
of faith. For instance, if the brother had been seen 
under the influence of liquor; if he had been heard 
to utter vile or otherwise improper language; if 
it were a matter of general knowledge that he was 
living in sin; these would be such grounds as we 
believe the Apostle had in mind. But evidently the 
Apostle had no intention of cultivating a spirit of 
fault-finding and judging one another as respects 
the heart and private affairs,— use of time or money, 
etc. These belong to our individual stewardship 

R3034 : page 199 

and none should endeavor to interfere with the 
proper liberties of conscience and conduct which 
the Lord has granted to each. The Apostle is very 
stringent in his condemnation of such judging of 
one another, which so often leads to roots of bitterness, 
misunderstanding, disfellowship, etc., and 
which, as the old leaven, should be purged out of 
our hearts and lives.— Rom. 14:10,13. 

But now, for those who "obey not our word," 
the apostolic Scriptural directions in respect to 
their conduct, etc., is "note that man, and have no 
company with him, that he may be ashamed." 
Nevertheless, knowing the tendency of the fallen 
mind to go from one extreme to another, either 
of too great leniency or of too great severity, the 
apostle continues, "Yet count him not an enemy, 
but admonish as a brother." (2 Thess. 3:13-15.) 
To admonish as a brother does not mean to denounce 



roundly and severely; it means to admonish 
in a spirit of love, gentleness, meekness, patience, 
and with a sincere desire to help the brother to see 
the fault which we are certain exists, and which 
we are sure is not evil surmising on our part. 

The Apostle John shows us that this matter of 
distinguishing as between brethren that are to be 
esteemed and brethren that are to be warned, appertains 
not merely to conduct but also to doctrinal 
matters. Yet we may be sure that he does not 
mean that we are to disfellowship a brother merely 
because of some differences of view on non-essential 
questions. We may be sure that he does mean his 
words to apply strictly and only to the fundamentals 
of the doctrine of Christ: for instance, faith in God; 

R3035 : page 199 

faith in Jesus as our Redeemer; faith in the promises 

of the divine Word. These will be marks of 

a "brother," if supported by Christian conduct, 

walking after the spirit of the truth;— even tho 

the brother might have other views which would 

differ from ours in respect to certain features of the 

plan of God not so clearly and specifically set forth 

in the Scriptures. But for those whom we recognize 

as being doctrinally astray from the foundation 

principles of Christ, the Apostle intimates that 

very drastic measures are appropriate;— not persecutions, 

nor railing; not bitter and acrimonious disputes; 

not hatred, either open or secret; but a 

proper showing of our disfellowship with the false 

doctrines held and taught by them; a proper protection, 

so that our influence shall not be in any manner 

or degree used to uphold his denial of the fundamentals 

of the Gospel. This drastic course is outlined 

by the Apostle in these words: "If there come 

any unto you, and bring not this doctrine [confessing 

Christ to have come into the world, in the flesh, 

to redeem our race, etc.] receive him not into your 

house, neither bid him God-speed; for he that biddeth 

him God-speed is partaker of his evil deeds." 

-2 John 10,11. 

But, as our text intimates, we are to use discretion, 
judgment,— "and of some have compassion, 
making a difference." Some we may recognize as 
being merely entrapped of the Adversary, either in 
sin or in false doctrine, as the case may be, and not 
wilfully, intelligently, of their own volition. Toward 
such, still maintaining an attitude of firmness, we 
are nevertheless to express freely our trust that 
they are only temporarily wrong; and to seek to 
restore them, either doctrinally or in respect to their 
perverse moral course, to the position of fellowship 
with the Lord and with all the brethren who are in 
fellowship with him. Others we are to "save with 



fear, pulling them out of the fire." We may be 
obliged to speak very plainly to them; we may be 
obliged to tear open and expose before their eyes 
the sores of their own immoral course, showing 
them, as the case may be, the grossness of the sin 
or the grossness of the error in which they are involved; 
and doing so perhaps in strong language, 
if we realize that nothing short of this has availed 
to arouse them from their lethargy. In pulling 
them out of sin we are "pulling them out of the 
fire"— out of the Second Death— as the Apostle 
James says, speaking of this same class: "Let him 
know that he who converteth a sinner from the error 
of his way shall save a soul from death"— a 
brother who is a sinner, a brother, he explains, who 
has "erred from the truth."— James 5:19,20. 

Finally, we remark that the dealing of the brethren 
with the disorderly is not to be in the nature 
of a punishment; for it is not with us to punish. 
"Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." 
Our warnings or reproofs or withdrawals of fellowship, 
are to be merely in the nature of correctives, 
with a view, as the Apostle says, to the restoring 
of such an one. "Ye that are spiritual, restore such 
an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, 
lest thou also be tempted";— if not in the same 
manner, possibly in some other manner, in which 
you are weaker.— Gal. 6:1. 

As to what would be a sufficiency of evidence 
of repentance and reformation, each will require 
great wisdom and grace to determine. The heart 
in which brotherly love dwells richly, the heart 
which loves righteousness and hates iniquity, the 
heart which realizes its own imperfections, and that 
it is acceptable only through the Beloved and the 
New Covenant— that heart will rejoice at the first 
evidences of contrition and repentance on the part 
of the disorderly brother. If very full of love, his 
heart may go out to him almost too quickly; he 
may need to restrain himself; especially if it be a 
second or a third offense of the kind, or the circumstances 
otherwise very grievous. It will be apparently 
his duty to look for works in harmony with 
the repentance, and to wait to see some demonstration, 
in the nature of restitution for wrong done, 
or such an open and radical change of conduct as 
will give evidence that the heart has returned to 
its loyalty to God, to the truth, and to 
righteousness. 

The erring brother, truly repentant, will not be 
averse to giving such evidences, nor consider it unreasonable 
that his professed reformation shall be 
thus attested. Indeed, we may expect that such will 
feel so humbled in respect to his attitude, and the 
disgrace which he may have brought upon the 
cause, that he will feel disposed of himself, either to 



remain absent for a while from the company of the 
brethren, in penitence, or, if acceptable to their 
company, he will feel disposed to take a back seat— 

R3035 : page 200 

a very humble position amongst the brethren. And 
if the repentant offender had occupied the position 
of a leader in the company, humility on his part, 
no less than discretion on the part of the brethren, 
would seem to indicate that he should not be restored 
to any official or leading position in the congregation 
for a considerable time,— until ample evidence 
had been given of the sincerity of his 
reformation. 

But we close as we began, by urging that facts, 
evil deeds or evil doctrines, and not evil surmisings, 
knowledge, and not rumors, are the bases of 
Scriptural disfellowship. Hence the necessity for 
the observance of the Lord's rule. (Matt. 18:15.) 
While we are not to close our eyes to wrong in a 
brother, love will refuse to keep picking to find 
fault where none is openly apparent. And if fault 
is apparently discovered it is not to be "discussed 
among the brethren," but as the Lord directs should 
be taken direct to the offender by the discoverer 
and not so much as mentioned to others unless offender 
refuse to hear;— refuses to correct the fault. 
Oh, how much trouble would be saved, how many 
mistakes and heart-aches avoided if this rule were 
strictly followed! 



R3035 : page 200 

"GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD." 

-EXOD. 16:4-15. -JULY 6, 1902.- 

FOLLOWING the International S.S. course 
which seems to lead us in a very diversified 
and profitable course of general Bible 
study, we return now to studies in the Old Testament; 
—taking up the thread where we left it, in 
the passing of Israel through the Red Sea into the 
wilderness. The new quarter's lessons consider 
God's dealings with Israel, and the instructions 
given them in the wilderness. These were evidently 
intended to prepare a nation for self-government, 
which for nearly two hundred years had been in 
bondage, almost slavery. The first of this series 
of wilderness lessons may be designated a lesson of 
trust; and as we note Israel's experiences and the 
Lord's guidance of their affairs, doubtless we will 
all find lessons that will be helpful to us who, as 



spiritual Israelites, are being led by the antitypical 
Moses out of Egypt, the world, through a wilderness 
of instruction and trial and testing, toward 
the heavenly Canaan. 

Three routes led from Egypt toward Canaan, 
and the Lord chose for his people the most roundabout 
way of the three: he had in view from the 
first, their need of training. Their long bondage 
had made them servile and weak, lacking in self-reliance 
in the new way and fearful that their leader, 
in whom they trusted remarkably, might yet prove 
incompetent for their deliverance. What a resemblance 
to all this we find in the spiritual Israelites! 
when first leaving the world and its rudiments 
—although trusting in Christ, our fully accepted 
Leader, how apt we are to feel fearful of our ability, 
even under his guidance, to gain the promised glorious 
deliverance from sin and its slavery! 

The first disappointment in the journey was 
when the supply of water which they were carrying 
became exhausted and they had reached the 
waters of Marah (bitter) and found them brackish 
and unfit to drink; their disappointment was intense 
and they murmured against Moses. He in 
turn cried unto the Lord for help, and in response 
was shown a tree which being cast into the waters 
purified them. This was the first lesson of trust, 
and the Lord impressed it upon them as such. 
(Ex. 15:25,26.) This experience was followed by 
a joyful one when their journey brought them to 
Elim, to its many water-springs and its palm 
groves, where they rested. Similarly the spiritual 
Israelite is not long out of Egypt before he is permitted 
to have trying experiences; and seeking refreshment 
he perhaps finds bitter disappointments, 
corresponding to the waters of Marah. The first 
impulse of the beginner in this way will probably 
be in the nature of murmuring which, whether so 
intended or not, is a reflection upon the wisdom and 
guidance of our Leader. The lesson to be learned 
is perfect trust: to look to the Lord to turn our 
bitter disappointments into profitable lessons. As 
Moses purified the waters of Marah, so our still 
mightier Leader can make out bitter experiences 
sweet if we will but trust him. Then to us also 
comes a season of rest and refreshment, an Elim 
condition. The Lord does not permit us to have 
bitterness and trials continually, lest we should become 
thoroughly discouraged. He leads us sometimes 
by still waters, restoring our soul, refreshing 
and resting us in his grace, and these experiences 
rightly received and producing in us thankfulness 
and appreciation, tend to make us stronger 
for the further journey and lessons in the wilderness 
school of the present life. 

But evidently the lessons at Marah and Elim 



were not sufficient for Israel; they had not yet 
learned to trust the Lord, nor, that murmuring was 
an improper course; and so we find them murmuring 
again that Moses had led them out into the 
wilderness, away from the flesh-pots and leeks and 
onions of Egypt, to perish of hunger in the wilderness. 
How much more appropriate it would have 

R3036 : page 200 

been had they said to themselves, The Lord through 
Moses is our leader, and we will trust in him. Let 
us pray unto the Lord our God that he will supply 
all our needs according to the abundance of his 
wisdom and grace and power. However, they were 
not sufficiently advanced to take such a reasonable 
position, and were, therefore, infantile of disposition, 
so merely gave a wail of despair and disappointment. 
But the Lord was gracious and patient, 
and although he upbraided and instructed 
them respecting improprieties of their course, he, 
nevertheless, answered their wail as he would 
have answered their more appropriate petition for 
"things needful." 

QUAILS AND MANNA. 

It was necessary that the Israelites should learn 
the lesson of their complete dependence upon the 
Lord— the lesson of trust— hence the Lord did not 

R3036 : page 201 

prepare for them the bounties of manna and quails 

until they felt their need. Had these been given 

without their need being first felt, no doubt the 

Lord's bounty would have been considered as 

merely a part of his responsible duty; whereas, having 

learned of their need, they were the better prepared 

to appreciate the provision, and also to realize 

its miraculous source. So it is with the spiritual 

Israelites in respect to spiritual necessities, encouragements, 

food, sustenance: they are permitted 

to feel their needs, and to ask that they may receive 

spiritual nutriment freely. 

That the lesson might be the more impressed, 
the Lord first explained to Moses what he was about 
to do, and that there was a lesson to the people in 
connection with it; subsequently Moses and Aaron 
laid the promise before the people— that the Lord 
would give them flesh to eat that very evening; 
and that beginning with the next morning God 
would provide them with bread from heaven. They 
properly took no credit for this to themselves, but 
on the contrary, appealed to the people that they 
did wrong in murmuring against them as their 



leaders, and assuring them that they were really 
murmuring against the Lord their real leader. Had 
Moses and his assistant Aaron, and not the Lord, 
been their leaders, they would have taken great 
risks indeed in coming out, even from bondage, 
into the wilderness; because however well-intentioned 
Moses might have been, he was incompetent 
to supply the necessities for so vast a multitude. 
Evidently the people believed when they left Egypt 
that the Lord was leading and that Moses was 
merely his representative, and the fact that they 
now murmured against Moses and not against the 
Lord implied a lack of faith and a lack of trust, a 
disposition to fear that Moses was leading them 
on his own responsibility. Moses, on the other 
hand, meekly ignores his own relationship to the 
work, and loyally points them to the Lord as being 
the one who had led them thus far, and who was 
thoroughly competent to supply all their needs and 
to perform toward them all of his good promises. 
Spiritual Israelites are similarly to keep in mind 
the fact that they are not following human leaders; 
that the real Director of the course of spiritual Israel, 
the real Leader, is the Lord; and that men, at 
the very most, are his honored representatives. 
In cases of disappointment of expectations we are 
to remember that God was and is our real Leader, 
and are not to doubt, not to murmur, but to learn 
the lesson of trust, of confidence, and to cry unto 
the Lord for further deliverances. 

Human nature is vividly illustrated in the cry 
of the Israelites against Moses; their plaint was 
"Would to God we had died by the hand of the 
Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh 
pots, when we did eat bread to the full! for ye have 
brought us forth into this wilderness to kill this 
whole assembly with hunger." They forgot all 
about the bitter bondage of Egypt; the making of 
bricks without straw; the task masters; and how 
they had cried out to the Lord for deliverance; 
they remembered only some of the pleasant things 
—and we are not to expect, under all the circumstances 
narrated, that they had any superabundance 
in the matter of food. So now the discontented 
mind fails to see the leadings of God's providences, 
—leaves him out of its calculations,— forgets 
the exceeding great and precious promises set 
before us in the Scriptures, for the time thinks only 
of the things given up. How apt are all to remember 
the pleasures and gratifications of the sinful 
condition, and to forget its burdens and heartaches 
and disappointments ! 

All Israel, probably, was assembled, in its representatives, 
the chief men of all the tribes, and 
these matters were explained, and the lesson still 
further impressed, by the manifestation to them of 



the brightness of the Lord's glory in a cloud. The 
lesson of trust was being impressed; they were to 
know the Lord as their Leader and that all the provisions 
for their necessities were from him, although 
they were announced to them by the Lord's servants. 
This lesson, too, is for us. 

After these instructions had prepared them, 
the quails came and the manna. A strong wind 
from the sea brought quail in immense numbers, 
which, wearied with the journey, were unable to 
fly high and thus came within the reach of the 
Israelites, many of them falling from sheer exhaustion. 
This was no less a miracle than if natural 
means had not been used in connection with it; 
the lesson of trust which it taught was that God 
is abundantly able to control the natural means 
in fulfilment of his promises. Travelers in that 
region tell us that such occurrences are not uncommon; 
one of these says, "I have myself found the 
ground in Algeria, in the month of April, covered 
with quail for an extent of many acres, at daybreak, 
where the previous evening there had not 
been one." 

The provision of the manna was a miracle of 
another kind: wholly aside from the natural order 
of things, so far as we may be able to discern. The 
manna fell early in the morning and could be gathered 
after the dew had disappeared; it was evidently 
deposited in or from the dew by some power of God 
working probably in harmony with the natural laws 
of chemistry, not yet thoroughly understood. The 
grains were small and white and required painstaking 
labor to gather; nor was it then ready for use, 
but required to be either boiled or baked to prepare 
it as food. (vs. 23). Everything connected 
with the manna indicates not only that it was a 
most stupendous miracle, but a continuous one- 
lasting from this time for forty years; until Israel 
had entered the land of Canaan and ate of the old 
corn of the land. Again, it was miraculous that a 
double portion fell on the sixth day of the week and 
none on the seventh; and that it would spoil if kept 
over any night except the one following the sixth 
day. 

By these two miracles Israel was taught the 
great lesson of confidence in God,— that to him and 
him alone they were to look as their Leader. And 
so to spiritual Israel the Lord gives providential 
leadings, teaching them the same lesson of trust 
in himself. To us this applies not only in respect 
to earthly food, in supply of our physical necessities, 

R3036 : page 202 

but also to the heavenly food and the supply 

of all our spiritual necessities. It teaches the same 



lesson that is expressed in our Lord's prayer, our 
Golden Text; namely, "Give us this day our daily 
bread." The Lord's people are to recognize God's 
providences daily; to walk by faith, not by sight. 
We see but the one step before us, and that sometimes 
indistinctly in the light of the lamp of the 
divine Word; its more distinct utterances are in 
respect to the ultimate end of the Lord's leadings;— 
that he has accepted us, as his people, under the 
Mediator of the New Covenant; that he is leading us 
by him through present experiences, trials and testings, 
in order that we may be made meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light;— that he will 
continue to lead us if we will continue to follow, 
and will ultimately bring all of his faithful into 
the promised land, the heavenly Canaan. 

The Lord's supply of our earthly needs is perhaps 
best represented by the provision of the quails. 
He overrules natural affairs to provide us the things 
needful, sometimes more and sometimes less 
abundantly. And as the Israelites doubtless ate of 
the quails not only at the time of their gathering, 
but preserved some of them for future use, so we 
in respect to earthly things are to use the things 
of this world as not abusing them. We are to use 
them wisely, remembering that while they come to 
us in the ordinary course of life, they are, nevertheless, 
God's provision and to be used with frugality 
and judgment, to his praise. If the supply is 
abundant, we are to be thankful, and if it is deficient 
we are to trust. We are to learn the lesson 
of trust; and that after having done what we 
are able to do in the way of providing for our necessities, 
we can safely leave all else to him with 
whom we have to do,— our Father in Heaven. 

The lesson from the manna seems more particularly 
to illustrate our spiritual supplies, which 
come wholly from above. The manna is called in 
the Scriptures "The corn of heaven," "the bread of 
the mighty"-"angels' food." (Psa. 78:24,25; I Cor. 10:3.) 
Our Lord interprets the manna as a 
symbol of himself,— the Truth— of which a man 
may eat and never die. Nevertheless, this bread, 
although given freely, demands labor on the part of 
those who would appropriate it and obtain from it 
spiritual sustenance; it must be gathered, and it 
must be prepared as food. We cannot expect to 
come to Christ and to receive in an instant and 
without effort on our own part all the gracious 
mercy, blessing and truth that is in him. The 
truth is God's gift, to be sure; but it is so given 
as to require the putting forth of energy on our 
part, which will demonstrate our need, our hunger, 
our appreciation of this "bread of life." Neither 
can we receive enough in one day or one month 
or one year to sustain us perpetually; we need to 



come to the Lord daily, and to receive from him 
through his Word and spirit the life-giving forces 
by which we may be sustained day by day in the 
trials of life,— and by which we may grow strong 

R3037 : page 202 

in the Lord and in the power of his might. 

Lord, evermore give us this bread!— day by 
day, until, entering into the antitypical Canaan, 
the heavenly Kingdom, we shall have no further 
need of this daily supply, but be changed, perfected 
as new creatures in Christ Jesus in the First 
Resurrection! 



R3037 : page 202 

GOD FIRST-IN THE DECALOGUE. 

-EXOD. 20:1-11.-JULY 13, 1902.- 

Golden Text:— "Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thy heart."— Luke 10:27. 

AFTER LEAVING ELIM, in our last lesson, 
the journey of the Israelites led to Mt. 
Sinai; but before reaching it their faith in 
the Lord was tested severely by a conflict with 
the Amalekites, a warlike tribe of the desert. Unused 
to military matters and encumbered with 
their families, flocks and herds, the men of Israel 
were forced to a conflict, and, strange to say, their 
leader, Moses, who some forty years previously 
had been a notable Egyptian general, did not attempt 
now to take charge of the battle, but entrusted 
it to Joshua, while he went to the top of 
a hill overlooking the field of battle, and there in 
the sight of the contending peoples, engaged in 
prayer with uplifted hands. It was here that Aaron, 
Moses' brother, and Hur, his brother-in-law (husband 
of Miriam), upheld the hands of Moses in 
prayer; because it was noticed that the Lord's 
special blessing attended the Israelites when Moses' 
hands were upheld. Thus Israel vanquished the 
foe, and thus it was demonstrated that it was the 
Lord who fought with Israel and conquered their 
enemies. No doubt Israel learned a lesson of faith 
in the Lord, and through Moses' example learned to 
trust, not in Moses, but in the Lord as their Leader. 
And the humble conduct of Aaron and Hur in this 
incident became the groundwork of a great lesson of 
helpfulness in the Lord's service— showing how 
assistance in the service is recognized of the Lord 
and such co-operation acceptable. So with spiritual 



Israelites. In all the trials and conflicts with our 
Adversary and his deluded followers, we are to 
learn distinctly the lesson that all our trust is to 
be in the Lord, our Leader, the antitype of Moses, 
Captain of our Salvation; who does not, in an 
earthly sense, actually lead us in the conflict, but 
is in the Mountain, in the Kingdom: his merit prevails 
for our blessing and succor, and all of his faithful 
servants in turn recognize themselves as merely 
co-operating with him. 

Another incident worthy of notice occurred 
about this time: Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came 
to meet him here, bringing Moses' family (Ex. 18); 
moreover, the Lord used this man for giving Moses 
some valuable suggestions respecting the government 
of the Israelites; and Moses was humble 
enough to receive such instruction as of the Lord, 
notwithstanding the fact that it came from an Ethiopian, 
one who was not of the seed of Abraham, 
and who did not join himself to them. Thus God 
sometimes even now uses outsiders to give suggestions 
and lessons to his covenant people; and wise 
is the man or woman humble enough to receive 
instruction from any quarter— when found to be in 

R3037 : page 203 

harmony with the divine will. The advice given 

to Moses,— that he should no longer attempt to be 

the law-giver for the people in all the minutiae of 

their affairs, but a sort of supreme judge, and Mediator 

between God and the people, was a wise suggestion, 

evidently from the Lord, by whomsoever 

given. So also was the next suggestion, that the people 

be organized according to their tribes and families, 

and that each tribe should thus have, in itself, 

its own proper servants and officers and judges for 

minor details. Of this arrangement some one has 

said, "This [arrangement] became the basis (Kalisch) 

of Alfred the Great's Saxon constitution, and 

thus the basis of the constitution of modern England 

and America"— a government of the people, 

by the people, through their own representatives. 

THE GIVING OF THE LAW. 

The transaction at Mt. Sinai was so arranged as 
deeply to impress all who were present. It was to 
be another lesson for the people respecting God, his 
right to control them and his will concerning them. 
Boundary marks were fixed around the mountain, 
which was declared holy because of the Lord's 
presence in it; a man or beast trespassing upon it 
was subject to death: meantime the mountain 
shook with earthquakes, and fire and smoke, thunders 
and lightnings, and trumpet-like sounds and 



voices manifested to the Israelites the importance 
of the event at hand. But if the Lord thus impressed 
them by the solemnity of their surroundings 
with the importance of the covenant which 
he was about to make with them, his message to 
them, introducing the commandments, was very 
gracious and gentle. In this preamble he reminds 
them that he, the Lord, had brought them out of 
the land of Egypt: they had by this time gotten 
beyond any desire to return to Egypt; they were 
learning to trust in the Lord, to realize his care and 
protection and deliverance from enemies and from 
want. 

Meantime, the people, in obedience to the Lord's 
direction, had purified themselves, their clothing 
and their camp; and, as directed, they were endeavoring 
to abstain from all impurities, as a prerequisite 
to their meeting with and entering into covenant 
relationship with the Lord of Hosts. The 
spiritual Israelite also has something analogous to 
this. First he must realize the justice of God and 
the greatness of God, and his own unworthiness 
and weaknesses; he must see something of the 
terrors of Sinai before he will be in the proper condition 
to receive the favors which our Lord desires 
to bestow. Properly, he too will seek to purge 
himself so far as possible from all filth of the flesh; 
properly also, he will seek a mediator, and as the 
Israelites said to Moses, so will he say to Christ, 
"Entreat the Lord for us, that we may speak to 
thee, and speak thou to him." We realize our need 
of a mediator through whom the Word of the Lord 
will come to us, and by whose merit and grace we 
shall be helped in satisfying the demands of the 
divine law. 

But a greater lesson is included in this type. In 
this still larger view Moses typified Christ Jesus 
the Head, and the Church, his body, complete; in 
this larger view Israel typifies so many of the world 
of mankind as are desirous of entering covenant 
relationship with God; in this larger view the fire 
and smoke and voices and trumpets and earthquakes 
of Mt. Sinai represent the great time of 
trouble and manifestations of divine power which 
are to come in the end of this Gospel age to convince 
the world of its need of the Lord's help and to 
make the world ready to enter into the New Covenant. 
In this larger view the three days of purification, 
setting bounds about the Mount, etc., represent 
the period of this Gospel age from the first 
advent down to the glorification of the Church- 
typified in the going up of Moses into the mountain, 
to be the representative of the people, to receive 
the Lord's Law and to bring it down to the 
people. Thus counting the matter according to the 
days of the week,— a thousand years to each day,— 



our Lord's first advent occurred early on the fifth 
day;— the fifth day has passed, the sixth day has 
passed, and we are now in the early morning of 
the seventh or "Millennial" day; and it is in this 
third day "early in the morning" that the antitypical 
Moses [Christ and the Church] is to ascend into the 
mountain, Kingdom of the Lord. It is in this third 
day, and very shortly now we believe, that the 
great and terrible manifestations of divine dignity 
and majesty are to be made known to the world in 
general. 

This is in full accord with the statement of the 
Apostle referring to this time, and to this same 
type. (Heb. 12:22-29.) For some time the Lord 
has been dealing with the world with a view to the 
bringing in of this New Covenant. Two (thousand 
year) days ago we approached the mountain, the 
Kingdom of God; there God, through the antitype 
of Moses, began to mark out the bounds of the 
Kingdom class, who might and who might not approach, 
come into the Kingdom. From that time 
the proclamation of purification has been made, 
the people being commanded to cleanse themselves; 
or, as the Apostle again says, "The times of this 
ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth 
all men everywhere to repent: because he hath appointed 
a day, in the which he will judge the world 
in righteousness, by that man whom he hath ordained" 
-Christ. -Acts 17:30,31. 

The instruction to purify and to get ready has 
been more or less heard and more or less heeded 
throughout the world; and now, shortly, we may 
expect the marshaling of the people as described 
in Ex. 19:17-20, so graphically described by the 
Apostle as picturing the events with which the 
present age is to close: "Yet once more I shake 
not the earth only, but also heaven." He explains 
that in the great changes now at hand the transformation 
will be a complete one, which will thoroughly 
shake out and remove everything in connection 
with the civil, religious and social affairs 
of man that is not in harmony with the laws of the 
Kingdom— the Millennial Kingdom. Only the 
faithful who shall constitute the Kingdom-class 
shall stand the shaking of this time.— 
Heb. 12:26-28. 

R3038 : page 204 

THE FIRST FOUR COMMANDMENTS. 

The law delivered to Moses was upon two tables 
of stone. Although not so specified, it is a generally 
accepted opinion that the first four commandments 
were upon one stone and the remaining six 
upon the other. This would make about an even 



division as respects the matter; but more particularly 

it divides as between the duties of Israel 

toward God and toward men. Although the Decalogue 

(the law in ten commandments) was given 

to fleshly Israel and not to spiritual Israel, nevertheless, 

the latter may learn from it some very valuable 

lessons respecting the divine will. God does 

not address the house of Sons as he addresses the 

house of servants,— ours are not commands as to 

what we shall not do; ours is one command respecting 

our duty toward God, and it is so comprehensive 

that it takes in all that was said to Israel in 

the ten commandments, and as we shall presently 

see, much more. 

(1) "Thou shalthave no other gods before me." 
The thought is not that they were prohibited from 
having other gods before Jehovah, in the sense of 
superiority, implying that they might have some 
gods on an equality with or inferior to him. Rather, 
the thought is that they should have no other gods 

in his presence— that so long as they recognized Jehovah 
as their God, none others were to be recognized 
in any sense or degree. 

(2) The Second Commandment is an elaboration 
of the first, lest the people might say, 'We will 
have no other gods, but we will make for us images 
to represent our one God so that they may 

help the mind through the eye. But the Lord prohibits 
this, and we can readily see the wisdom of 
the prohibition. Many Christian people have felt 
that they could pray before pictures of the Lord or 
while looking at a crucifix, better than without such 
an aid: indeed we know that Greek and Roman 
Catholics throughout the world (nearly three times 
as numerous as those termed Protestants) continually 
use images, pictures, beads, etc., as reminders 
and helps to the mind and faith; but we believe 
that the effect has been seriously injurious; the 
tendency downward rather than upward, and that 
this, to some extent, accounts for the fact that the 
races using images, etc., are inferior to those not 
using them, but practicing the higher and purer 
worship of God which recognizes no intermediary, 
no crucifix, no image, no picture, but communes 
directly with the Lord. 

The Gospel Church has a still higher thought 
than was given to the Jews on this subject. Our 
Master's words suggest that even fathers and mothers 
and wives and children might intrude upon our 
love and devotion and take the place of the Lord 
in our affections; and that this must not be permitted 
by any who would be of the elect. In comparison 
we must love less than God all other beings, 
so that the first strength of our love and devotion 
may be given to our Creator. "Thou shalt 
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, mind, 



soul and strength." This would also include the 
thought that wealth, or self or ambition must not 
be permitted to take the chief place in those who 
would be the Lord's. Many seem to be in danger 
along these lines. We cannot read their hearts, 
but the vast majority not only of the world, but of 
those who profess devotion to the Lord, are bowing 
themselves down to idols of wealth, social ambition, 
personal ambition, etc., and serving these with 
all the strength and time and means and knowledge 
which they have consecrated to the Lord. We 
are not saying a word against the procuring of 
"things needful" in a manner "honest in the sight 
of all men;" we refer to something beyond this,— 
the attempt to lay up riches, honor, etc., with the 
time and knowledge and talents consecrated to the 
Lord. Is not this idol worship from the standpoint 
of the New Covenant? 

The Lord announces himself as a jealous God 
who wants all of our affections, all of our confidence, 
our entire trust. He wants that we should 
be so fully in accord with him that his will shall 
be supreme in all the affairs of life. This is not to 
be considered selfishness on the part of the Almighty; 
because this, under his overruling providences, 
means to his creatures the largest amount 
of happiness, the largest amount of success in the 
duties and affairs of the present life, and the largest 
amount of preparation for the blessings which the 
Lord has prepared for and promised to those who 
love him. 

The declaration that the Lord will visit the iniquities 
of the fathers upon the children unto the 
third and fourth generation of those that hate him, 
and show mercy unto thousands of them that love 
him and keep his commandments, does not represent 
anger, bitterness, resentment, selfishness;— 
rather these words express the law of nature, under 
which in wisdom God has placed humanity. Every 
one who uses his mind and his talents in accord 
with the Lord's will, brings a blessing not only upon 
himself but extends, in a natural way, that blessing 
to his children and theirs. On the contrary, those 
who live contrary to the Lord, who mind earthly 
things, become more and more "earthly", "sensual," 
"devilish," and surely transmit these groveling and 
deficient tendencies to their children, influencing 
and injuring them unto the third and fourth 
generation, in a perfectly natural manner. 

The Apostle points out to us that this is the 
secret of the extreme degradation that we see about 
us in various parts of the world today. There was 
a start to all this degradation. Of course the original 
start to degradation and sin was in the disobedience 
of father Adam, and in the death-sentence 
upon him. But in proportion as people since have 



disregarded the Lord's will and arrangement and 
laws, so far as they knew them, in the same proportion 
have they injured and degraded themselves 
and their posterity. The Apostle's words are, 
"When they knew God they glorified him not as 
God, neither were thankful; but became vain in 
their imaginations and their foolish heart was darkened. 
Professing themselves to be wise, they became 
fools and changed the glory of the incorruptible 
God into an image made like to corruptible 
man, and to birds, and to fourfooted beasts and 
creeping things. Wherefore God also gave them up 
to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, 

R3038 : page 205 

to dishonor their own bodies between themselves: 
who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshiped 
and served the creature more than the 
Creator. "--Rom. 1:21-31. 

It has been suggested that the original of vs. 6 
might be rendered a thousand generations, and that 
this would imply a continuation of present conditions 
of imperfection and need for divine mercy 
for a period of at least 20,000 years, instead of one 
thousand— the Millennium. We disagree with such 
an interpretation entirely, suggesting that in a very 
proper sense of the word every child is generated, 
and hence might not improperly be spoken of as 
a generation. This is in accord with the translation 
given in the common version which we approve. 

The command to the Israelite that he should 
not take God's name in vain, did not signify that 
he should not name the name of the Lord, yet going 
to an extreme in the matter the Israelites avoided 
the covenant name of God,— Jehovah. The expression, 
"in vain," evidently signified lightly, frivolously 
or in any other than a sacred or reverential 
manner. No such command is needed by the "new 
creature in Christ." How could he willingly or intentionally 
speak lightly or irreverently of his 
Heavenly Father, after being begotten of the holy 
spirit? To have a will to speak otherwise than 
reverently would be sure indication that he had 
not been begotten of the holy spirit;— that he was 
a bastard and not a son. However there is a sense 
in which we may well take a lesson from this command 
to Israel, a sense in which it is applicable to 
spiritual as well as natural Israel. As a people 
Israel had taken God's name,— they had professed 
themselves to be God's people, under his guidance 
and leadership; it was their duty to see to it that 
this should not be a vain, empty, or meaningless 
covenant, or agreement; that it should be carried 
out to the full. So with us spiritual Israelities, we 
have entered into a covenant with God; we have 



named the name of the Lord upon us, calling ourselves 
his people, claiming him as our Father, and 
confessing Jesus as our Redeemer. It is proper for 
us to remember that this solemn profession or obligation 
or covenant is not a vain, frivolous matter; 
that it should be entered into with solemnity, and 
with full appreciation of its importance and of our 
responsibilities under it. The Lord will not hold us 
guiltless, if, having taken his name upon us and 
receiving his benediction as his children, we then 
either sin wilfully or in any degree reflect dishonor 
upon him whose name we bear. 

"REMEMBER THE SABBATH DAY." 

The fourth commandment designates the seventh 
day of the week for rest, not only for the head 
of the family but for every member of it, including 
servants and cattle and visitors. It was made the 
duty of the head of the family to see to it that this 
divine command was carried out in his home, for the 
blessing of himself as well as for the comfort and 
good of those under his care. The new law, Love, 
the basis of the New Covenant into which we spiritual 
Israelites, as the "house of sons," have entered, 
has no command respecting the seventh day 
of the week, nor indeed respecting any day. If it 
was good that the Israelites should rest, would it 
not be good also that we should rest one day in 
the seven? Yes, surely; on general principles it is 
advisable that all men observe such a rule of physical 
rest from toil one day in seven. Is there any 
reason why we should object to the seventh day of 
the week for such a rest? None whatever so far as 
the Christian is concerned. 

Being left without a specific law on the subject, 
he is at liberty to make such arrangements for his 
rest as will be most profitable to him under the general 
law of Love. Being without a specific law on 
the subject Christian people, desiring to have one 
day of seven for worship, gradually fixed upon the 
first day of the week as being the one which to 
them would have the largest meaning, because of 
its being the Memorial of the Lord's resurrection, 
and hence, the Memorial of the Christian's joy and 
faith and hope with respect to the eternal life promised 
through our Redeemer. Do you consider the 
choice of the first day of the week a good one? We 

R3039 : page 205 

certainly are glad that throughout the civilized 
lands the first day of the week is so observed; we 
are glad, too, that it is not observed according to 
the Jewish law, merely as a day of physical rest, 
but rather that it is much used by Christians as a 



day of fellowship of spirit and growth in grace, 
knowledge and love. 

But why did the Lord not put in the law of the 
New Covenant some mention respecting some day 
of the week, first, seventh or some other day? We 
answer because the entire law is a "Law of Liberty," 
—designed to test by its liberty those to whom it 
is given. It leaves each one unfettered that he may 
the more abundantly show the kind and extent of 
his devotion to the Lord. Instead of demanding 
one day of the seven the Law of Love really controls, 
regulates our entire time; seven days in the 
week we are to love the Lord our God with all our 
heart, mind, soul and strength; and seven days of 
the week we are to love our neighbor as ourselves; 
and seven days in the week we are to rest also— rest 
from our own works— rest by faith in the finished 
work of Christ— rest in the love of God— rest in the 
peace of God which passeth all understanding, 
ruling in our hearts continually. The seventh day 
commanded to the Jew as his rest day, while it was 
beneficial to him, was also typical: it typified the 
Christians' rest of faith, this heart relationship to 
the Lord, in which, as children of God, all such may 
continually rejoice— every day and every night. So 
the Apostle explains the matter (Heb. 4:4-11), declaring 
further that there is a still larger rest remaining; 
namely, the eternal life condition to be 
entered into on the great seventh day,— the Millennial 
age. 

Some have suggested that in the expression 
"Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy" the 
word remember implies that the Sabbath day had 
been previously instituted and commanded; and 
that this was merely a reminder of it. From this 
we dissent. There was no law given previous to 
Israel's arrival at Sinai; there was no mention of 
the keeping of a Sabbath previous to Israel's arrival 

R3039 : page 206 

at the wilderness of Sin of which Mt. Sinai is the 
center. It was instituted in connection with the 
giving of the manna. (Exod. 16:23.) We are not 
to read into the Lord's Word what is not there. The 
words of the text signify that Israel should be careful 
continually to remember this injunction put 
upon them, respecting the seventh day, and that 
thenceforth it should be kept holy, sacred, free 
from work, as unto the Lord. All this is implied 
further in the declaration of the 1 1th verse respecting 
God's having rested on the seventh day; and 
the explanation is that similarly, now, in the giving 
of the law, God was blessing the seventh day and 
honoring it as a reminder of the six days of creation, 
and the seventh day in which God rested from creative 



work. 

We have heretofore explained why the days of 
creation should not be understood as literal days 
of twenty-four hours each, but as larger days of 
seven thousand years each; and this subject we 
hope to treat still more at length (D.V.) in Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. 6. We merely note here, that 
the seventh day which God observed was one of 
these larger days of seven thousand years; and that 
it began just after the creation of our first parents 
and that since then God has rested from any creative 
work, and has merely permitted, as far as earth 
is concerned, that things already created should 
take their course;— many of them a downward 
course, as in the case of man in his fall from primeval 
perfection into sin and death. The Apostle explains 
that God is still resting, and waiting for 
something,— leaving a further work for the Lord 
Jesus to do,— the work of redemption and restitution. 
The redemptive work he has already accomplished; 
the restitution work he will begin as soon 
as the election of his Church— the "bride," the 
"Lamb's wife" is accomplished. Meantime God 
rests, leaving the matter in the hands of him whom 
he hath ordained to be "Lord of all," and to whom 
he has decreed all things shall be subject, for the 
purposes of restitution,— so far as possible. And 
as God is thus resting and leaving the matter in the 
hands of Christ, so all who come to a knowledge of 
the truth, to a knowledge of God's plan, are to rest 
similarly,— leaving the case in the hands of our 
glorious Redeemer and seeking so far as we may be 
able, not to direct him, not to do the work for him, 
but to co-operate with him in the work which he 
is now doing in selecting the Church; and by and by, 
to co-operate as he has promised we may, in the 
work of blessing and restoring all the families of 
the earth who will hear his voice and become obedient 
to his law. 



R3040 : page 206 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
IN MY FLESH SHALL I SEE GOD. 



Question.— In what sense can the statement in 
Job 19:26 be true, since we understand he will not 
have power to "see God" as a human being? 

Answer.— The passage might be understood in 
two different ways: (a) As an expression of Job's 
trust in the Lord that notwithstanding the serious 



malady with which he was afflicted, and the apparent 
utter destruction of his skin, by a loathsome disease, 
yet he hoped for recovery and that he should yet praise 
the Lord in the flesh and in health. Or (b) it may be 
understood to refer to a future life and Job's confidence 
that though his sickness might result in death, complete 
dissolution, yet it did not mean in him an everlasting 
extinction. As previously stated, God would 
call and he would answer in his flesh. His seeing God 
in the flesh should not be understood as that which is 
impossible, of which our Lord says, "No man hath 
seen God at any time," and of which the Apostle says, 
"Whom no man hath seen nor can see." It should be 
understood in the way in which it is commonly used 
today; viz., that God's people see him in his works, as 
we sometimes say, "I see God's hand in this." And 
again, we are informed that "all flesh shall see the salvation 
of God." And again, "Look unto me and be 
ye saved, all the ends of the earth." 

VARIOUS READINGS OF OLD MSS. 



Question.— Why do you quote and comment on 
Luke 22:43,44, when old MSS. omit these verses? 

Answer.— Because while some old MSS. omit these 
verses, we find that others do not. If you will look in 
the foot-notes of Tischendorf Testament, you will find 
that "S2" omits these verses: the S represents the 
Sinaitic MS. but the 2 represents a secondary or altered 
reading of that MS. From this it is evident that the 
Sinaitic MS. originally contained these verses; but 
some later hand obliterated them, thus making this 
MS. to concur with the Vatican and Alexandrine. 
On the whole we are inclined to think these verses 
genuine, partly from the fact that they are in old MSS. 
and partly from the fact that the incident narrated is 
only what we should expect under the circumstances. 

CHANGED FROM GLORY TO GLORY. 



Question.— In what sense of the word are we 
"changed from glory to glory," even as by the spirit 
of the Lord?-2 Cor. 3:18. 

Answer.— After we are justified by faith we are 
called to the adoption of sonship; and after we accept 
that call by making a full consecration of ourselves to 
the Lord we are made recipients of the spirit of his holiness, 
the spirit of adoption into his family, and after 
we receive this spirit of adoption we are guided by it 
and taught by it respecting the things pleasing and acceptable 
to our heavenly Father; we are, so to speak, 
under this influence moulded and fashioned into the 



likeness of his dear Son our Lord Jesus. This moulding 

and fashioning we are required to do to a considerable 

extent for ourselves, but are stimulated to such 

transformation of character by the light of the knowledge 

of the divine character which we behold in God's 

Word. This transforming of our characters is not instantaneous 

but gradual— we grow more and more like 

Christ, we are changed from glory to glory in our minds, 

our wills, our hearts, our characters— this change will 

not be complete until our resurrection, when we shall 

be like him and see him as he is, and share his glory 

to the full. An article on this subject will be found 

in our issue of March 1, 1893. 



R3039 : page 207 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Dear Brother Russell:— On the occasion of your last visit to 
our house, you lost on the floor the check you had received for 
your satchel, etc. at the hotel opposite the depot. I felt sure 
you would be able to get them without the check, yet I concluded 
to return it and learn positively that you had procured 
them. While on this errand I met a man I hadn't seen for 
years, whom formerly I had known well. I was compelled to 
introduce myself to him, because he said he couldn't recognize 
me. When I made myself known he was astounded and said, 
"Why, what have you been doing to yourself? You look 
younger than you did when I saw you last, which is more than 
ten years ago; besides you have lost that care worn-look you 
had, and now appear so much happier. What has caused such 
a change in you?" I answered "Good news! The influence 
of the truth causing me to cast all my care on Him." He said, 
"I would like to hear something that would be the means of 
making so great a change in me." I said, "You can hear it if 
you have ears to hear." I then questioned him as to whether 
he was still a Christian, and he told me he was seeking diligently 
to know what was truth, had once left the Methodist 
Church and attached himself to the Advent denomination, but 
soon learned he had gained nothing by the change and returned 
to the Methodists, only to be as dissatisfied as ever. He was 
really anxious to hear the details of my experience, and seemed 
glad that I didn't have to go outside God's Word to get the 
message of comfort. I then told him how MILLENNIAL DAWN 
came to me and opened the eyes of my understanding, enabling 
me to realize the truth that God is love, and showing me my 
privilege to be joint sacrificer with the Lord and co-laborer with 
him in this the greatest period of all time (thus far)— the harvest 
of the age. His interest was awakened, he was eager to 
get the book, even desiring to purchase one at once if I could 
tell him where to procure it. We were several blocks from Bro. 
Brown's. He went there with me and took away what I hope 



will be as great a treasure to him as it has been to me. 

So you see, dear brother, the loss of your check, though it 
may have caused you some annoyance, occasioned that seemingly 
chance meeting and started another MILLENNIAL DAWN on 
its wonderful mission. 

Two causes make the Washington folks very joyous now; 
viz., The early prospect of the Volunteer work, and the established 
fact that there will be a convention here in October. Bro. 
Fowler, our captain, told me a few days ago that he believed 
every one would engage in this work;— and why shouldn't we? 
If we appreciate the opportunity extended us by our dear Lord, 
we will not only delight to do his will, but will earnestly strive 
to do it in the most acceptable manner. 

Experience has taught us that there is much to be learned; 
we have realized the necessity of being as "wise as serpents and 
as harmless as doves." A soft answer has many times turned 
away wrath; a quiet courteous manner has gained for us respect, 
and been the means of obtaining an audience with the person, 
for the printed sermon we have presented, that could not have 
been accomplished in a loud or boisterous way. To get into a 
contention, even for the truth, on these occasions diverts from 
the specific service. There is a time when silence is golden; it 
seems to me that while engaged in the Volunteer work is that 
time; the message we deliver will speak more eloquently than 
mortal tongue, for it is our Lord knocking at the door of the 
hearts of his people. 

And now, Bro. Russell, I entreat you to make use of every 
opportunity to say to the brethren where ever you may go, to 
put forth earnest efforts to come to the Annual Convention in 
Washington, D.C., October 4th, 5th and 6th. Warm hearts 
will meet them here. We hope for a glorious time of help to 
the Church, not forgetting the nearly starved and blind and 
ignorant who are yet where we were once. May our Lord's 
blessing be on all efforts tending to make this convention a success 
and may it be with us in this as in all else, "God first," 
to his honor and glory through Jesus. 

With love, I am your brother in the love and service of our 
Master. J. T. D. Pyles, Dist. of Columbia. 



Dear Brother Russell:— I know that your time is very 
much taken up; but I would love so to tell you of a dear Sister 

J , whom we met in P . She came into the DAWN 

Truths about 1890, and has been a TOWER reader since 1892. 
She said that in all her Christian life she had felt the need of 
"light," and that the DAWN truth didn't seem something new, 
but only the expression of something she has always wanted. 
She had no education at all, could barely read; and couldn't 
write. She said when she read the first DAWN, she had to spell 
out the words. But, notwithstanding, she said, "My heart just 
runs over with joy all the time, and please say to Brother 
Russell for me that he has made one poor ignorant old woman's 
life rich, oh, so rich! and that every word he has written I have 
read, and not only read, but lived on. May God bless him 
always!" 



How often my own heart feels the blessedness this dear old 
sister speaks of. Truly your sister, 

Helen Brewster.— Indiana. 



Dear Brother Russell:— I have been wanting to write to you 
for some time, but have delayed knowing there are so many 
corresponding with you that your time must be fully occupied. 
I want to tell you, however, how I am getting along. It is now 
over four years since I obtained the first volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Since then I have obtained and read and reread the 
five volumes and the WATCH TOWER as well. The light that 
dawned upon me then has been growing brighter. It took me 
some time to grasp the truths of God's plan as I see it now. 
The orthodox (?) teachings were hard to eradicate, but I went 
to the "law and the testimony" and now I see "the more excellent 
way" shining out on almost every page of the Word. I 
purchased a number of vol. I, and loaned them to others that 
wanted them, also distributed the tracts and TOWERS you sent 
me. Many persons are interested in a measure; others reject 
the truth with scorn. I meet opposition from a number of 
sources, chiefly from the clergy, and especially the Church I 
formerly belonged to (Baptist). Sermons are preached on 
"hell," "the immortality of man," "the Holy Ghost," etc. I 
can thank God for this light he has given me of his Word 
(through your instrumentality) and smile amid the storm. It 
inspires me with more energy to use every opportunity to spread 
the truth. 

"I love to tell the story 

Because I know 'tis true, 
It satisfies my longings 

As nothing else can do." 

I have been trying to study the Bible all through life, but 
found so many perplexities I hardly knew what to think about 
it, and when I went to the leaders for light, I was told "They 
are the deep things of God and not for us to understand." Now 
I can, in the language of the one Christ healed say, "Whereas 
I was blind, now I see," and I am thankful to my Heavenly 
Father that I have "eyes to see and ears to hear" the "glad 
tidings of great joy which shall be to all people." 

One minister in this section (the French Missionary) has 
become quite interested. We can however look forward with 
joyful anticipation to the good time coming when "the blind 
eyes will be opened, and deaf ears will be unstopped." 
Yours in Christian fellowship, 

N. E. Butler, Nova Scotia. 



page 209 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. JULY 15, 1902. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 211 

Higher Criticism in Scotland 211 

The Negro Not a Beast 213 

Miscegenation not Scripturally 

a Crime 213 

How Shall we account for 

Racial Differences 215 

Obligations Toward Fellow-Men— 

In the Decalogue 217 

Poem— "These Many Years" 220 

Worshipping the Golden Calf 220 

page 210 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 
than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the DAWNS at 25 cents each, 
cannot be for money -making: that it is merely another way of 
preaching the truth. No other religious books are sold at any 
such price. Indeed few subscription books sell for less than two 
to three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are invited 



to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 
R3040 : page 210 

MORE VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION. 

The friends are displaying great energy this year in the 
distribution of literature near Christian meeting places. We 
bid you all God-speed in this very effective preaching of the 
Gospel. Our first order for the special issues of our journal used 
this year was for 1,000,000 copies. Over one half of this quantity 
has already gone out to fill large requisitions and nearly 
200,000 are on back orders waiting for the papers as fast as the 
printers can supply them. We hope to get caught up very soon 
now, and request that those who have sent us small orders for 
mail shipment exercise just a little more patience. "Let 
patience have her perfect work." We have just issued 400,000 
more of these issues, so as to be ready for your later orders. 

Meantime let those who have not been engaged in this 
branch of the service enquire of themselves whether or not they 
can afford to miss so grand an opportunity for showing forth 
the praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his 
marvellous light. Do you know of and are you using a better 
method of preaching the truth? "He that reapeth receiveth 
wages [joy and peace and blessing in the present life even] 
and gathereth fruit unto everlasting life." 



R3040 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE "HIGHER CRITICISM" IN SCOTLAND. 
SCATHING PRESS COMMENTS. 



A SCOTTISH READER of Zion's Watch Tower 
writes:— The month of May annually witnesses 
the great ecclesiastical meetings known 
as the General Assemblies of the Presbyterian 
Churches in Scotland. This year the Assemblies of 
the Established Church and of the Free Church (the 
latter consisting of those who did not enter the union 
between the former Free Church and the former 
United Presbyterian Church, now called in union the 
United Free Church) met in Edinburgh, the historic 
capital of the country, while the Assembly of the 
United Free Church was held in Glasgow. To 
readers of Dawn the principal interest in the voluminous 
discussions, extending over some ten days, 
will be in respect to the question of the "Higher 
Criticism" in connection with which there was a 
great debate in the U.F. Assembly at Glasgow 



on Friday, 23rd May. The matter arose 
in this way: Certain memorialists had called 
attention to the teachings of Professor George 
Adam Smith (one of the Professors of the Church) 
in a volume of lectures recently published by him, in 
which, they contended, views are set forth wholly 
subversive of the divine authority and authenticity of 
the Scriptures. The memorial had been remitted to 
the College Committee for consideration, and this 
committee, after deliberating, resolved unanimously 
to recommend that the Assembly should not take any 
action against Professor Smith. When this recommendation 
came before the Assembly for disposal 
extraordinary interest was taken in the proceedings, 
and the large St. Andrew's Hall was crowded all day. 
Rev. Dr. Kidd, Glasgow, submitted the report. Principal 
Rainy moved that the Assembly adopt the 
recommendation of the report to the effect "that it 
was not the duty of the Church to institute any 
process against Professor Smith in connection with 
his lectures recently published; but at the same time 
declared that they were not to be held as accepting 
or authorizing the critical theories therein set forth." 
The motion also called upon ministers and professors 
to take care that reverence for Holy Scripture should 
be conspicuously manifest in their writings. 
In a long speech in support of the motion, 
Principal Rainy contended that the present was 
not a fitting time to enter into the large question 
that had been raised, and that a Committee of the 
Church could not satisfactorily deal with the matter. 
Neither he nor those associated with him had any 
desire to make things uncomfortable for Professor 
Smith. The Bible would live triumphantly through 
all facts established as facts, and all the consequences 
following from them. Professor Orr seconded. Dr. 
John Smith, Edinburgh, moved a long amendment, 
setting forth that the recommendation of the College 
Committee did not deal with the most serious matter 
raised by the memorialists, and that, in view of the 
manifest danger to the peace and prosperity of the 

R3041 : page 211 

Church arising directly from the intrusion of this 
critical controversy in its present form, the Assembly 
appoint a large and representative Committee to take 
account of the whole situation with a view to arriving 
at such conclusions as shall dispel anxiety and clear 
the testimony of the Church before the world. Dr. 
John McEwan, Edinburgh, seconded. Dr. Wells 
moved that the Assembly resolve to appoint a Committee 
to confer with Dr. George Adam Smith in the 
hope that the perplexities be removed. Lord Overtoun 
seconded. Considerable discussion followed. 
Professor George Adam Smith addressed the 



House, complaining that he had been misrepresented. 
Amid loud applause he declared— 
"From the bottom of my heart I believe in the Bible 
as the revelation of God to sinful man— a thing which 
found me long before I found it." On a division, Dr. 
Smith's amendment was defeated by that of Dr. 
Wells; and on a further division, the report of the 
College Committee was approved by 534 to 263 given 
for Dr. Wells' amendment. This decision, together 

R3041 : page 212 

with the whole attitude in which the Churches stand 
towards the Higher Criticism in view of their creeds 
and standards, such as the "Confession of Faith," has 
been extensively commented upon by the press of 
the country. There have, of course, been various 
opinions expressed; but the following extracts will 
be found as instructive and suggestive of the real 
state of matters in Scotland as they are undoubtedly 
plain and incisive in terms. They are both from the 
Edinburgh Evening News, an ably edited and influential 
daily of the Scottish capital. The first extract, a 
leading article, deals with the general question:— 

Some of the influential among the clergy are 
getting alarmed about the Higher Criticism. This 
feeling found expression yesterday in the Established 
Church Assembly. Speaking on the indifference of 
the masses, Dr. Mair attributed it largely to the 
Higher Criticism. His words are worth reproduction: 
"The lapsing class cared nothing at all about 
creeds, but they did care about their squabbling. 
They said, 'When you have made up your own minds 
then we may hear you.' The prime cause was the 
change in the way of regarding Scripture that had 
arisen largely from scientific naturalism and from 
the Higher Criticism acting upon an age which worshiped 
progress and seemed to think that the newest 
was always best. He condemned reckless unscientific 
criticism, which only and always did mischief, and 
it was remarkable that these things percolated down 
into the lowest classes even. Had the Churches 
changed in their way of regarding the Word of God?" 
Dr. Mair has hit the nail on the head. Why should 
the working classes attend church? In the days of 
orthodoxy, when the Bible was believed to be an 
authoritative revelation, preacher and hearer held 
definite relations to each other. Sheltered behind a 
"Thus saith the Lord," the preacher could unfold 
before his hearers, after the style of Jonathan Edwards, 
a scheme of Redemption, which in essence was 
a philosophy of history. Man's creation, his fall, the 
progressive upward movements under supernatural 
guidance, as exhibited in the call of Abraham, the 
selection of the children of Israel, the wilderness 
legislation, sacrificial and ritualistic, typical of the 



New Testament revelation— these things formed the 

staple of orthodox preaching, and gave to human 

life an organic unity. To the anxious inquirer, with 

his "What must I do to be saved?" the old divines had 

a ready and intelligent answer. They could point 

him to the Cross upon which the Second Person in 

the Trinity died as an expiation for human guilt. If 

questioned as to the authority for all this, the orthodox 

divine could appeal to the Bible as an inspired and 

infallible record. He could show the organic unity 

between the Old and New Testaments, and without 

difficulty could prove from the wilderness legislation 

and prophetic predictions the transcendent greatness 

of Christ and the sacrificial nature of his death. 

What has the Higher Critic to say to the anxious 

inquirer with his cry, "What must I do to be saved?" 

The Higher Critic can no longer point to Christ, the 

Second Person in the Trinity, as the Saviour of sinners. 

According to the "Encyclopedia Biblica," there 

was nothing specially supernatural about Christ. The 

miraculous birth is explained away or ignored, the 

miracles are attributed to misunderstandings or 

exaggerations, the supernatural, in short, is reduced 

to a minimum. Then Professor George Adam Smith 

has torn to tatters the old Redemption drama, which 

charmed the heart of John Calvin, Jonathan Edwards, 

John Knox, Luther, and our own Candlish and Cunningham. 

According to the Higher Critics, there was 

no fall, no call of Abraham, no special legislation in 

the wilderness, no sacrificial symbols of the great 

sacrifice on Calvary, no predictions of Christ. In a 

word, the Bible is a collection of mythical stories, 

from which a preacher may extract a few 

grains of ethical teaching just as a skillful moralist 

may extract a few grains of ethical teaching from 

"Aesop's Fables." The working classes are not fools. 

They will not attend church to listen to men who 

themselves are living in a mental fog, men who, if 

they were honest, would prefer breaking stones on the 

highway to saturating their souls with hypocrisy for 

the sake of the loaves and fishes. 

[We are quoting the above not endorsing it all. 
The editor would be very interested in seeing Bible 
proofs about the "Trinity." He is sure that neither 
the thought, nor the word Trinity is Scriptural. It 
is such careless use of the Bible that has given Higher 
Critics the foothold they have obtained.] 

The second— also a leading article— appeared on 
the day following the decision in the Professor Smith 
case:— 

There is no use mincing matters. The Protestant 
Church is an organized hypocrisy, and its leaders 
arrant humbugs. It is actually come to this that if 
the author of the "Age of Reason" were alive today 
he would not be spoken of derisively as Tom Paine, 
the infidel, but the Rev. Thomas Paine, D.D., Professor 



of Hebrew and Old Testament Exegesis, U.F. 
College, Glasgow. He would have no difficulty in 
preaching from a Protestant pulpit. That means that 
while professing to pin its faith on the Bible as an 
authoritative, supernatural revelation, the Protestant 
Church is now willing to tolerate in its pulpits and 
its professorial chairs men who hold the views of the 
famous Paine. What were the conclusions reached 
by Paine? Pretty much the conclusions reached by 
the Higher Critics who today fill the highest positions 
in Protestant Churches. In order to justify this 
assertion it will be necessary to examine the views 
of the Higher Critics in detail. Let us begin with 
the first book in the Bible, Genesis. What do the 
Higher Critics say about that book? For answer let 
us turn to the article on Genesis by Professor G. F. 
Moore in the second volume of the "Encyclopedia 
Biblica." According to Professor Moore, Genesis 
was written about the eighth century B.C. Consequently, 
Moses could not be the author. As to its 
historical value, the Professor shows what he thinks 
of it by talking of "the legends of Abraham, and 
especially of Isaac." In a similar strain writes Professor 
Adam Smith, whose case was before the U.F. 
Assembly yesterday. Paine in his book gives ground 
also for believing that Genesis could not be the work 

R3041 : page 213 

of Moses, and that it was a collection of traditions, 
stories and fables. Thus both the theological professors 
and Paine reach substantially the same 
conclusion. The close agreement between the 
Higher Critics of today and Paine is still further seen 
in the article on Historical Literature, also by 
Professor Moore, who remarks that "the stories of 
the patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, Israel, and his sons, 
are told with a wealth of circumstance and a vividness 
of color which show that we have entered the realm 
of pure legend." Let us turn to the article "Elijah," 
and what do we find? At the opening of the article 
we find the author, the Rev. W. E. Addis, Manchester, 
writing as follows: "We shall be better able to 
appreciate his (Elijah's) position when we have examined 
the legendary narratives in which his history is 
enshrined." It is the same with Elisha. Mr. Addis 
here also complains of the difficulty of reaching 
historic fact on account of the legendary nature of the 
Biblical account. This is very much the position of 
Professor Smith. Here, too, is substantial agreement 
with Paine, who, instead of using the word "legendary," 
uses the word "romancing." Take a crucial 
instance, the famous prediction in Isaiah about the 
Messiah. Here is what Professor Smith says: 
"Isaiah meant no more than that some one should be 
born whose character and hopes should be proof that 



God was with his people. Whether the promised 
unborn was an individual or a future generation of 
Israel it is difficult to make out; but probably the 
latter is what Isaiah intends." Professor Smith 
further knocks the feet from the famous prediction 
by stating that the word "virgin" should be really 
translated "marriageable woman." That is rather a 
severe blow at the incarnation as detailed by Matthew. 
The notable feature is that this is precisely the theory 
of Paine, who, if alive today, instead of being persecuted 
as a base infidel, would be drawing a handsome 
salary as a professor of theology in the U.F. Church. 
Dr. Rainy justifies this kind of tomfoolery on the 
plea that the question about the authenticity of the 
Bible is under grave discussion, and that we had 
better wait for light. That is to say, the Church is 
no longer the witness of God upon earth, but a huge 
debating society, in which large salaries are paid to 
those who set themselves to destroy the creed to 
which they have subscribed. The proceedings of 
yesterday confirm us in our old opinion, that the 
Church has become a colossal sham, and the clergy 
a band of sleek-faced Jesuitical trimmers, whose 
moral obliquity is only equalled by their intellectual 
dishonesty. 



R3042 : page 213 

THE NEGRO NOT A BEAST. 



A BROTHER sends us with the following 
questions, a book now having an extensive 
sale in the South, and calculated to stir up 
strife with its teaching that the negro is not human, 
but a beast. Our answers review the statements of 
said book. 

(1) Question.— Are there any grounds for the 
belief of some that the negro is one of the lower animals, 
in the Scriptures called a "beast" and created, 
like the other beasts, prior to the creation of Adam, 
who was the first that was called a man? 

Answer.— Of course whoever advances such a 
theory must at least fancy that he has proofs to support 
it, and frequently the wish to find such proofs 
misleads the judgment and causes the individual to 
accept as proofs, matters which would not be proofs 
if regarded in an unprejudiced manner. In our opinion 
there are no such proofs, but strong testimony of 
the Scriptures to the contrary. Science has proven 
that somehow the Creator has fixed boundaries and 
limitations which hinder the different species from intermingling 
Even where the species closely resemble 



each other in many respects, as for instance, the 
horse and donkey, the dog and the cat, a cross-breed 
with powers of propagation cannot be secured. This 
law, which it is well known obtains throughout the 
animal kingdom, should in all reason be applicable to 
mankind; and hence, if whites and negroes were of 
different species they could not, by commingling, produce 
offspring capable of propagation. Briefly stated, 
this is the scientific side of the question, which cannot 
be set aside by any amount of sophistry or theorizing. 
It will stand as a fact after the theorizing is dead. 
From the Scriptural standpoint the answer is equally 
specific. Note the Apostle's words, "God that made 
the world and all things therein. ..hath made 
of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the 
face of the earth,"-Acts 17:24-28. 

MISCEGENATION NOT SCRIPTURALLY A CRIME. 

(2) Question.— Those who take the view I mention, 
claim that Cain's sin consisted in marrying a negress, 
and that it was for this reason that God would 
not accept his sacrifice. It claims also that the crime 
of all nations, leading to their degeneracy and divine 
disfavor, has in every instance been the commingling 
of the white "man" and the black "beast"; and that 
the different colored races, yellow, red, brown, are 
the result of these admixtures, and that hence heathendom 
prevails amongst the various colored races, 
while Christianity prevails amongst the whites. What 
answer would you make to this proposition? 

Answer.— The proposition is wholly illogical. It 
is not true that divine favor has gone with the whites 
exclusively, and against the blacks and other colored 
races; civilizing the whites and barbarizing the others. 
If civilization and barbarity are to be the tests entirely, 
we have only to take in a wide scope of history to see 
the fallacy of the view presented. Eighteen centuries 
ago the white peoples of Europe, with their straight 
silky hair, were savages, idolaters, barbarians— far 
more degraded than were the millions of India and 
the millions of China at the same time. This disproves 
this theory at a glance. 

Furthermore, the Children of Israel, who for 
eighteen centuries before that had been the favored 
people of God, and respecting whom it was written, 
"You only have I known (recognized) of all the 
families of the earth," are not a fair skinned and 
straight and silky haired people. Their hair is quite 

R3042 : page 214 

kinky, and their skin is quite swarthy, altho they also 
are a part of the Caucasian race. Furthermore, we 
notice in the case of that nation that whereas they 
were subjects of divine favor for eighteen hundred 



years, and then became objects of divine disfavor for 
a similar period, it was not because of their having 
intermarried with blacks, but for a very different reason 
—because of their rejection of Messiah. This 
proves that alienation from God which constitutes the 
heathen "strangers, aliens and foreigners," was not 
because of intermarriage with the blacks. 

If those who favor this theory should persist in 
saying that all who are strangers from God and from 
the commonwealth of Israel, were rejected and utterly 
cast off because of impurity of blood through negro 
admixture, let us reflect further that these Gentile nations 
include our own forefathers, the barbarians of 
Europe. And let us further reflect that however cast 
off they were, and from whatever reason they were 
cast off, their debt, their penalty, was paid by the 
great ransom sacrifice which our Lord Jesus gave— 
not for the Jews only, but for the Gentiles also, by 
which we, who were once aliens and strangers and 
foreigners, have been brought nigh to God, and 
granted the privilege of becoming his sons. 

But the entire argument is fallacious. Their conjecture 
respecting Cain's transgression is trumped up 
based upon a slight imperfection in the translation of 
our common version Bibles, which read, "If thou doest 
well shalt thou not be accepted? And if thou doest 
not well, sin lieth at the door. And unto thee shall 
be his desire and thou shalt rule over him." (Gen. 4:7.) 
This latter statement is still further twisted out 
of shape to prove the point by making it read, "Unto 
thee shall her desire be, and thou shalt rule over her," 
and making the "her" apply to the negress, whom 
Cain is supposed to have accepted as a wife. On the 
contrary, the Scriptural account shows that Cain had 
no wife at the time of this injunction. It was subsequent 
to this that Cain went and dwelt in the land of 
Nod, on the east of Eden, and knew his wife, and she 
conceived. (Verses 16,17.) Cain's wife was undoubtedly 
one of his sisters, for such was the custom 
of early times, nor was it necessary to bar by law intermarriage 
between blood relations. The necessity 
for this at the present time lies in the fact that the race 
has greatly degenerated, and that the idiosyncrasies 
of one family need to be offset by different peculiarities 
of another— and sound advice is that all mating 
should be between those of dissimilar temperaments. 
In the present run-down mental and physical condition 
of the human family in-breeding tends to produce 
insanity and physical degeneracy, while interbreeding 
gives better results, by scattering and offsetting 
the weaknesses of each tribe or family. 

There is nothing said respecting any sin on Cain's 
part up to the time he became jealous of his brother, 
and his murderer. He did entirely right to bring 
to the Lord the offering which he did bring of the 
fruits of the ground; nor was the Lord displeased with 



this. The fact that Abel's offering was accepted while 

Cain's was rejected, should have been understood by 

him as indicating the kind of sacrifice which would 

be best pleasing to the Lord, and straightway he 

should have procured and presented animal sacrifices: 

then, undoubtedly, his would have been as truly acceptable 

as Abel's. The Lord from the very first 

wished to teach his creatures that the only reconciliation 

for sin would be through the shedding of 

blood; thus he foreshadowed to them the great sacrifice 

for sin— the blood of Christ. "Without shedding 

of blood there is no remission." 

Cain should, therefore, have congratulated his 
brother Abel, and have been thankful for this clear 
manifestation of what kind of a sacrifice would be 
pleasing to his Creator; but instead we are told that 
he was wroth, angry. It was for this anger that the 
Lord reproved him as the context clearly shows. The 
Lord said to Cain in substance: Why are you angry? 
Do you wish to bring me a sacrifice? Are you angry 
because I have shown you the kind of sacrifice which 
I wished to receive? Are you jealous because this 
manifestation of my wishes came to you through your 
brother? Evidently you are in a wrong condition. 
If you would do the acceptable thing, would you not 
be accepted as well as Abel, and your sacrifice as well 
as his? And if now that you know what would please 
me you do not do so, would it not prove that sin lies 
at the door, that your heart is not right? Then follows 
the twisted statement which we here give from 
Leeser's translation— "If thou doest not well (now 
that you know what my will is) sin lieth at the door, 
and unto thee is its desire, but thou canst rule over 
it;"— you can get the victory over this wrong attitude 
of mind if you but so desire. But instead of getting 
the victory over his jealousy, Cain permitted it 
to grow; and getting into an altercation with his 
brother the envious, murderous feelings of his heart 
gave vent to the blow which made him the first 
murderer. 

The Scriptural evidences are wholly against the 
theory mentioned in the question. Take, for instance, 
the fact that Moses married a negress, and had children 
by her. According to the theory we are criticising 
this would have been an unpardonable sin in 
God's sight, a carnal union between a man and a beast. 
According to this theory Moses would have been rejected 
utterly from divine favor. But what do we 
find? Quite to the contrary. It was after this marriage 
that God chose Moses to be his representative 
and the leader of his people out of Egyptian bondage. 
Moreover, it was when Moses' brother Aaron and his 
sister Miriam, especially the latter, upbraided him for 
his marriage to a negress, that the Lord defended him 
in the matter, and smote Miriam with the plague of 
leprosy as a punishment for her improper conduct 



and language respecting this subject. (See the account, 

Num. 12.) Zipporah was an Ethiopian, described 

in the Hebrew text as a Cushite. Ebed melech, 

also an Ethiopian, was one of King Zedekiah's household, 

and be it noted that he was both thoughtful and 

zealous for the Lord's prophet, Jeremiah, and was the 

commander of the thirty men who delivered him from 

prison (Jer. 38:7-12.) Hence the argument of those 

who claim that the negro is devoid of organizing intelligence 

or ability, except as he may have an admixture 

of white blood, is shown to be fallacious. 

We have already quoted from the Apostle Paul 
that all nations are mentioned as of one blood; and 
this again borne out by his statement that those who 

R3043 : page 215 

accept Christ, whether Jew or Gentile, barbarian or 
Scythian, bond or free, are "all one in Christ Jesus." 
--Gal. 3:28; Col. 3:11. 

The Ethiopian eunuch to whom Philip was sent 
with the messages of salvation was unquestionably a 
black man— "Can the Ethiopian change his skin?" 
(Jer. 13:23; Acts 8:27.) We find no suggestion on 
Philip's part that this Ethiopian was not a man, but 
a beast; but quite to the contrary, he was ready to 
preach the Gospel to him and to accept him as a 
brother in Christ upon his confession of faith. 

The Queen of Sheba who visited Solomon in the 
height of his glory is presumed to have been a negress: 
the present Emperor of Abyssinia claims to be 
a descendant of Solomon by this Queen— he is a black 
man, and an able warrior and general, as the Italian 
army, attempting to invade his country a few years 
ago, learned to its cost— its serious defeat. Solomon 
is presumed, by some, to have referred to the Queen 
of Sheba in his Songs or Canticles 1:5,6. 

HOW SHALL WE ACCOUNT FOR RACIAL DIFFERENCES? 

(3) Question.— If the foregoing is not the solution 
of the racial distinctions amongst men, what 
would you suggest as a reasonable explanation? 

Answer.— From the Scriptural standpoint we 
must and do recognize all of the human family as 
one race, of which father Adam was the original head; 
a later head being Noah. Accepting as we do the 
Bible narrative of the flood (and it is confirmed by 
similar, though less explicit, narratives amongst all 
ancient peoples) we need not go back of Noah and 
his family in seeking a cause for the differences. Taking 
Mt. Ararat as the central joint from which post-diluvian 
humanity spread itself over the earth, we may 
reasonably suppose that his three sons and their posterity 
went in different directions, the one northward, 
the other southward, and the third eastward. There is 



a general concensus of opinion that it was Ham who 
went southward, and whose posterity afterward peopled 
Africa; that it was Shem who remained near the 
Mediterranean and became the millions of Armenia, 
Persia, Assyria, Egypt and India; and that Japheth 
went northward and eastward, and that his posterity 
is represented in the Turks, Russians, Chinese, etc. 

In attempting to account for the wide differences 
between whites and blacks, and the lesser differences 
between these and the yellow, brown, and red, we 
are treading upon uncertain ground,— as all ground 
must be in which our imperfect knowledge and imperfect 
reasoning powers have not inspired direction 
from the Lord's Word. Hence it should be understood 
at the outstart that all that we or others can do 
is to guess on this subject— respecting the differences 
in shape of head, color of skin, shape of eyes, peculiarities 
of hair, the nose, lips, etc. Undoubtedly, the 
climate and the soil have much to do with these differences, 
just as they have much to do with changes 
in vegetation. For instance, the apple which reaches 
so great a degree of perfection in a cold climate, if 
transferred, even gradually, to a warm one will do 
poorly, and if it does not die out entirely will at least 
undergo a transformation, in harmony with the 
change of soil and climate. The same is noticeable 
in the quince, the plum and the grape, the orange, 
etc. Is there more difference between the different 
races of human species than between the different 
kinds of grapes— some sweet, some sour; some larger, 
some smaller; some round, some oblong, some pear-shaped; 
some white, some green, some reddish, some 
purple; some with solid meat, some half full of juice, 
some with seeds and some without? Yet it is not 
questioned that all grapes are of one family. 

Again, consider the dog species. Some are sleek 
and some are rough; some are very woolly and some 
are without hair; some white, some brown, some tan; 
some large, some small, etc. Does any one dispute 
that all dogs are of one species? Appropriately we 
find that locality and climate and the kind of food subsisted 
upon had much to do with these differences. 
True, we see dogs in various countries of different 
breeds, now, yet we recognize each breed as having 
had originally a distinctive home: as for instance, the 
St. Bernard of the Alps, the Spitz of the Artie regions, 
the Scotch terrier, the Collie and the Newfoundland 
—each had its own place, and was developed 
under peculiar conditions, which for the time kept it 
separate from others. We are to remember that for 
long centuries neither dogs nor their masters roamed 
the world over as at present, but were content with 
their own home country, which, with its peculiar conditions, 
and customs, gradually fixed certain characteristics 
of thought, manner, language and outer 
appearance. As a consequence, an experienced eye 



will know a Scotchman fresh from his native heath 
as quickly as he would recognize his dog. And the 
same with other peoples. 

When we find that Europe, which was settled 
much more recently by its present inhabitants, has 
in so short a time divided itself into so many different 
nations, and when we remember that Europeans 
have stirred and commingled with each other far more 
than the peoples of other parts of the earth, it helps us 
to see how gradually, through many centuries, other 
peoples have undergone still greater changes. 

In considering this matter we are not to forget 
the strong pre-natal influence of the mother's mind 
upon her offspring,— co-operating with the influences 
of climate and soil. To illustrate: Suppose a missionary 
and his wife removed to China; not only 
would the influence of the climate and soil be manifested 
upon themselves, but the same would be still 
more manifested in their children. Whoever will give 
careful attention to this matter will notice that each 
succeeding child born in that foreign country will 
have increasingly more resemblance to the Chinese— 
the hair, the skin, the shape of the eyes, and in general 
all features will bear closer resemblance with 
each succeeding child. We can readily suppose that 
if so much change occurs in a few years, ten or 
twenty centuries under similar conditions would turn 
any white people into regular Chinese, even supposing 
there were no intermarrying. The mother, while 
carrying her unborn child, has continually before her 
the Chinese type of countenance— eyes, hair, color, 
etc., and the continual impress of these upon her mind 
could not fail, according to the law of our being, to influence 
her offspring in the manner noted. 

R3043 : page 216 

Indeed a traveler, a scientist, has lately reported 
to the civilized world that he found in China a district 
where there were ruins of a very ancient Hebrew 
temple, and tablets in Hebrew. The people of the 
district informed him that they had a tradition that 
their fathers once spoke and understood the language 
of the tablets (Hebrew), had emigrated thither many 
centuries before, adopting the Chinese customs and 
language and, gradually, their appearance also. 

The effect would be similar in India. Undoubtedly 
the stronger contrast between the white and the 
black would require a longer time to be brought about; 
but we should expect that neither of these extremes 
fairly represented the original, if we may judge of 
Adam, Noah and Abraham by the only nation whose 
ancestors can be traced unblemished back to these 
heads of the race,— the Jews. We may suppose that 
they were neither as white as some of us, nor as 
black as the negro, but of a swarthy, tawny color. If 



this be true, the extreme whiteness of some peoples is 
not to be considered the original standard, but a 
deflection on the one side, as the negro and others are 
deflections on the other side. We are not to forget, 
either, that Africa is inhabited by various tribes or 
nations of negroes— some more and some less degraded 
than the average. Those brought to America 
as slaves were of various tribes;— from among whom 
we doubt not the Lord is making choice of some for 
the prospective "Royal Priesthood." 

While it is true that the white race exhibits some 
qualities of superiority over any other, we are to remember 
that there are wide differences in the same 
Caucasian (Semitic and Aryan) family; and also we 
should remember that some of the qualities which 
have given this branch of the human family its preeminence 
in the world are not such as can be pointed 
to as in all respects admirable. Indeed we can not 
but wonder whether if the Gospel had been sent into 
Asia instead of into Europe it might not have found 
amongst the people of India a soil much more naturally 
adapted to the development of the peaceable 
fruits of righteousness. However, that the Gospel 
was divinely directed into Europe is most manifest 
(Acts 16:6,9), and sooner or later we shall see the full 
meaning of this divine providence. Perhaps the Lord 
intends to show that as typical Israel was a stiff-necked 
generation, so also spiritual Israel will be 
taken from amongst similar classes; and all the more 
show forth the power of the truth, by taking the elect 
Church chiefly from amongst the most quarrelsome, 
aggressive, selfish and dominating of humanity, and 
transforming these through the power of the truth 
into exemplifications of patience, humility, love and 
peace. The secret of the greater intelligence and aptitude 
of the Caucasian undoubtedly in great measure is 
to be attributed to the commingling of blood amongst 
its various branches; and this was evidently forced 
in large measure by circumstances under divine control. 
It remains to be proven that the similar commingling 
of the various tribes of Chinese for several 
centuries would not equally brighten their intellects; 
and the same with the peoples of India and Africa. 

NOAH'S CHARACTER AND HIS "CURSE" UPON HAM. 

(4) Question.— Those who hold that the negro is 
a beast deny that he is the offspring of Noah's sons, 
and claim that the curse of Noah was not upon Ham, 
but upon one of Ham's sons, Canaan. They belittle 
Noah's curse, by saying that it was the senseless babbling 

R3044 : page 216 

of a drunken sot. What say you on this point? 
Answer.— Those who use such language evidently 



are not familiar with the subject sufficiently to discuss 
it at all. The word "curse" is used by Noah after 
the same manner that God is said to have cursed the 
earth, and cursed mankind; from which curse man 
was redeemed by our Lord. The word "curse" here 
is used in the sense of penalty, retribution, and not in 
the sense of an imprecation or a profane denunciation. 
God declared man to be under the sentence of his 
divine law,— a death-sentence "curse" or penalty. 
Noah declared, prophetically, that Ham's characteristics 
which had led him to unseemly conduct disrespectful 
to his father, would be found cropping out 
later, inherited by his son,— and prophetically he foretold 
that this degeneracy would mark the posterity of 
Canaan, degrading him, making him servile. We are 
not able to determine to a certainty that the sons 
of Ham and Canaan are the negroes; but we consider 
that general view as probable as any other. 
Respecting Noah: It is a great mistake to 
charge him with being a drunken sot, and thus slanderously 
to set forth in a disreputable light one whom 
the Lord esteemed. (See Ezek. 14:14,20.) The fact 
is that the conditions after the flood were so different 
from those which preceded it that Noah was probably 
ignorant of the fact that the changed atmospheric 
conditions produced a ferment in the grape 
juice, giving to the liquor alcoholic and intoxicating 
qualities. We have not the space here to consider 
the wonderful change in climate, etc., which occurred 
at the time of the flood; but everything connected with 
the narrative supports our conclusion that Noah 
drank of the fruit of his vineyard in ignorance of its 
stupefying qualities. See our issue of Nov. 15, 1899. 

OTHER INCONSISTENCIES IN THE ARGUMENTS REVIEWED. 

(5) Question.— When Jude says, "Woe unto 
them ! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran 
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and 
perished in the gainsaying of Core" (Jude 1 1), has it 
any bearing on this negro question? 

Answer.— It has no bearing upon this question 
in the interest of the theory which we are opposing; 
but it has decided force in opposition to it. The 
Apostle Jude (Thaddeus— Matt. 10:3) mentions Cain, 
Balaam, and Core. The sin of Cain was hatred of his 
brother— murder; the error of Balaam was love of 
reward, so that he was willing to do evil to obtain it; 
the gainsaying of Core was his rebellion against divinely 
instituted arrangements. The Lord's people 
are to note all of these wrong courses and to avoid 
them all. 

We trust that we have answered the questions 
satisfactorily, and have thoroughly disproven the theory 
under examination. We will, however, notice 
a few other points made in the pamphlet: for instance, 



the negro is blamed with being peaceable and submissive, 

and his white brother is credited with being of 

a higher order, because he is unsubmissive and warlike. 

R3044 : page 217 

Is it not a fact that in these particulars, if true, 
the colored man resembles Abel, and the white man 
Cain?— that the colored man resembles Jesus, and the 
white man Nero?— that the colored man resembles 
Moses, and the white man Pharaoh? If the negro is 
more peaceable by nature, he is that much by nature 
nearer to the standard which the Christian, as a new 
creature, is to copy. But we dispute the proposition 
entirely. 

It is argued further that in Jonah 3:8, the word 
"beast" refers to the negro because it says that both 
"man and beast" were commanded to wear sackcloth 
as the sign of humiliation before God, and that it 
would be inappropriate for cattle and sheep. But this 
argument loses any little force it at first seemed to 
have, when we read in the preceding verse that "herds 
and flocks" were to participate in this fast before 
God. 

The argument drawn from Exodus 19:13, that the 
beasts referred to had hands is easily answered by 
showing that the Hebrews used the word hand 
for beasts as well as for man. The Hebrew word 
rendered hand in the citation is yad; and the same 
word is used in I Sam. 17:37, where it is rendered 
"paw"— "The paw of the lion and the paw of the 
bear." 

The writer makes a point of the use of the word 
"beast" in contradiction to the word "cattle." But if 
we refer to Young's Concordance under the head of 
"beast" we find the word behemah, which, while the 
general word for cattle, is rendered beast more frequently 
than cattle. The distinctive word for beast, 
not rendered cattle, is (Hebrew) chai, and its signification 
is "living creature." Chai is used in Ps. 104:20, 
and the description of verses 21,22, shows that it 
refers, not to man-eating negroes, but to lions, and 
such wild beasts. The lack of candor on the part of 
the author of the pamphlet criticized, is shown by the 
fact that in one place he accuses the negro of being too 
peaceable, while in another place, to suit his theory, 
he makes of him the man-eating wild beast of the Old 
Testament. 



R3044 : page 217 

OBLIGATIONS TOWARD FELLOW -MEN-IN THE DECALOGUE. 
-EX. 20:12-17.-JULY 20.- 



"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."— Mat. 19:9. 

AS THE FIRST four commands of the Decalogue 
note man's first obligation and responsibility 
to his Creator, so the remaining six 

mark out his responsibilities toward his fellow-creatures. 
We can, undoubtedly, gain some valuable lessons 
in the study of these commands given to Israel at 
Mount Sinai, constituting the basis of the Law Covenant: 
nevertheless, it is proper, especially in view of 
the gross misunderstanding prevalent upon the subject, 
that in considering these commands Christians 
should remember that they were not given to them, 
but to the Jews; that as we have a New Covenant so 
we have a new law as the basis of that Covenant, as 
well as a new Mediator. Old things have passed 
away and all things have become new to the new 
creature in Christ Jesus, whether Jew or Gentile. The 
profitable lessons we may learn through the study of 
these commands given to others, are of the same kind 
as the lessons we learn in studying the various types 
and ceremonies of that Jewish Covenant, which the 
Apostle assures us were but shadows of good things 
coming after them. (Heb. 10:1.) We have the good 
things, the spiritual things, the higher things; nevertheless, 
we learned to appreciate these higher things 
the more by noticing their types and shadows and 
by contrasting them with the higher things. For instance, 
altho we study the things written in the law 
concerning the typical day of atonement, and its sacrificial 
ceremonies, etc., we do not do so with a view 
to repeating those sacrifices of bulls and of goats 
which can never take away sin; but with a view to 
seeing the more clearly the full force and meaning of 
the better sacrifices, the anti-typical, which do take 
away the sin of the world. So with the Ten Commandments. 
God would not address these to 
any member of the house of sons, adopted into his 
family and begotten of his spirit, because they would 
be inappropriate to such, and really be a denial on 
God's part that they had become sons or that they 
had his spirit; for "If any man have not the spirit of 
Christ he is none of his," and certainly the man begotten 
of the holy spirit, possessed of the mind of Christ, 
would no more need to be told that he should do no 
murder, that he should not steal, etc., than that he 
should not take God's name profanely. None of these 
things would anyone begotten of the spirit of God be 
disposed to do; and, hence, it would not have been appropriate 
in God to have made that Jewish Law the 
basis of the Covenant into which he has invited the 
Church to enter, as children, heirs of God, and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ their Lord, if so be that they 
suffer with him. 
The first of these commandments taught the Jew 



the sacredness of the family relationship— that the 
children should honor the parents, which implies that 
the parents should not only so instruct their children, 
but that, so far as possible, they should strive to live 
before them such lives as would reasonably call forth 
such respect, obedience, honor. A promise of long life 
is attached to this commandment. We may esteem on 
general principles that children obedient to their parents 
would be the more inclined to be obedient to the 
laws of their country and to the laws of their 
Creator, and that such obedience would be favorable 
to old age. But we are not certain that 
there was not more than this intended. The words, 
"That thy days may be long upon the land which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee," would seem to connect 
this promise with Israel's possession of the land of 
promise. And if we have reasoned logically that obedience 
to parents would lead to obedience to God, we 
may reason reversely that Israel's disobedience to 
God which resulted in their various captivities, taking 
them out of the land of promise, and finally in their 

R3045 : page 218 

complete banishment from that land, means that this 
lesson of obedience to parents was not well learned, 
and that this reward of continuing in their own land 
was therefore taken from them. 

If we would seek a higher meaning for this commandment, 
under the law of love, its first meaning to 
the Lord's people would be that they should honor 
their Father in heaven, and the Abrahamic Covenant 
under which they have been begotten to the new nature. 
(Gal. 4:22-31); and such honor to God and such 
respect for their covenant with him are certainly the 
terms upon which they may hope for a share in the 
heavenly Canaan with its eternal life. And in proportion 
as God's people reverence him and honor him in 
word and in deed the influence of such lives upon their 
children should be weighty, and should call forth their 
respect. They should seek to rule their own homes 
in love, remembering, nevertheless, the Lord's admonition, 
"A man's foes shall be they of his own 
household." They need not be surprised if, despite 
their every effort to do good and properly to inculcate 
duty, the influences of the world and its false 
views of matters, should make their homes very different 
from what they would prefer. 

"Thou shalt do no murder"— the Revised Version 
rendering— is much to be preferred to the Common 
Version, "Thou shalt not kill." Murder is always 
wrong; killing is sometimes right, sometimes duty. 
The life of the lower animals was given to man according 
to his necessities (Gen. 9:3), but we deprecate 
that which is misnamed sport— the destruction of 
birds and beasts and fishes wantonly— for no good 



purpose, but merely to gratify a savage desire to take 
life. That this command was not intended to prohibit 
the taking of human life under certain circumstances 
is evident from the fact that the same law 
made provision for the killing of murderers. 

To the Church, the new creatures in Christ, a still 
higher law governs on this subject. Our law of Love, 
the New Command, covers it completely. He who 
loves his neighbor will surely not murder him. But 
our Teacher gave a still higher thought respecting 
this feature of the law, and the way in which we, his 
followers, should view it, when he declared that for 
one brother to have hatred toward another was to 
have the murder spirit— the spirit which, under certain 
conditions, might lead to murder. According to 
this definition the person who angrily wishes that another 
were dead commits murder in his heart. On the 
contrary, the spirit of love wishes well to the neighbor 
—yea, even tho he be an enemy, desires that he 
may come into harmony with the Lord, and ultimately 
attain life everlasting, and so desires these things 
as to seek by word and act to render him any assistance 
possible. 

The third of these commands, "Thou shalt not 
commit adultery," was greatly magnified by our 
Lord's declaration to the effect that evil desires, tho 
not accomplished for lack of opportunity, were as 
really violations of this commandment as tho the act 
had been committed. How the magnifying glass of 
the Law of Love enlarges and intensifies the words, 
the acts, the thoughts, of life! There is in this a lesson 
of purity of thought which should be profitable to 
all the Lord's people; for altho we are not in the flesh 
but in the spirit, as new creatures, and in our trial or 
judgment, nevertheless, the new mind deals with and 
operates through the mortal body, and must continually 
strive to bring it into the fullest subjection possible. 
Hence, it is valuable for us to know just how 
the Lord esteems such matters, that we may put the 
greater guard upon the very thoughts and intentions 
of our hearts. We may be sure that it was not of accident 
that the Apostle wrote respecting the wisdom 
from above, "first pure." Our own purity, in the 
sense of our justification by faith, comes before we 
can have any standing or relationship with the Lord 
or be begotten into his family; and this same purity 
which is made the foundation of the new life, and 
given to us reckonedly, must be appreciated by us 
and lived up to as closely as possible. And the clearer 
view we get as to what constitutes impurity in the 
Lord's sight, the better will we be able so to regulate 
and govern our mortal bodies, our acts, our words, 
our very thoughts, as to bring them into as close conformity 
to the will of God as possible. 

Another thought in connection with this command, 
is given to us as new creatures. We have been 



betrothed to our Lord, and to him as our Bridegroom 
we owe full allegiance— whether we regard this from 
the standpoint of the Church as a whole, or from the 
standpoint of each individual united with the Lord. 
From this standpoint, as the Lord's betrothed we are 
to be uncontaminated, unadulterated— separate from 
the world. "Ye are not of the world, even as I am not 
of the world;" "I have chosen you out of the world." 

The fourth of these commands, "Thou shalt not 
steal," is of much greater depth and breadth than 
many are inclined to suppose. In the light of the New 
Covenant and its law of love, stealing may properly 
be understood to apply to the defrauding of a neighbor, 
friend or enemy, in any manner— depriving him 
of his rights or liberties as well as of his money or 
property. It would apply also to the stealing of a 
good name from another, as Shakespeare has pointed 
out. This command would be infracted, in the light 
of the Law of Love, by any transaction in which a 
neighbor would be worsted in a bargain, provided 
anything had been secreted or any deception calculated 
to warp his judgment in the making of the bargain 
had been practiced. From this standpoint there 
is a great deal of "respectable" stealing done today;— 
not only by misrepresentation of the goods by shopkeepers 
and by untruthful advertisements, but also 
amongst dealers of stock exchanges who, directly 
or indirectly, throw out wrong information to mislead, 
and by others in fraudulent organizations whose 
financial standing, etc., is often grossly misrepresented 
to enable the organizers to steal from those 
who become the purchasers of the stock at more than 
its real value. 

The Law of Love is very difficult to apply to business 
under present conditions; but it always insists 
upon absolute fairness and truthfulness in respect to 
all statements made. It is not incumbent upon us, 
however, after making known the facts in any matter, 

R3045 : page 219 

to either directly or indirectly force upon others 
our opinions or judgment in respect to the value of 
the facts explained. We may safely allow other men 
to use their judgment, while we use ours, when we 
have told them frankly the truth in regard to any 
matter. 

The fifth of these commands, altho it does not directly 
prohibit false statements, does necessarily prohibit 
any statement which would mislead a neighbor 
to his injury, and herein we see a superior wisdom in 
the light of this command. I might make a declaration 
that at a certain hour I will do a certain thing. 
I am at full liberty to change my mind and not to do 
that thing, provided my conduct in this shall not injure 
my neighbor in any sense or degree. To whatever 



extent our testimony on any subject would be inclined 
to lead friends or neighbors or anyone to take any 
course which would be injurious to themselves or 
others, and which they would not otherwise have 
taken, to that extent we are bound under the Law 
of Love. We may do all the good we please to a 
neighbor, but we may do him no injury. This is the 
spirit of the Apostle's injunction that we say, "If the 
Lord will" we will do thus and so. We are to consider 
the Lord's will in all we undertake, and his will 
in brief, is that we honor him and do good, not evil to 
fellow men. 

False witness applies to the telling of lies, but it 
goes deeper than this and applies to any misrepresentation, 
whether it be by direct statement or indirectly 
by such a statement as would permit a wrong 
inference to be drawn. Indeed, amongst refined people 
this subterfuge, by which they palliate their consciences, 
and at the same time gratify their spiteful 
hearts, is very common. One may even bear false 
witness by the nod of his head, by the shrugging of 
his shoulder, or by silence— if a misstatement be 
made in such a connection that silence might be understood 
to mean consent. If a Jew, a member of the 
house of servants under Moses, the Mediator of the 
Law Covenant, was required to be particular upon 
this point, how much more particular should all be 
who essay to be members of the house of sons, under 
the New Covenant and the New Mediator! Does not 
the New Covenant Law of Love go still deeper on this 
point? It surely does. It prohibits in specific terms, 
not only the speaking of untruths in respect to a 
neighbor, but the speaking of anything concerning 
him that would be to his discredit, even tho it were 
true— unless under certain circumstances which Love 
could fully endorse— if the testimony were required 
by a court of law, or if the testimony were necessary 
for the protection of another from injury. And even 
in such cases as little of derogatory truth as possible 
should be uttered, and it only in love. The Apostle's 
word on this subject is, "Speak evil of no man." 

There is no point, or feature, of the entire Law of 
Love, as it bears upon our relationship to fellow-creatures, 
that needs more of our attention than this 
point. It seems difficult for Christians to learn thoroughly 
the Master's lessons, that, if they have anything 
unpleasant to say respecting a brother or sister, 
any criticism of the private life or affairs to offer, it 
should be offered to him or her alone and not to 
others. 

Perhaps on no other score does the Adversary 
succeed so well in doing mischief amongst the Lord's 
people— in planting roots of bitterness, producing 
misunderstanding, anger, malice, hatred, strife and 
other works of the devil. Let us permit love to do 
her perfect work in this relationship to our fellows. 



A difference is to be observed in respect to criticisms 
of doctrines publicly uttered. The criticism of 
an error should be as publicly made as the error was 
publicly set forth, if it be of importance. The thing 
then to determine would be our liberties and responsibilities, 
and we might have neither. But if we 
possessed both our criticisms should be only in love, not 
in boastfulness but in humility; desiring only to serve 
the truth and the brethren. Humility will suggest, 
too, that we be sure we are right before proceeding to 
criticize. Even then some points of truth can generally 
be approved while the points of error are being 
criticized. 

The sixth of these commandments, and the last of 
the whole, deals with covetousness. As the last it 
stands in an important place, and when fully appreciated 

R3046 : page 219 

is seen to have a bearing upon all the other 
commandments. Covetousness implies discontent. 
It, therefore, generally lies at the bottom of slander, 
false witness, theft, adultery, murder, and disobedience 
to parents. Indeed, in some respects we may 
suppose that it lies at the bottom of any disloyalty 
to God also. Was it not covetousness on the part 
of Satan which first led him to disloyalty and sin? 

In becoming new creatures in Christ we are supposed 
to eradicate from our hearts everything that 
could in any sense of the word develop into covetousness 
—by the consecration of our wills, our hearts, 
to the Lord, by the acceptance of his will as instead 
of our own. From this standpoint, as the Apostle 
declares, "Godliness with contentment [absence of 
covetousness] is great gain." Indeed, viewed from 
the proper standpoint of the new creature, we have 
nothing to covet, because in becoming the Lord's we 
have become joint-heirs with our Redeemer to all the 
riches of divine grace, so that the Apostle could say, 
"All things are yours. ..and ye are Christ's, 
and Christ is God's." 

But let us as new creatures, remember that covetousness 
can come into a heart otherwise pure, and 
defile the whole, as we see illustrated in the case of 
Satan, so that of all the things which we need to 
guard against most carefully this is one of the chief. 
All the graces of the spirit are opposed to covetousness 
—meekness, gentleness, brotherly kindness, love, 
all forbid that we should covet the things of our 
brethren or the things of the world. Rather, thankfulness 
should so fill our hearts— gratitude for the 
manifold mercies and blessings already received, that 
there will be no room for a covetous thought. True, 
the Apostle, in our Common Version, is made to say, 
"Covert earnestly the best gifts" (I Cor. 12:31), but it 
would be a great mistake to suppose that the Apostle 



taught that the Lord's people were to covet positions 
of influence in the Church. We are indeed to desire 

R3046 : page 220 

to have, to enjoy and to use in the Lord's service, as 
many talents and gifts as possible, but we find the 
very reverse of the Apostle's thought and teaching 
that we should covet the honors or possessions of one 
another. This seems to be a danger point with many, 
and when we remember that it has proven to be the 
wreck -rock for many, it behooves us to be extremely 
careful to covet merely the Lord's favor and the gifts 
and talents by which we can best serve one another 
and not ourselves. 

THESE MANY YEARS. 

--DEUT. 8:2.- 

"These many years! What lessons they unfold 
Of grace and guidance through the wilderness, 

From the same God that Israel of old 
In the Shekinah glory did possess. 

How faithful he, through all my griefs and fears 

And constant murmurings, these many years! 

"God of the Covenant! From first to last, 

From when I stood within that sprinkled door 

And o'er my guilt the avenging angel passed, 
Thy better angel has gone on before; 

And naught but goodness all the way appears, 

Unmerited and free, these many years ! 

"Thy presence wrought a pathway through the sea; 

Thy presence made the bitter water sweet; 
And daily have thy hands prepared for me 

Sweet, precious morsels— lying at my feet. 
'Twas but to stoop and taste the grace that cheers, 
And start refreshed, through all these many years! 

"What time I thirsted and earth's streams were dry, 
What time I wandered and my hope was gone, 

Thy hand has brought a pure and full supply, 
And, by a loving pressure, lured me on. 

How oft that hand hath wiped away my tears 

And written 'Pardoned!' all these many years! 

"And what of discipline thy love ordained 
Fell ever gently on this heart of mine; 

Around its briers was my spirit trained 

To bring forth fruits of righteousness divine; 

Wisdom in every check, and love appears 

In every stroke throughout these many years! 

"Lord, what I might have been my spirit knows— 



Rebellious, petulant, and apt to stray: 
Lord, what I am, in spite of flesh and foes, 

I owe to grace that kept me in the way. 
Thine be the glory! Merit disappears 
As back I look upon these many years. 

"Thine be the glory! Thou shalt have the praise 
For all thy dealings, to my latest breath; 

A daily Ebenezer will I raise, 

And sing Salvation through the vale of death— 

To where the palm, the golden harp appears, 

There to rehearse thy love through endless years. 



R3046 : page 220 

WORSHIPPING THE GOLDEN CALF. 

-EX. 32:1-6, 30-35. -JULY 27.- 

"Thou shalt have no other Gods before me."— Ex. 20:3. 

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS became the 
foundation, or basis, of the Law Covenant 
between God and Israel— Moses being the 
Mediator. These commandments were written on 
parchment, and added to them were about seventy 
enactments, or explanations in accord with them, 
based upon them, and these all, recorded in Exodus 20-23, 
constituted what was termed the Book of the 
Covenant. After the people had assented to the 
Law and the Covenant based upon it, Moses killed 
an animal, which represented himself, the Mediator 
of that Covenant, and he sprinkled the blood of the 
animal upon the Book of the Covenant, which represented 
the Lord and his faithfulness to all of his 
promises; and he sprinkled of the blood also upon 
the people— probably not upon the two millions, but 
upon representatives of the whole, the heads or chiefs 
of the tribes. Thus in type, or symbol, Moses stood 
pledged to God on behalf of the people, and to the 
people on behalf of God that the provisions on both 
sides should be carried out. 

It was after this solemn and significant ceremony, 
that by the Lord's direction Moses went up into the 
mountain as the people's representative— for communion 
with the Lord, and to receive from him the 
Decalogue written on tables of stone, which the Jews 
traditionally claim were of sapphire. His mission 
lasted forty days. 

This absence of their leader, in whom they reposed 
great confidence, might have resulted in great 
blessing to the Israelites had they been in a proper 
condition of heart. Altho, under the circumstances, 
forty days— nearly six weeks— would seem to be quite 



a considerable absence, without communication, it 
might have had the effect of impressing upon the 
minds of the people the fact that, after all, not Moses 
but God was their leader, and that he had merely used 
Moses thus far as his servant, and that if anything had 
befallen this servant the Lord, who had begun the 
good work of their deliverance, in fulfilment of the 
promises made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, was 
abundantly able to provide them another leader, and 
that nothing could have happened to Moses aside 
from divine foreknowledge and ability to prevent. 
This would have been a great lesson of faith and 
patience, beneficial to them for the remainder of 
life. But, instead, they had "an evil heart of unbelief," 
which quickly forgot the Lord's deliverance 
from the Egyptians, his leading through the Red 
Sea, the destruction of the hosts of Pharaoh in 
pursuit of them, the Covenant promise which he had 
just executed with them, and the manna which they 
were gathering daily; all these mercies of God were 
evidently underestimated— not fully and rightly appreciated, 
and their measurable unthankfulness and 
ingratitude became the basis of their fall into sin and 
idolatry, in gross violation of the covenant they had 
just made. 

Ingratitude toward God would naturally mean 
ingratitude toward the servant whom he had used for 
their deliverance; hence the disrespectful language in 
which they referred to their great deliverer as "this 

R3046 : page 221 

Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land 
of Egypt"— the man who was to lead us into the 
land of promise, and who now has gotten lost himself 
in the mountain. The wide difference between the 
character and disposition of Moses and that of the 
majority of the Israelites is shown by the fact that 
at this very time, while they were thus speaking 
lightly of him, Moses was importuning the Lord for 
them. The Lord made known to Moses in the 
mountain that Israel had gotten into serious sin, and 
by way of testing his fidelity as their appointed 
mediator, whose blood had typically sprinkled the 
people and thus pledged itself on their behalf, the 
Lord proposed to him the blotting out of the entire 
nation of Israel, and the taking of Moses as the 
seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the head of 
a new nation. But faithfully Moses had plead for 
those whom he represented. He thus showed himself 
a worthy type of the great Mediator of the New 
Covenant, Christ Jesus our Lord, who has made 
mediation for the sins of the people— reconciliation 
through his blood. 

The conduct of the Israelites in this matter shows 
up the weaknesses of the fallen human nature. They 



wanted to worship, and they desired to gratify this 
natural inclination in connection with fallen tendencies. 
They would worship God, but they would 
have an outward emblem or sign representing him— 
additionally, no doubt, they craved some gratification 
of lewdness and licentiousness, which were marked 
elements of the idolatrous worship of Egypt, with 
which for a long time they had been in contact. They 
appealed to Aaron, Moses' brother, as second in 
command of the host— telling him of their religious 
sentiments, their desires for worship, their need of 
some external sign or representation of God, and 
that this was the more necessary in view of the long 
absence of Moses and the possibility that he would 
never return to the leadership, and that the people 
must have something upon which to center their 
attention, either a living man representing God, or 
an idol, an image, representing him, etc., etc. The 
weakness of Aaron, in contrast with the strength of 
his brother Moses, is very markedly shown in this 
incident, and clearly exemplifies the wisdom of God 
in the choice of Moses to be the leader of the people, 
even tho at the outset the latter in meekness ignored 
his own abilities and suggested to the Lord his 
brother Aaron for the leader. 

Whether Aaron really entered into the spirit of 
the people, and concluded with the leaders who appealed 
to him that it would be the wisest thing to 
make the image, or whether he did it as an expedient 
to hold the people in check until Moses' return, by 
conceding the demands which he really did not 
approve, we are unable to determine. It is possible 
that his course in calling for the earrings, etc., was 
first of all with a view to dissuading the people from 
the course suggested, by making it cost them considerable 
sacrifice in the way of their personal 
adornments. It may be, too, that he trusted that 
during the time necessary to the engraving of the 
moulds, the melting of the jewels, and the moulding 
of the calf, Moses would appear and re-assume the 
leadership and command the people. However, whatever 
were his thoughts and motives, he displayed a 
weakness of character far from commendable, one 

R3047 : page 221 

which should teach all who providentially come into 
places of influence and power amongst God's people, 
that there is but one right way to do; namely, not 
to participate in sin— not to become a participator in 
wrong, but meekly yet firmly to stand up for principle, 
for righteousness, at any cost— leaving the results 
with the Lord without fear, knowing that he is the 
real Leader of the people, and that attempts to compromise 
with wrong would be at the expense of divine 
approval, and therefore too costly to be considered 



for a moment. 

The golden calf having been made, the next thing 
in order, of course, would be an altar for sacrificing 
to it, which accordingly was made, and then the 
program of a "feast to Jehovah." This shows that 
the idolatry here started was not different from the 
kind practiced today in Christian churches, where 
images, pictures, crucifixes, etc., are worshiped. 
Those who use these assure us that they do not 
worship the crucifixes, statues, etc., but merely use 
these as symbols or emblems of the Lord, and that 
their worship is to him. So evidently the Israelites 
were not worshiping the golden calf as being their 
god, but as merely to represent God; for the program 
which drew them together to the worship distinctly 
specified that it was a feast unto Jehovah— altho 
Jehovah did not acknowledge their feast nor accept 
the worship connected therewith, because it was in 
violation of the principles and regulations which he 
had enjoined. 

Full of religious fervor, the people arose early on 
the morning of the feast, offering to the Lord burnt 
offerings which he could not accept, and peace offerings 
under conditions upon which he could not be 
at peace. The burnt offerings were entirely consumed, 
but the peace offerings were eaten by the 
people, and constituted their feast. The day was 
given up to revelry; they sat down to eat and to 
drink, and rose up to play— dances and supposedly 
lewd conduct, after the manner of heathen,— professedly 
to the honor of God. It was at this juncture, at 
the close of the forty days, that Moses reappeared 
in their midst, and soon caused consternation by his 
proper and emphatic denunciation of the proceedings 
and of all who were instrumental in their inauguration. 
As he came down from the mountain he heard 
the shouts of the people, but discerned that they did 
not indicate either victory or dispute in warfare, but 
rather that they were voices of singing and revelry, 
and as he came in sight of the golden calf and the 
idolatrous worship, and realized how quickly and 
grossly the people had violated the divine command 
on the subject, he dashed the tables of the Law 
upon the rocks and broke them in fragments— 
symbolically thus intimating an illustration of the 
failure of Israel to keep the Law, and ultimately the 
complete failure of the Law Covenant, as we know 
it did fail in respect to Israel in general at our Lord's 
first advent. 

The revelers were disquieted by the appearance 
of the great commander and his indignant rebuke of 

R3047 : page 222 

their irreligious fervor. Aaron came in for his share 
of this, but promptly acknowledged his error, pleading 



as an excuse the demands of the people, his own 
weakness in the matter being too evident to require 
pleading. The one man stood up against a nation of 
two millions of people, denounced their sin, announced 
himself as being on the side of the Lord and 
thoroughly opposed to such infractions of his Law, 
and called upon such of the people as were on the 
Lord's side to desist from sin and come to his side 
in opposition to it. Altho overmastered and cowed 
in the presence of their God-appointed leader, the 
chief men of all the tribes except one seem to have 
resented Moses' reproofs. That one tribe was the 
tribe of Levi, typical of the household of faith from 
which the royal priesthood is now being selected. 
This tribe, altho to some extent led astray with the 
rest, and to some extent leaders, through Aaron, in 
the wrong course, was at heart on the Lord's side; 
and when the rebuke came and the Lord's will and 
way were clearly set before them through the 
Mediator, they promptly came to the side of the Lord 
on the question. The leaders of the other tribes were 
not ready to admit that their course was a wrong one, 
not willing to submit themselves promptly, and the 
result was the destruction of about three thousand of 
the leaders in the wrong way, and the full return of 
the remainder of Israel into harmony with the Lord 
and with acknowledgement of their transgression. 
On the next day after this punishment of the leaders 
Moses more fully explained to the people the enormity 
of their sin, and went up again into the mountain, 
for them, as their representative, to make an 
atonement for them with the Lord. 

This incident well illustrates the general tendency, 
more or less, of fallen man to substitute something 
of his own creation, either as instead of the Lord or 
in addition to the Lord, as an object of worship. 
The worship of the golden calf symbolizes or pictures 
in a general and very forceful way the worship of 
the mammon of wealth, of earthly riches, honor, 
influence, etc. At our Lord's first advent he found 
Israel nominally worshiping Jehovah, nominally very 
zealous of his worship, but really worshipers of 
mammon, worshipers of riches and honor of men, of 
dignities and titles, of place and position. The 
Pharisees, who were confessedly as well as professedly 
the most religious class of Jews at that time, the 
holiness people, our Lord accused of "covetousness— 
which is idolatry"— and in the Emphatic Diaglott 
translation this statement, "for they were covetous," 
is rendered, "for they were money-lovers." (Luke 16:14; 
Col. 3:5.) It was to the whole nation in general, 
and to the Pharisees in particular, that our Lord 
declared, "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon"— thus 
implying that they were worshipers of the Mammon 
of wealth in its various forms. Referring to one form 
of Mammon he again said to them, "How can ye 



believe who receive honor one of another, and seek 
not that honor which cometh from God only?" He 
referred to another form of mammon-worship, and 
the prevalent but erroneous thought that it was 
compatible with the worship of God, when he said, 
"Ye devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make 
long prayers," and he denounced such religion and 
mammon-worship as hypocrisy. The antitypical 
Mediator, who fulfilled the Law on behalf of true 
Israelites, and who declared that, so far as that people 
were concerned, the tables of the Law and the 
Covenant based upon them were broken,— dashed 
to pieces,— fully explained that their difficulty consisted 
in worshiping the golden calf, worshiping 
mammon, bowing down to the opinions of men, 
traditions of the elders; their love of the praise of men 
and titles, and honor of man, and their love of wealth, 
had to do largely with their reprehensible course in 
the sight of the Lord and their inharmony with their 
Mediator when he appeared. As Moses, the typical 
mediator, called for those who were on the Lord's 
side to come to him, so Christ called for all the 
"Israelites indeed," the household of faith, the Royal 
Priesthood, to come to him; and as there was in the 
type a destruction of the leaders of the remainder, 
so there came a time of trouble upon the remainder 
of the house of Israel which resulted in the complete 
overthrow of their national polity, the destruction of 
their city, etc. And as the typical mediator then went 
up into the mountain to make reconciliation for their 
sins, so Christ as the High Priest ascended to make 
atonement for the sins of the people. 

We may draw another lesson still closer to ourselves 
and in full harmony with the foregoing. We 
may remember that natural Israel and the first advent 
of our Lord were patterns of spiritual Israel and the 
second advent of Christ; that as he came to his own 
professed Israelites, yet found them unready to receive 
him, so at his second coming professed 
spiritual Israel, styled Christendom, will be equally 
unready to receive him; and that as he found only a 
remnant of the whole of natural Israel ready for the 
higher plane of the Gospel age, so in the end of this 
age he will find only a little flock in all ready for 
the higher plane of the Kingdom— ready for the 
change to glory, honor, immortality and joint-heirship 
with himself and participation in the Kingdom work. 
As this class was the stone of stumbling and rock of 
offense to literal Israel, that was but the foreshadowing 
of how the same class would be a stone of 
stumbling and rock of offense to spiritual Israel; as 
it is written, "He shall be for a stone of stumbling 
and rock of offense, to both the house of Israel." As 
the natural Israelites stumbled because they and their 
leaders were outwardly loyal to the Lord and his 
purposes, yet really were selfish and self-willed, and 



therefore not ready to receive him and to fall in line 
with his reproofs and corrections in righteousness, so 
likewise it will be with the leaders and the masses of 
nominal spiritual Israel at the second advent of the 
Lord; so that now, as with Israel, only a remnant will 
be found, only the Levites— on the side of the Lord; 
and the time of trouble which came upon natural 
Israel for its overthrow was typical of the great overthrow 
and great time of trouble, "such as was not 
since there was a nation," about to come on nominal 
Christendom for its complete overthrow as a social 
financial, political and religious institution. But following 
this trouble the antitype of Moses will have 
the full command, and will, indeed, lead the people 
through the wilderness, and altho during the Millennial 
age of their leading they will experience 

R3048 : page 223 

chastisements for their wrong-doing, these chastisements 

will be corrective rather than destructive, to 

the intent that they may learn well the lesson of our 

Golden Text, "Thou shalt have no other gods before 

me." 

We have seen that one of the principal difficulties 
in the way of Israel at the first advent was the fact 
that they were mammon worshipers. Is this also illustrative 
of the condition of nominal spiritual Israel 
at the present time? Is it, or is it not, true that nominal 
Israel of to-day blends the worship of God and the 
worship of Mammon? Is it, or is it not, true that 
while nominally worshiping Jehovah the vast majority 
are bowing down to the golden calf of wealth, honor 
of men, dignity, titles, etc., etc.? We fear that it is 
only too true that there never was a time when 
money, influence, power, and honors of men were 
more exalted or worshiped or more striven for than 
at present. We are not making wholesale condemnations, 
nor suggesting that no excuse or allowance 
should be made in this matter. On the contrary, we 
would claim that it is true of many to-day, as it was 
true of Aaron, that they are led, yea, almost forced, 
into the positions which they occupy in respect to the 
worship of Mammon, in respect to their obedience 
and servility to the popular sentiment— to the general 
craze for the worship of the golden calf; the worship 
of great human institutions; the worship of wealth; 
the worship of titles and influence, and the tendency 
to be identified with these and in some measure to 
share in the glory, both by contributing to and by participation 
in their revels. 

It is nearly nineteen centuries since the New Covenant 
was sealed with the precious blood of our Mediator, 
and he left his people and ascended up on high,— 
going up into the mountain, into the presence of God. 
His absence was longer protracted than had been expected, 



and meantime many of those who had trusted 
in him and waited for him and expected his coming 
again to lead his people into the land of promise, have 
ceased to expect him, and are claiming that he will not 
come again to lead and deliver them— are claiming 
that it is necessary that other leaders should take 
charge and deliver the people. The heads of the various 
parties in conference have decided, not that 
Mammon shall be to them instead of God, but that 
Mammon shall be the representative of God, to lead 
the people to success; that Mammon shall convert 
and civilize the world; that Mammon shall bring in 
for the groaning creation, in a natural way, the various 
blessings craved, and cause the earth to blossom 
as the rose. Meantime the leader whom God had 
appointed to bring the deliverance returns, is present. 
He is justly wroth and indignant at present conditions. 
He has set up his standard of truth and righteousness, 
and is even now standing at the gate of the 
camp, and is calling, as did Moses in the type, "Who 
is on the Lord's side? Let him come unto me! And 
all the sons of Levi gathered themselves unto him." 
(Exod. 32:26.) Let all who are truly the Lord's, however 
much they may have been entangled with the 
popular fallacies of our day, with its love of money 
and titles, its selfishness, love of honor of men, etc., 
—let all of the true-hearted be prompt to take their 
places on the Lord's side. Shortly the great time of 
trouble is to begin, which will mean the complete 
overthrow of all who uphold the worship of Mammon, 
however much they claim that it is really the 
worship and service of Jehovah. 

Moses as a Mediator showed himself grandly as a 
man, and beautifully typified the faithfulness of our 
Lord and Redeemer. How pathetic is Moses' plea— 
"If thou wilt forgive their sins—." He left the sentence 
incomplete, as tho it were beyond thinking that 
God could permit such an infraction of the Covenant 
he had just made. But Moses proceeds and expresses 
to the Lord his willingness, his preference, that if 
Israel's sin cannot be forgiven he also may be blotted 
out of the book of life. We exclaim, Noble man! 
Pure patriot! And we take to ourselves a lesson of 
unselfish devotion to others. But when we look from 
Moses the type, to Jesus the antitype we see the same 
lesson brought out in a still more pronounced form. 
The Mediator of the New Covenant realizing that it 
is impossible for God to forgive sin, to blot out sin, 
gave his own life as the redemption price for sinners. 
He actually did what Moses proffered to do and 
meant, for he gave not merely a prospect of life and a 
temporary existence such as Moses possessed, but he 
gave his all, with his rights to eternal life as a man, on 
our behalf. But tho the Father was pleased with his 
devotion— indeed, had foreseen it, and had made this 
arrangement for the cancelation of man's guilt and 



sentence of death, yet he purposed that the great 
Mediator of the Covenant, through whose blood- 
death— it was sealed, should not suffer everlasting extinction, 
but that on the contrary he would reward 
him for his nobility and devotion, both to men and to 
God's Law, by raising him from the dead to a still 
higher plane of life— to glory, honor and immortality. 
-Phil. 2:5-11. 

And as the Lord said to Moses, "Go now; and lead 
the people unto the place" designated, so he has appointed 
that our Mediator who has actually given his 
life for us and has received the new life with superior 
power and glory, should be the leader and the commander 
of the people, and bring whosoever of them 
wills back into full accord with God, back to the 
Edenic conditions, the land of promise. But as the 
Lord said to Moses in respect to the people and their 
sin, so it will be with mankind; viz., "Their sins shall 
be visited upon them." They will receive stripes or 
chastisements in proportion as they participated willingly 
or knowingly in a course of sin. So it will be 
during the Millennial age; altho the Lord will forgive 
the original sin, and remit its penalty of death, nevertheless, 
to whatever extent men have sinned wilfully, 
on their own account, against light and knowledge 
and opportunity, in that same proportion they 
are personally responsible, and will be obliged to suffer 
stripes of chastisements even while being brought 
by the Redeemer back from the plane of death to the 
plane of perfection, harmony with God and everlasting 
life. And those who will not profit by the lessons, 
who will not obey that great Teacher and Leader, the 
antitype of Moses, shall be "cut off from amongst the 
people," as the Lord has declared.— Acts 3:23. 



page 225 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL.XX111. AUGUST 1, 1902. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 227 

Laws of Nature vs. Laws of God 228 

Without Religion Man is Lost 229 

Higher Criticism Infidelity 

Reaching the Sunday School 230 

Who is He that Condemneth? 230 

The Desire of All Nations 

Shall Come 233 

Poem— "He Careth For You" 235 

Israel's Typical Tabernacle 235 

Nadab and Abihu Cut Off 237 

page 226 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 
than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the DAWNS at 25 cents each, 



cannot be for money -making: that it is merely another way of 
preaching the truth. No other religious books are sold at any 
such price. Indeed few subscription books sell for less than two 
to three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are invited 
to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 

MORE VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION. 

The friends are displaying great energy this year in the 
distribution of literature near Christian meeting places. We 
bid you all God-speed in this very effective preaching of the 
Gospel. Our first order for the special issues of our journal used 
this year was for 1,000,000 copies. Over one half of this quantity 
has already gone out to fill large requisitions and nearly 
200,000 are on back orders waiting for the papers as fast as the 
printers can supply them. We hope to get caught up very soon 
now, and request that those who have sent us small orders for 
mail shipment exercise just a little more patience. "Let 
patience have her perfect work." We have just issued 400,000 
more of these issues, so as to be ready for your later orders. 

Meantime let those who have not been engaged in this 
branch of the service enquire of themselves whether or not they 
can afford to miss so grand an opportunity for showing forth 
the praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his 
marvellous light. Do you know of and are you using a better 
method of preaching the truth? "He that reapeth receiveth 
wages [joy and peace and blessing in the present life even] 
and gathereth fruit unto everlasting life. 



R3048 : page 227 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

TROUBLE AMONGST METHODISTS. 

FOR MANY YEARS Rev. Agar Beet, D.D., 
has been theological tutor of Richmond College, 
England. Of him a prominent English 
journal says: "Dr. Beet occupies a unique position 
in Methodism. He is the only Methodist theologian 
today who has won a very great reputation outside 
his own denomination. His writings, particularly on 
the question of eschatology, have won a very wide 
circulation and have produced a profound effect in 
many quarters." Dr. Beet, it seems, got to studying 
the Bible and found in it nothing to support the common 
supposition that God has so constituted man 
that he can never cease to be. He has found it to 
teach, on the contrary, that everlasting life is God's 
gift through Christ to our dying race, and that a refusal 
of that gift would signify death— not life, in torment 
or otherwise: that "the wages of sin is death;" 
that "the soul that sinneth it shall die;" that "he that 
hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son 



hath not life, but the wrath of God [the curse— the 
sentence of death] abideth on him." 

Dr. Beet's crime consisted in teaching these Bible 
truths with which Methodist doctrines, like those of 
so many other "traditions of the ancients," conflict. 
To teach along these Biblical lines would quickly extinguish 
all the "fires of hell" which Methodists have 
poked so industriously for a century; it would relieve 
God of the charges of injustice and lovelessness 
and devilishness hurled against him by some of 
his fallen creatures who, nevertheless, know well 
that they are not so depraved as either to plan or 
work out such diabolical tortures; it would show up 
Methodism as well as other "isms" as slanderers of 
God in these respects, and would undermine confidence 
in the infallibility of their teachings, and send 
the people for instruction to the Bible instead of to 
creeds and catechisms of the dark ages and to other 
blind guides. 

The "Wesleyan Institution Committee" concluded 
that the foregoing grounds were quite sufficient for 
dropping Dr. Beet from the college faculty. There 
is plenty of room for Higher Criticism Infidelity and 
for anti-Scriptural evolution theories in all such institutions, 
but no room for the truth— the Bible 
must not be heard, for it, being the great antagonist 
of error, would speedily make havoc of the multitudinous 
errors developed in medieval times and duly 
labeled "Orthodoxy." In a defense of his position, 
published in The Methodist Times (London), Dr. 
Beet says: 

"During the last century Methodist opinion about the 
doom of the lost has completely changed. Very few Wesleyan 
ministers can now read Wesley's sermons on 'Hell' 
and on 'Eternity,' Nos. 73 and 54, without repudiating 
much of their teaching with indignation. Evidently the 
writer accepted on these topics current phraseology without 
duly weighing its meaning. But I notice that, when 
selecting fifty-three sermons as an embodiment of his distinctive 
teaching, Wesley did not include these sermons; 
and that, in the sermon on The Great Assize,' which he 
did include, there is very little which contradicts the 
teaching of my book. 

"This change of opinion has been carefully ignored. 
Many scholarly and godly ministers have nursed their 
doubts in silence, some under a sense of guilt for concealing 
their opinions, until the need for concealment has become 
to them a humiliating and intolerable bondage. In 
some cases, men have not dared even to think, lest the 
thoughts they dared not utter should make them the more 
conscious of their bondage. This doubt and fear are very 
widespread. There has been a retreat from the position 
held by our fathers, along the whole line; for the more 
part in darkness and solitude. Of all this, I have abundant 
and pathetic proof, some of which I am able to produce." 

A reviewer writing in one of the leading London 



dailies says on this subject:— 

"For my own part I have no quarrel with Dr. Beet on 
this matter. I presume that few men of intelligence and 
culture accept today the old dogma of eternal suffering 
which was preached with so much fervour forty or fifty 
years ago. Even the Wesley an Conference itself has expunged 
from its catechism the definite statements that 
once found so lurid an expression. I remember very well 

R3049 : page 228 

in the days of my childhood being asked the questions and 
giving the answers, both of which I had learnt from the 
catechism. 'What sort of place is hell?' Answer: 'Hell is 
a dark and bottomless pit full of fire and brimstone.' 
Question: 'How will the wicked be punished there?' Answer: 
'The wicked will be punished in hell by having their 
bodies tormented by fire, and their souls by a sense of the 
wrath of God.' Question: 'How long will those torments 
last?' Answer: 'The torments of hell will last for ever 
and ever.' These questions and answers were in a 
catechism designed, as was said on its title page, for 
children of tender years. I presume, therefore, that the 
Methodist Conference has changed its views on these particular 
questions, or these questions and answers would not 
have been expunged from their catechism. 

"In theory, however, there has been no change in 
Methodist doctrines or dogmas. The standards are the 
same today as at the beginning. Wesley's 'Fifty-three 
Sermons,' with his 'Notes on the New Testament,' remain 
the ultimate court of appeal. At the Synods Wesleyan 
ministers are still asked the old questions, and are expected 
to give an affirmative answer. Though there has 
been no change in Methodist dogmas or standards, there 
has been an unmistakable change in the character of 
Methodist preaching, and that change has been noticed, 
not so much in what has been said as in what has been left 
unsaid. Questions on which forty years ago, or even 
twenty years ago, Methodist ministers were emphatic, today 
they are very largely silent on, and this silence is not 
always because the ministers themselves feel in any doubt 
or uncertainty on the questions, but because it is not considered 
wise or prudent to stir up any kind of religious 
controversy. The gospel of expediency is very popular in 
most religious communions. 

"Dr. Beet, in his manifesto, says: This change of opinion 
has been carefully ignored. Many scholarly and godly 
ministers have nursed their doubts in silence, some under 
a sense of guilt' If this statement be true, it seems 
to me to show a lamentable lack of moral courage on the 
part of the ministers in question. It is sincerely to be 
hoped that none of these ministers preached what they 
had ceased to believe. I am afraid that the atmosphere 
of ecclesiastical communions generally is not favourable 
to the growth of courage or the development of an independent 
spirit. The dead hand of the ancient creed-makers 



is still upon us. 

"I am told that those who are anxious that Dr. Beet 
should no longer occupy the Professor's chair at Richmond 
College are very desirous of maintaining what they call 
'the purity of doctrine.' It is all very well to stand for 
'purity of doctrine,' if we only knew what purity of doctrine 
is. One, of course, can admire their zeal, and in some 
measure share their anxiety. But it seems to me that if 
we were one-half as anxious about purity of conduct as 
we are about purity of doctrine it would be very much better 
for the world. There are a hundred questions of doctrine 
on which we may disagree, and our disagreement 
will not affect by a hair's breadth the condition or the destiny 
of communities or of individuals.. ..We are horrified 
at what we call heresy, but we wink at drunkenness. 
We plunge the whole denomination into convulsions because 
a man dares to depart, even in the smallest degree, 
from what we conceived to be the standard set up a hundred 
and fifty years ago; and yet we allow publicans and 
brewers and Stock Exchange gamblers and company promoters 
and swindlers and oppressors to occupy prominent 
positions in the Church, to take the chair at missionary 
meetings, and lay foundation stones of churches and Sunday 
schools. 

Notwithstanding the fact that all nations have 
been made drunk with Babylon's wine of false doctrine 
(Rev. 17:2) we find the non-professors rather 
less intoxicated than are professing Christians and 
able to give some rather sound advice, as in the article 
just quoted. Thank God that the Millennial Morning 
is here and that it will not be possible to keep the 
world and the Church asleep, stupid, thoughtless 
much longer! The silver Jubilee trumpets are being 
sounded by the priests (of the "royal priesthood") 
announcing the Jubilee, and incidentally awakening 
all true Israelites to the fact that for a long time they 
have been subjects of "nocturnal halucinations" and 
horrible nightmares, without basis or reason. 

LAWS OF NATURE VS. LAWS OF GOD. 



The Christian, accepting the Bible as his standard 
of philosophy, long ago found himself in conflict with 
so called Science which, ignoring a personal and 
almighty God whose will controls Nature, defies Nature; 
places Nature's Laws high above all others and 
attempts to prove Nature to be her own Creator by 
evolutionary processes under the Laws of Nature. 
The followers of the Lord, Jehovah, recognize his 
right to control the universe and— both directly and 
through his Son and his apostles and others to so 
control Nature that winds and waves and demons 
and disease would obey. Those who believe in the 
miracles of the Bible neither deify Nature nor reverence 



its operations as unalterable laws, but they do, 

on the contrary, sanctify the Lord God in their hearts. 

It is pleasant to find a Scientist committing himself 
on these lines and renouncing his worship of 
Nature as a god. Prof. S. P. Langley, Secretary of 
the Smithsonian Institute, recently took this position 
in a paper read before the Philosophical Society 
of Washington. Among other things he said:— 

"It is perhaps a hard saying to most that there are no 
such things as 'laws of nature'; but this is the theme on 
which I have to speak. 

"These, then, are the laws of man's own mind, or the 
effects of his own mind, which he projects outside of himself 
and imagines to be due to some permanent and unalterable 
cause having an independent existence... 

"To decorate our own guesses at nature's meaning with 
the name 'laws of nature' is a presumption due to our own 
feeble human nature, which we can forgive for demanding 
something more permanent than itself, but which also 
leads us to have such an exalted conceit of our own opinions 
as to hide from ourselves that it is these very opinions 
which we call nature's laws. 

"The history of the past shows that once most philosophers, 
even atheists, thus regarded 'the laws of nature,' 
not as their own interpretations of her, but as something 
external to themselves, as entities partaking the attributes 
of Deity— entities which they deified in print with capital 
letters— as we sometimes do still, tho these 'laws' now are 
shorn of 'the glories of their birth and state' which they 

R3049 : page 229 

once wore, and are not turning out to be, 'substantial 
things.' 

"But are there not really things (like the fact of gravitation, 
for instance) external to ourselves, which would 
exist whether we were here or not, and which are part of 
the order of nature? Apparently, yes,— but part of the laws 
of nature, no ! 

"The present generation has begun, if not to be modest 
or humble, to be somewhat less arrogant in the assumption 
of its knowledge. We are perhaps beginning to understand, 
not in a purely poetical sense, but in a very real 
one, that there may be all around us, in heaven and earth, 
things beyond measure, of which 'philosophy' not only 
knows nothing, but has not dreamed. 

"As a consequence of this, there is growing to be an 
unspoken, rather than clearly formulated, admission that 
we know little of the order of nature, and nothing at all of 
the laws of nature.... 

"Let us repeat, and repeat once more, that tho nature 
be external to ourselves, the so-called 'laws of nature' are 
from within— laws of our own minds— and a simple product 
of our human nature. Let us agree that the scientific imagination 
can suggest questions to put to nature, but not 
her answers. Let us read Bacon again, and agree with him 



that we understand only what we have observed. Finally, 

let us add that we never understand even that, in the fulness 

of its meaning; for remember that of all the so-called 

laws of nature the most constantly observed, and most intimately 

and personally known to us, are those of life and 

death— and how much do we know about the meaning of 

them?... 

"The lesson for us is we must not consider that anything 
is absolutely settled or true." 

Ah yes! Now we know that they know that they 
don't know. Believers alone know the knowable 
things, and all else they leave to the all wise One in 
whom they trust. "Thy Word is Truth," and it is 
scientific from the standpoint of The Divine Plan of 
the Ages and from no other standpoint. 

"WITHOUT RELIGION MAN IS LOST." 



The Atheists of Berlin, a numerous body, are criticising 
the Kaiser for his pronounced religious tendencies and 
the publicity he is giving his views on the subject. They 
remind him that the ablest minds in Germany do not 
share his belief in a hereafter, that in proof of it the 
Berlinese are the least given to church attendance of any 
large city in the world, and that disbelief instead of hindering 
actually does more to advance the material well-being 

R3050 : page 229 

of the empire than Christianity has done or can do. 

The critics inveigh particularly against the royal pronouncement 

that a man whose life is not founded on religion 

is a lost man. This reasoning they contend belongs 

to the benighted centuries and is a reflection upon enlightened 

Germany of today. The address which has aroused 

this complaint was delivered last week in Posen. Here 

is the part objectionable to infidelity: "The German empire 

to-day is rooted in simplicity and fear of God. I look to 

all, priests and laymen, to help me uphold religion among 

the people, in its health and strength. This applies 

equally to the two creeds, Catholic and Protestant. 

"It is with pride and joy that I am able to tell you that 
the pope said to my special ambassador who went to Rome 
on the occasion of the Holy Father's jubilee that he had always 
had a high opinion of the piety of the Germans, and 
especially of that of the German army. The pope asked 
my ambassador to tell his sovereign that the one country 
in Europe where order and discipline still prevailed, with 
respect for authority and regard for the church, and where 
the church could live, was the German Empire, and for 
that the Papal See was indebted to the German Emperor. 

"This justifies me in saying that our two great creeds 
must, while living side by side, keep in view their one 
great aim— to uphold and strengthen the fear of God and 



reverence for religion. Whether we are 'moderns' or 
whether we labor in this or that field, does not matter at 
all. He who does not found his life on religion is a lost 
man. I rejoice that I have placed my whole empire, my 
people and my army, as well as myself and my house, beneath 
the Cross and under the protection of Him who said, 
'Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my word shall not 
pass away.'" 

We are living in a peculiar time in more respects 
than one. While the whole "religious world" is 
losing its faith in the Bible and accepting instead a 
belief in Evolution;— that Nature is our god which 
made us and is evolving us into higher conditions by 
some kind of "Laws of Nature"— and while doubt is 
growing respecting a personal Creator or any interest 
he takes in mankind;— at the same time each skeptical 
person seems more anxious than ever that the 
common people should maintain their respect for 
"religion." They care little what kind of religion- 
good or bad— so long as it has some fear, some terrors, 
connected with it that will restrain the common 
people. They realize that if the latter ever get to see 
matters in the same skeptical light in which the 
wealthy and educated view them it would mean a 
death knell to the present order of things social, political, 
financial and ecclesiastical. They want no 
change; realizing that any possible change would 
surely be to the detriment of their "interests." 

The Kaiser is one of the world's wise men; and 
it is for this reason that he throws his influence more 
and more toward Papacy which, he realizes, will 
hold its influence upon the "common people" longer 
than will Protestantism; because it has a firm grasp 
upon the reason and intellect of its votaries. This 
disposition is a growing one: Patronize every religion 
that will maintain superstition. 

We do not complain at this worldly wisdom, believing, 
as we have frequently stated, that the worst 
form of government is better than anarchy, and that 
even gross superstition has points of advantage 
over scoffing atheism. It is for this reason that we 
seek to avoid setting free with the truth those who 
would use their liberty as a license for evil doing. 

But in this general tendency we forsee some of our 
coming tribulations. As the Pharisees and rulers 
and Doctors of Law, in the harvest of the Jewish 
Age, were "grieved that they taught the people" and 
fearful that the truth would lead to dire calamities 
upon their nation, so we apprehend it will ere long 
be in this harvest of the Gospel Age. Not only will 
the nominal Church preachers feel jealous that their 
flocks should understand the Bible better than themselves, 
but civil rulers, public men, legislators, etc., 

R3050 : page 230 



will sympathize with and assist in suppressing anything 
that would "unsettle the faith" of Christendom. 

Poor fellows ! they do not realize that the people 
generally have almost no faith to unsettle; and that 
the vast majority are too indifferent to heed and 
search for and thus obtain the truth and too weak-kneed 
to stand up for it if they did see it. Nor do 
they know, as we do, that the Lord has so arranged 
it that— "None of the wicked shall understand but the 
wise shall understand."— Dan. 12:10. 

HIGHER CRITICISM INFIDELITY REACHING 
THE SUNDAY SCHOOL. 



Having conquered the college professors and 
through them the ministry, during the last twenty-five 
years, this latest form of Infidelity has permeated 
denominational literature and public school text 
books, and now the question is how to deal it out 
in the Sunday Schools wisely; i.e. how to insidiously 
introduce it to the young so as not to shock them and 
lead them to a total repudiation of Churchianity and 
all else built upon the Bible, and so as not to shock 
any of the parents who may still be "old-fogy" believers 
in the Bible's divine authorship. The ideas of 
one prominent in the preparation of the "sincere milk 
of the Word:" 

Rev. A. E. Dunning, D.D., editor of The Congregationalist 
and one of the International Committee on the Sunday 
school lessons, describes the situation as follows: 

"A widening chasm divides the teaching of the Bible 
in schools and colleges from its teaching in many Sunday 
schools. The accepted principles of the development of 
life and of the growth of literature, as taught in public 
schools, are being contradicted in Sunday schools, in the 
effort to defend theories of the creation of the universe 
and of the composition of the Bible which are contrary to 
known laws of the evolution of nature and of literature. 
The consequences of such opposing teachings are not difficult 
to predict. 

"The main conclusions of Biblical criticism are now 
accepted with practical unanimity by all scholars who have 
given attention to them. They have been reached by patient 
investigation, and have displaced traditional theories 
among educated people. 

Zion's Watch Tower cheerfully takes its place 
amongst the uneducated who refuse to accept the 
guesses, philosophies and conclusions of "science 
falsely so called" in contradiction to the testimony of 
"holy men of old who spoke and wrote as they 
were moved by the holy spirit,"— the Bible. All of 
Satan's attacks of the past have been weak and 
puerile as compared with this one,— this deflection, or 
revolution, rather, inside the ranks of those professing 



loyalty to God and the Bible. Our expectation is 
that it will spread with amazing rapidity, and constitute 
a part of the sifting of wheat from tares and 
chaff. And many will be surprised at the results 
unless forewarned by the voice of the Lord through 
his Word, that— "A thousand shall fall at thy side, 
ten thousand at thy right hand."— Psa. 91:7. 



R3050 : page 230 

WHO IS HE THAT CONDEMNETH? 

"No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every 
tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. 
This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their 
righteousness is of me, saith the Lord."— Isa. 54:17. 

WHAT A HERITAGE! What would one not 
give, sacrifice, to have this assurance which 
pertains not only to the life which now is, but 
goes far beyond, lays hold upon and blesses the eternal 
interests of all who attain this heritage. It is not 
applicable to one individual alone, but as declared, it 
belongs to all the servants of the Lord— every true 
spiritual Israelite may claim it, rest upon it and rejoice 
in it. 

Our text may to some extent be applicable to regathered 
and re-favored Israel after the flesh, in the 
near future when the Lord will fulfil to them all his 
good promises; but without question it belongs to 
spiritual Israel— new creatures in Christ Jesus, joint-heirs 
with him of the Abrahamic promises as the seed 
of Abraham.-Gal. 3:29. 

Spiritual Israel may sometimes feel as our Lord 
himself expressed the matter, "My God, my God, 
why hast thou forsaken me?" and may not always 
realize the object and necessity for some 
of the experiences through which the Lord 
permits Zion as a whole, and each individual 
Christian as her members or children, to 
pass; they may see that at times the Lord has apparently 
permitted the great adversary or his deluded 
servants to forge against them grievous weapons of 
destruction, and to assail them in health or in their 
social peace or financially; sometimes these weapons 
of the adversary have seemed to do terrible execution 
against them, and many may wonder how the Lord's 
good promise of our text is being fulfilled: "No 
weapon that is formed against her shall prosper." 

Many tongues have arisen against the Lord's Zion 
as a whole and against each member individually— 
tongues laden with the "poison of asps", tongues 
bitter with envy, malice, hatred and strife,— tongues 
which hesitate not to slander and misrepresent, to 



say all manner of evil falsely. And to a large extent 
these weapons and tongues have succeeded, have 
wrought havoc with the sheep, as also with the 
Shepherd; and God permitted it— he neither stopped 
the weapon nor stilled the tongue; and yet he assures 
us apparently to the contrary of this in our text. 
What is the true explanation of this situation? 

The explanation is that "Ye are not in the flesh, 
but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell 
in you"— ye are "new creatures" in Christ Jesus, "old 
things are passed away, behold all things have become 
new." (Rom. 8:9; 2 Cor. 5:17.) The weapons 
and tongues attempt to assail us as new creatures, 
but fail of this and merely do injury to the old 
creature— to the flesh, which we have already consecrated 
to death anyway. By helping to kill or to 
mortify the flesh, our adversaries are really helping 
us as "new creatures" instead of hindering us as 
designed. God thus turns what seems to harm us 
into everlasting joy and blessing. 

The context bears out this thought, declaring, "All 

R305 1 : page 23 1 

thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great 
shall be the peace of thy children." (v. 13.) Ah 
yes, these spiritual sons of God need the instructions 
of the Lord's Word in order to understand his dealings 
—in order to enable them to have the great 
peace here predicted. God's children in the school 
of Christ learn not their lessons all at once, but 
gradually, "Line upon line, precept upon precept, here 
a little, and there a little," by degrees they come to 
comprehend the exceeding great and precious promises 
of the Father's Word which unite in declaring 
that under his supervision "All things shall work 
together for good to them that love God— to the 
called ones according to his purpose"; this is a 
sufficiency for the beginning of faith and, therefore, 
a sufficiency for the beginning of the peace. As our 
instruction progresses we learn the philosophy of 
our experience— that by the trials and vicissitudes of 
this present life, by our warfare with the world, the 
flesh and the devil, by our strivings in this battle, we 
are forming characters in accord with righteousness; 
and, additionally, we learn that God seeketh such 
characters, and is thus developing us because he has 
for the world in general a great and wonderful plan 
of salvation not yet fully made known, in which he 
desires that the "elect" Church of this Gospel age 
shall be co-workers, joint-heirs with their Lord and 
Redeemer, as the royal priesthood under him, their 
Head,— the great Prophet, Priest and King so long 
promised, whose work shall be to overthrow the 
powers of evil, to bind the Adversary, to lift up and 
enlighten the world of mankind and to grant to every 



redeemed child of Adam a full, gracious opportunity 
of return to the Father's favor through obedience 
and restitution. 

When once the eyes of our understanding are 
opened to appreciate the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of our Father's plan, we see that 
the world of mankind are not in torture and hopeless 
misery, but are in the great prison house of death; 
we see that our Lord Jesus has by the grace of God 
tasted death for every man; and we see that it is on 
the strength of this redemption for the whole world 
by the one sacrifice of sin that the promise has gone 
forth that all shall be brought to a knowledge of the 
truth that they may be saved. From this standpoint 
everything becomes new; old fears and perplexities 
pass away, and the light of the knowledge of the 
goodness of God shining into our hearts, becomes 
more and more a transforming power therein,— 
changing us from glory to glory. And if we continue in 
this way it will eventually fit us for participation with 
our Redeemer in all this glorious Millennial work. 
We see that it is because of God's desires to have us 
thus members of his "elect" Church that he has 
favored us in advance of the world with the knowledge 
of his goodness and redeeming love, and that 
he has anointed us with his spirit and called us to 
this high, heavenly calling. Praise his name! 

As the teaching of the Lord to the Church belongs 
to the present time, so does the peace of those who 
are taught apply in the present time, and is in proportion 
to our readiness to receive instruction and 
come to a knowledge of God. Those who instructed 
by the divine Word have reached a large degree of 
knowledge of the divine character through the divine 
plan, may, should, must have the peace of God which 
passeth all understanding, ruling in their hearts. If 
they have not the peace they cannot have the joy of 
the Lord; and if they have not this, even under the 
present trying circumstances and conditions, it is 
because they have not been sufficiently taught of the 
Lord; and if they have been long in the school of 
Christ without this attainment, it is an evidence that 
they have not been giving the proper earnest heed 
to the Word,— it is an evidence that they have been 
following the traditions of men rather than inquiring 
for the old paths, the way of the Lord. Let us all 
take heed lest we let slip those things which we have 
heard, remembering that the earthen vessels in which 
we have the treasure of the new mind are leaky, and 
that this necessitates our keeping near to the fountain 
spring— near to the Lord, near to his Word and, 
hence, near to all others who are close to the Lord 
and to his Word. 

The context further declares respecting this class 
under consideration, "In righteousness shalt thou 
[the godly] be established; thou shalt be far from 



oppression, for thou shalt not fear; and from terror, 

for it shall not come near thee." (vs. 14.) This also 

applies to the present life and not to the life of glory. 

Those who are not established in righteousness now 

will not be accounted worthy to be sharers in the 

first resurrection, respecting which it is written, 

"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection. 

Righteousness, justice, must be the 

foundation of every character acceptable to God: 

as justice is the foundation of the Lord's throne, 

so it is the foundation of all with which he has 

to do; and if we are his it must be the 

sub-stratum of our Christian character. We 

must learn to be just before we are generous; we 

must learn that while love may call for sacrifices, duty, 

obligation calls for justice first. In the blindness and 

darkness which came to us from the dark ages, before 

the anointing of our eyes with the eyesalve of truth 

from the words of the Lord and his apostles— when 

in our blindness we conceived of God as unjust and 

unloving because of misrepresentation of his plan, we 

had so low an ideal before our minds that we found 

it easy to excuse injustice or cruelty or selfishness, 

since, according to our false standard and misconceptions 

of God, he was the exemplar of all this. The 

Lord undoubtedly had mercy upon us on account of 

our ignorance and blindness; but now since he has 

opened the eyes of our understanding, has shown us 

his own justice and his own boundless love, and since 

we are seeking to copy these, there is no longer room 

for us to excuse unrighteousness or injustice in our 

hearts. It may require time to bring every word and 

act and thought into harmony with the new mind 

instructed from the Word;— we may never succeed 

to our own satisfaction in this matter in our present 

life, because of the weaknesses of the flesh through 

which our wills must operate; but we can at least 

make strong effort, and by the Lord's assisting grace 

R3051 : page 232 

accomplish great things in righteousness, not only 
of intention, but in righteousness of thought, of 
judgment, of conduct. 

This righteousness in which the Lord's children 
are to be established, is further explained by the 
statement, "Thou shalt be far from oppression, for 
thou shalt not fear." As we look back into the dark 
ages we see that it was full of oppression practiced 
in the name of the Lord and in the name of righteousness 
and in many cases, undoubtedly, practiced 
conscientiously. In all good conscience men oppressed 
one another because of their fears, their false 
theories declaring that the Lord was about to torture 
to all eternity all who did not accept a certain theory 
of belief, and it seemed to them the veriest kindness 



to inflict torture by thumbscrew, rack and stake for 
the correction of heretics— with a view to saving 
them possibly from an eternity of suffering; and with 
the view also to hinder them from misleading others 
to such an awful eternity. This oppression, this 
cruelty, was the result of fear, and the fear was the 
result of misunderstanding of God's character— because 
they were taught of men and not taught of the 
Lord, as the Prophet declares, "Their fear toward 
me is taught by the precept of men."— Isa. 29:13. 

As the light of the truth comes into our hearts 
giving us a true knowledge of the Lord, instructing 
us as his children, perfect love casts out fear, and 
proportionately it casts out superstition and intolerance 
and oppression, as the Prophet here declares. 
The Lord's people are to love religious liberty for 
themselves and are correspondingly to grant the same 
to all others. "Thou shalt be far from oppression, for 
thou shalt not fear." This class will be anxious to 
set men free, not anxious to enslave them. On the 
other hand the declaration is, "Thou shalt be far from 
terror, for it shall not come near thee;" the Lord's 
people ought to be the most fearless people in the 
world as respects earthly disasters and calamities; 
taught of the Lord they have learned that there is 
only one being who needs to be feared— the one 
who has the power to destroy the soul. They do 
indeed fear to displease or offend him; and yet, having 
learned of his goodness, mercy and love, they do not 
fear him in the ordinary sense of the word, but rejoice 
in him, confide in him, trust him as a child trusts a 
father, and this confidence grows in proportion as 
they are taught of the Lord— in proportion as they 
learn to trust, both from the Word of the Lord and 
from his providences, his dealings with them. 

The text further shows that there will be not only 
individual oppositions to be encountered, but that 
Zion as a whole will be assailed by foes; as we read, 
"Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not 
by me; whosoever shall gather together against thee 
shall fall for thy sake." (vs. 15.) Wonderful words 
of consolation! We cannot at present judge to what 
extent this may have a fulfilment not many years 
hence, when there shall be a general gathering together 
of opponents to the truth and its servants. 
Already there have been various combinations instigated 
by the adversary, and they have all come to 
naught. They have really harmed none because it is 
impossible to injure the very elect. They have indeed 
caused the stumbling of some, and heartaches to 
many, yet, nevertheless, under the Lord's providence 
they have worked out deeper and richer experiences 
in all who were in the proper attitude of heart to be 
thus taught. 

R3052 : page 232 



"Nearer my God to thee, 

E'en though it be a cross that raiseth me." 

The assurance here given is nothing but what we 
might reasonably know when we consider the Lord's 
own declaration, "So shall my word be that goeth 
forth out of my mouth; it shall not return unto me 
void, but shall accomplish that which I please, and 
shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." (Isa. 55:11.) 
So surely as our Heavenly Father has purposed 
the blessing of all the families of the earth 
through the seed of Abraham, just so surely it will 
be accomplished. And as the power of the Adversary 
raised against our Lord Jesus and the weapons 
formed against him, and which smote him down in 
death prevailed for a time, yet were merely so much 
of the outworking of the foreknown divine plan, so 
all of the machinations of the Adversary and the 
oppositions of the world and the flesh as well, cannot 
hinder the development of the various members of 
the body of Christ who, as the Heavenly Father 
has predicted, are to be joint-heirs with his Son in 
the Millennial Kingdom of blessing. 

The Word of the Lord declares that even those 
who crucified the Master, and who, in their conscientious 
conviction that they were doing right, said, "His 
blood be upon us and upon our children"— these are 
all yet to be the subjects of divine mercy in due time; 
because as the Apostle Peter declares that they 
did it "through ignorance." (Acts 3:17.) The Lord 
foretells the time that they shall look upon him whom 
they have pierced, and shall all mourn because of him; 
and he foretells, too, that at that time so far from 
crushing them or torturing them, he will favor them 
by pouring upon them the spirit of prayer and 
supplication.— Zech. 12:10. 

It is a different matter, however, when those who 
"have been enlightened and have tasted of the good 
Word of God and of the powers of the age to come 
and have been made partakers of the holy spirit," 
shall become accusers of the brethren, adversaries, 
persecutors. No blessings are promised to these; 
but the declaration is that "It were better for him 
that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he 
were cast into the sea." Judas was an ensample of 
this class in his day; of him the Master said in love 
and in sorrow,— not in anger,— "It were better for 
that man had he never been born"— his life has been 
more than wasted. It is not our thought that the 
Lord will have torments for these in the future, but 
rather that they die the Second Death, and that in 
some manner they receive retribution in the present 
life as did Judas. 

But he that is one of the Lord's people, possessed 
by his spirit, could not be a persecutor or opponent of 
the brethren,— none surely except those who become 



poisoned with the adversary's covetous disposition, 

R3052 : page 233 

with the desire for self-exaltation. No wonder that 
the Lord cautioned us against this sin of covetousness 
under which Satan originally fell, by which Mother 
Eve was seduced from loyalty to the Lord, and by 
which Judas and various other enemies of the Lord 
have been mislead. Let us be more and more on 
guard against it. Let others do what they will- 
whatever the Lord may permit— as for us, let us say 
with the Apostle, "we can do nothing against the 
truth, but for the truth"— all of our energies and 
powers must be enlisted on the side of the Lord and 
on the side of all those who are his. Not a finger 
dare we move, not a whisper dare we utter injurious 
to the members of the body of Christ, of whom the 
Lord declares, "No weapon formed against thee shall 
prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee 
in judgement, shalt thou condemn." 

WHO IS HE THAT CONDEMNETH? 

The closing words of our text remind us of the 
language of the Apostle (Rom. 8:31-39), "If God be 
for us, who can be against us?"— who can prosper 
against us, who can accomplish anything against us? 
That God is for us is already manifested in that he 
spared not his own Son, but redeemed us with his 
precious blood; and in that he has called us in Christ 
Jesus to be his "elect" Church, his Bride. "Who 
shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It 
is God that justifieth." In harmony with this, our 
text declares of these servants of the Lord, "Their 
righteousness is of me, saith the Lord." Some may 
endeavor to condemn them and may indeed succeed 
in finding fault with them for having imperfect judgments, 
and being sometimes imperfect in their conduct 
or words; but what will it matter that such 
should condemn those whom the Lord approves? 
The Lord informs us that he knows our imperfections 
better than any could know them; but that of his 
own grace he has provided a covering for our unintentional 
blemishes through the merit of the sacrifice 
of his Son. Who then shall succeed in condemning 
these whom God approves, whom God justifies, whom 
God declares to be right and acceptable to him 
through Jesus Christ? Others may claim that they 
are actually as nearly perfect as some of the faithful 
"elect," but the difference is that whereas God must 
reject all to any degree blemished, these have the covering 
of his Grace in Christ and are accepted according 
to their intentions and endeavors; and, therefore, they 
shall be able to stand, for he is able to make them 
stand in their testing or judgment.— Rom. 14:4. 



Let us as members of the house of Sons, accepted 
in the Beloved, take from our Father's Word in this 
text the strong consolation which he intends it should 
give us. Let our faith triumphantly sing, and our 
joy and rejoicing in the Lord know no bounds. 
According unto our faith it will be unto us. But 
while it will be on account of our faith that the Lord 
will approve of us, accept us, and bless us, he has, 
nevertheless, assured us in advance that where the 
tree of faith exists and grows, the character development, 
the fruitage of the faith will surely also abound, 
and that thus by our works (imperfect though they be) 
we shall give evidence of the faith that is in us. Such 
a living faith may well cause rejoicing in the house 
of our pilgrimage, with this assurance that even the 
machinations of our enemies shall work out for us 
blessings, under our Heavenly Father's supervising 
care, wisdom, love and power. 



R3052 : page 233 

THE DESIRE OF ALL NATIONS SHALL COME. 

"For thus saith the Lord of hosts: Yet once [more] it is a little while 
and I will shake the heavens and the earth and the sea and the dry land. 
And I will shake all nations and the Desire of all Nations 
shall come; and I will fill this house with glory, 
saith the Lord of hosts."— Hag. 2:6,7. 

HERE IS ONE of the richest promises in the 

blessed Word of God. It is the gospel in a 

nutshell— the gospel of grace to the world 

and of glory to the Church; and it is signed at both 

ends with the signature of the Sovereign of the universe, 

Jehovah of hosts. It was thus uttered by the 

mouth of one of his holy prophets— Haggai. But 

though with the other writings of the prophets it was 

held sacred as the Word of the Lord and reverently 

read by his anciently chosen people, fleshly Israel, 

their understanding of it fell far short of its true significance; 

and not until the holy Spirit was given as 

a comforter, a guide into all truth and a revealer of 

things to come (John 14:26; 16:13), was the precious 

import of this declaration of Jehovah made manifest 

to his saints (the gospel Church), as it has been 

through his holy apostles and prophets.— Eph. 3:5. 

Fleshly Israel thought they saw in this declaration 
an intimation of the exaltation and universal dominion 
of their nation, the fall of the Persian 
kingdom and the subserviency of all other nations to 
them, and that the house of Israel, thus exalted and 
enthroned above all the nations, would be filled with 
the glory of the Lord and recognized by all the world 
as God's specially chosen and honored people— a holy 



nation and a royal priesthood. With such a hope in 
view they diligently and cheerily worked to rebuild 
the ruined temple and to repair the fallen walls of 
Jerusalem after the decree of the Persian monarch, 
Cyrus, granted them liberty to return from captivity. 
But centuries rolled on; the Persian empire fell but 
Israel's glory still tarried; for they only passed from 
under the dominion of Persia to that of Greece, and 
then of Rome; and then, as a nation scattered and 
peeled, they were driven out of the land of their 
fathers— the land of divine promise— and scattered 
among all nations and persecuted among them all 
unto this day. 

What then? has God's promise failed? or has he 
forgotten it? No; for the Apostle Paul, under the 
leading of the holy Spirit, calls it to mind again (Heb. 12:26-28) 
and shows that the house which is to be 
thus filled with the glory of the Lord is not the 
fleshly house or kingdom of Israel, but the spiritual 
house or kingdom of God— the Gospel Church. 

The shaking of the earth mentioned in this text 

R3052 : page 234 

presupposes a former shaking, and this one is shown 
to be the last. The former shaking was that typified 
in the quaking of the earth at the giving of the law at 
Sinai; for under the law, says the Apostle, every 
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense 
of reward, and at various intervals the 
nation was thoroughly shaken and sifted by captivities 
and otherwise, that only the loyal and true might 
remain. (See Hebrews 12:25,26; 2:2; 3:17; 10:28.) 
But this last shaking is to be a greater shaking than 
fleshly Israel ever experienced; it is to be a shaking 
of the heavens [symbol of the ruling power] and the 
earth [all organized and law-abiding society] and the 
sea [the lawless and anarchistic elements] and the 
dry land [the established aristocracy of wealth and 
social independence]. And it is to be a shaking, not 
only of one nation, but of all nations— "And I will 

R3053 : page 234 

shake all nations." Surely this predicted shaking of 
all nations is but a repetition of the prophecy of 
Daniel (12:1) of a great time of trouble such as 
never was since there was a nation. 

But the Apostle Paul gives us the comforting 
assurance that "This word, yet once more, signifieth 
the removing of those things that are shaken, that 
the things that cannot be shaken may remain." And 
he further shows (Heb. 12:28) that that which will 
remain after the shaking, and which cannot be 
moved, will be the kingdom of God, which we shall 
inherit if we prove worthy— i.e., if we stand all the 



tests and shakings and cannot be shaken out. 

The Apostle, in stating that the kingdom of God 
—the true Church, the elect— cannot be shaken, 
thereby intimates that it shall not be exempted from 
those blasts that shall shake and utterly remove all 
other organizations, but rather that the true, elect 
Church shall not be moved by them. Her foundation 
is sure. "God is in the midst of her, and she 
shall not be moved." (Psa. 46:5.) As a matter of 
fact, we find ourselves today in the midst of these perilous 
and disintegrating influences. The storm is 
rising, and, as predicted, it is felt first by the Lord's 
little flock of consecrated believers. Their faith and 
patience and zeal and endurance are being tried by 
every means that the adversary can devise. Every 
device of error is being put forth in its most pleasing 
and subtle form; and advantage is being taken of 
every weakness of the flesh to overcome those who 
are endeavoring to fight the good fight of faith and 
to overcome the world, the flesh and the devil. 

And when we consider that "we wrestle not with 
flesh and blood, but against principalities, and powers, 
and against the rulers of the darkness of this world, 
against spiritual wickedness in high places" (Ephesians 6:12), 
we realize that the contest is a very 
unequal one unless we lay hold upon the strength 
which God supplies to us through Christ. 

The Apostle's language further intimates that 
since only that which cannot be shaken will remain and 
will inherit the kingdom, all others will fall. And in 
this light the words of the Psalmist— "A thousand 
shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right 
hand"— are seen to be no exaggeration. Nor should 
the faithful few be at all dismayed when the various 
shakings sift out their number; for so it must be 
until only that which cannot be shaken shall remain. 
Thus the whole nominal church, both within and outside 
the various organizations, must be shaken until 
only the true and faithful remain; for God will gather 
out of his kingdom all things that offend.— Matt. 13:41. 

But this shaking is permitted, not only to sift out 
of the Church all shakeable things, but it is to extend 
to all the nations; and so unprepared are they for 
the storm that is coming, and so unable to resist it, 
that the Apostle, with prophetic foresight, declares 
that their shaking signifies their removal (Heb. 12:27); 
and further, that their removal is not in order 
that anarchy may prevail, but in order that the kingdom 
of God, which cannot be shaken, may take their 
place. 

Thank God for the prospect of an unshakeable 
kingdom, whose kings shall reign in righteousness 
and whose princes shall decree justice (Isa. 32:1; Prov. 8:15), 
and under whose dominion the whole earth 
shall be at rest. (Isa. 14:7.) This is the kingdom 
which the Prophet declares will indeed be "the desire 



of all nations," when it is once established and its 
blessings begin to be realized by the world. Yes, 
truly "the desire of all nations shall come"— with 
blessings of life and health and peace and prosperity 
and good government. It is for this coming kingdom 
and its blessings that the whole creation groans 
and travails together in pain, waiting for the adoption, 
viz., "the redemption of our body"— the body of 
Christ, the heirs of the kingdom. (Rom. 8:22.) As 
soon as this body is all selected, fitted and tested, 
then the kingdom will be established and the desire 
of all nations will have come— the long desired peace 
and prosperity which every experiment of their own 
will have failed to secure. And doubtless every 
possible experiment will have been tried and proved 
futile before that time; the last, that of socialism, 
ending in universal anarchy. 

It is this body of Christ, this spiritual house of 
Israel, which, though lashed by many a storm, nevertheless 
"cannot be shaken," because it is firmly 
founded upon the Rock Christ Jesus: it is this house 
that Paul calls "the temple of God" (I Cor. 3:16; 6:19) 
that is to inherit the kingdom of God, and that 
Jehovah says he is going to fill with his glory. 

He will fill it with the glory of the divine nature: 
he will make every member of it like unto Christ's 
glorious body: he will endue them with power from 
on high to execute faithfully all of the divine purpose 
for human restitution, and for the establishment of 
universal harmony and peace. Praise the Lord for 
such a prospect for both the Church and the world. 
May its inspiration be felt by every devoted heart, 
and its warning be heeded by every one who feels to 
any degree inclined to be unstable. Take unto you 
the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand 
unshaken in the midst of the storms of this evil day, 
and be counted worthy to be a living stone in that 
glorious temple of God, now shortly to be filled with 
his glory, and to be an heir of that kingdom which 
cannot be moved, and which shall indeed be the 
desire of all nations. 

R3053 : page 235 

"HE CARETH FOR YOU." 

"Casting all your care upon him; 
for he careth for you."— I Peter 5:7. 

"What can it mean? Is it aught to him 
That the nights are long and the days are dim? 
Can he be touched by the griefs I bear, 
Which sadden the heart and whiten the hair? 
Around his throne are eternal calms, 
And strong, glad music of happy psalms, 
And bliss unruffled by any strife. 



How can he care for my poor life? 

"And yet I want him to care for me, 
While I live in this world where the sorrows be; 
When the lights die down on the path I take; 
When strength is feeble, and friends forsake; 
When love and music, that once did bless, 
Have left me to silence and loneliness; 
And life-song changes to sobbing prayers- 
Then my heart cries out for a God who cares. 

"When shadows hang o'er me the whole day long 

And my spirit is bowed with shame and wrong; 

When I am not good, and the deeper shade 

Of conscious sin makes my heart afraid; 

And the busy world has too much to do 

To stay in its course to help me through, 

And I long for a Saviour— can it be 

That the God of the universe cares for me? 

"Oh wonderful story of deathless love! 
Each child is dear to that heart above: 
He fights for me when I can not fight; 
He comforts me in the gloom of night; 
He lifts the burden, for he is strong; 
He stills the sigh, and awakens the song; 
The sorrow that bowed me down he bears, 
And loves and pardons, because he cares. 

"Let all who are sad take heart again. 
We are not alone in our hours of pain; 
Our Father stoops from his throne above 
To soothe and quiet us with his love. 
He leaves us not when the storm is high, 
And we have safety, for he is nigh. 
Can that be trouble which he doth share? 
Oh, rest in peace, for the Lord does care!" 



R3053 : page 235 

ISRAEL'S TYPICAL TABERNACLE. 

-EX. 41:13.-AUGUST 3.- 

"Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and 
into his courts with praise."— Psalm 100:4. 

WE CANNOT DO JUSTICE to this lesson 
here; nor is it necessary. We refer our 
readers to the booklet, "Tabernacle Shadows 
of Better Sacrifices,"* which a majority of them 
already possess, and which we believe has been very 
helpful to the Lord's people,— deepening the work of 
grace in their heart by its explanations of the riches 



of divine grace already bestowed upon us and those 
yet future, illustrated in Israel's typical tabernacle 
and its typical arrangements, sacrifices, etc. 

Incidentally we guard our readers against certain 
misapplications which, from contemporary reviews of 
the lesson, we may infer to be quite common. The 
tabernacle and its court, etc., were not, as many suppose, 
a church edifice, or place of worship for Israel. 
An ordinarily able minister and writer wholly misrepresents 
the tabernacle and its services as follows: 

"Suppose yourself approaching the Tabernacle at some 
desert camping place. ...It is a brilliant sight; 
the white hangings of the court contrast with the dark 
coverings of the tabernacle within. The gorgeous entrance 
curtain is looped up, for the Court is full of worshipers 
bringing sacrifices. White-robed priests are burning offerings 
at the large bronze altar in the center, while another 
is using the sacred laver near the Tabernacle entrance 
preparatory to entering. The many-colored curtain is here 
looped back on its golden pillars. From within we catch 
a gleam of the golden table and exquisitely wrought lampstand, 
while a fragrance of rare incense floats out upon 
us. Deep in the recesses of the Holy Place we can see the 
resplendent curtain, and we tremble as it seems almost 
luminous with the shining of the Shekinah behind it. All 
is so reverently silent that we hear the chime of bells on 
the high-priest's garment as he moves forward, and, turning, 
we read above his beautiful robes and glittering 
breast the crown and meaning of it all, "Holiness to the 
Lord." 

Quite to the contrary of this description, the Israelites 
in general were not permitted within even 
the outermost of the Tabernacle enclosures, the 
Court. Nor could they see over the high linen curtain 
which enclosed it, nor directly see through its 
doorway, which was behind a "gate" of heavy curtains. 
Only the tribe of Levi, consecrated to the 
Lord's service, was permitted inside this enclosure in 
the Court, and of these only the one priestly family, 
consisting at first of the five persons, Aaron and his 
four sons, were permitted to enter the Tabernacle 
proper, whose curtains, so far from being looped up 
about the gold-covered pillars, so as to permit the 
Levites to see the candlestick, tables, etc., were kept 
down, with the very object of hindering them from 
seeing anything within. And that they might not 
seek to look in when the officiating priests lifted the 
curtain and passed under it, a divine law was promulgated 
forbidding them to look, and prescribing a 
penalty of death for disobedience.— Num. 4:19,20. 

All of this has a deep significance in connection 
with the proper understanding of the meaning of 
these types. As the Court represented the condition 
of justification through faith in the sacrifice for sins 
in the atonement accomplished by the high-priest, so 
its brazen altar represented primarily the perfection 



of the man Christ Jesus, upon which his offering was 
accepted of God, as our sin-atonement, sanctifying in 
turn any offering of others that might be presented 
upon it. Likewise the laver taught in type a cleansing 
of the flesh, and a putting away, so far as 
possible, of all filthiness of the flesh and spirit on the 
part of those in the justified condition as preparatory 
to their entering the Tabernacle itself. As only the 
priests were permitted to enter the Tabernacle, or 



*Price 10c. each; 50c. per doz— free to those too poor 
to pay, upon postal card application. 

R3054 : page 236 

even to see its glories and beauties, the teaching is 

that as the Court represents one condition, the 

"Holy" represents another, and the "Most Holy" still 

another condition. As the priests, before being consecrated 

to the priestly office, must be Levites, so 

those who would be of the Royal Priesthood must 

previously have been justified believers, otherwise 

they would not be acceptable as members of the 

Royal Priesthood. Their entrance as priests into the 

Holy symbolizes their change of nature— from justified 

human nature to that of "new creatures," begotten 

of the spirit. The Holy represents the state 

or condition of these new creatures in this present 

life, while still in the flesh, and only reckonedly new 

creatures, while the Most Holy represents their 

future state or condition, in which they will be perfected 

as new creatures by participation in the first 

resurrection— beyond the "Vail." 

Our Forerunner, the "High Priest of our profession," 
or order, passed through the Court condition 
as the perfect man, presenting himself in consecration 
when thirty years of age; and then passed 
from the Court condition into the Holy, the sanctified 
or new creature condition, when begotten of the 
holy spirit. The three and a half years of our Lord's 
ministry are represented in the Holy of the Tabernacle; 
and as the First Vail represented his consecration 
to death, so the Second Vail represented 
his actual death, beyond which he arose in the perfect 
spiritual condition— the Most Holy. In all this 
he was the Forerunner of those who will constitute 
the Royal Priesthood, his house, the members of his 
"Body." We by nature are sinners, and hence must 
enter the Court condition of justification through 
faith in our Lord's sacrifice; we must be cleansed 
from the defilements of the flesh, so far as possible, 
through the word spoken unto us, represented in 
the washing at the Laver; and then we must make 
our consecration full and complete, represented by the 



Vail at the door, if we would enter thus into the 
Holy, enjoy the privileges typically represented in 
the light of the Golden Candlestick and the Shewbread 
and the Incense Altar, which signify the light, 
the truth, and the spiritual privileges, praises, prayers 
and communion which we have with the Lord as 
members of the body of Christ, this side the Second 
Vail. And for all who shall finish their course faithfully 
and joyfully, there remains beyond the Second 
Vail of actual death a glorious share in our Lord's 
resurrection to perfect spiritual conditions, to be partakers 
of the divine nature and to behold his glory in 
the first resurrection. 

The natural man, even tho justified, represented 
by the Levite, cannot see into, cannot discern, cannot 
appreciate, cannot enjoy, the privileges of the consecrated. 
He can hear through the priests some description 
of the glorious things beyond, but he cannot 
fully comprehend them or see their beauty— 
except by becoming a priest— by consecration, by 
self-sacrifice to the Lord. 

The same expositor whom we quoted above, errs 
again, as follows:— 

"Christian ministers continue the Tabernacle service 
of Aaron and his sons, pointing men to Christ, leading men 
in prayer, and inciting them to offer their bodies a living 
sacrifice. They are to be revered as standing in this noble 
succession." 

We fear there are many ministers in the nominal 
church who have neither part nor lot in the Royal 
Priesthood. Many of them confess that they are 
not even Levites, not even in the Court condition, 
when they acknowledge that they disbelieve the 
Scriptural teaching of man's fall into sin and the 
atonement for his sin effected by the great High 
Priest— when they claim, on the contrary, that there 
was no fall and no need of a redemption, but that 
man has reached his present plane of intelligence by 
a process of evolution. These evolutionists, of whom 
there are many in the nominal church ministry, are 
not in the Court condition of justification, nor have 
they any right or standing there. They are not even 
of the Levite class, the household of faith; consequently, 
they could not be of the priestly class. 

Altho many others of the ministers of the nominal 
church, as well as of the laity, have reached 
the position of justification through faith in the 
Lord's redemptive work, and altho some of them have 
washed at the brazen laver, purifying their lives 
through the Word of truth, yet comparatively few 
have gone on to take the step of full consecration 
necessary to their becoming members of the Royal 
Priesthood— necessary to their having the right to 
enter into the Holy, to discern the glorious truths 
represented therein, "the deep things of God," which 
can be seen only in the light coming from the Golden 



Candlestick, symbolizing the enlightenment of the holy 
spirit. But if the word "ministers" be used in the 
Scriptural sense, as signifying servants— persons devoted 
to the service of God, consecrated to do his 
will even unto death, then the term "minister" will 
be applicable, not only to those of this class who do 
public preaching, but to those of this class also who 
with different talents are serving the Lord and laying 
down their lives for the brethren in other ways 
public and private. 

Human systems, misnamed churches of Christ, 
have raised false standards on the subjects of the 
priesthood, and have separated God's people contrary 
to his arrangement, into "clergy" and "laity." 
Very shortly now the Lord will show how different is 
the divine standard of measurement; for surely then 
will be demonstrated what our Lord and the apostles 
explicitly declared, that "not many wise men after 
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are 
called" and accepted into his priesthood; but chiefly 
"the poor of this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of the 
Kingdom."— I Cor. 1:26; Jas. 2:5. 

Amongst the Lord's priests will be found some 
very lightly esteemed amongst men, some who have 
been mechanics or farmers or laborers or housekeepers, 
but whose hearts were fully devoted to the Lord, 
and whose ministry consisted in doing with their 
might whatsoever their hands found to do, as unto 
the Lord— doing good unto all men as they had opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith- 
laying down their lives for the brethren. When the 
lists shall be proclaimed doubtless the names of many 
highly esteemed amongst men, the names of many 

R3054 : page 237 

great and noble and wise and learned, honored of 
men and expected to be honored of the Lord, may 
be found wanting; because, in their love for the approval 
of men they sought not exclusively the honor 
which cometh from God only— because either of 
their failure in not exercising the proper faith in the 
ransom, or because of their failure to exercise the 
proper consecration,— devotion of their lives to the 
Lord's service. 

It is to this priestly class that the Golden Text is 
applicable. Their thankfulness to the Lord for his 
mercies and blessings leads them to count not their 
lives dear unto themselves, but to lay down their lives 
willingly in his service. Their hearts are filled with 
praise, because, having made consecration of themselves, 
and having entered thus the courts of the 
Lord to be seated with Christ in heavenly conditions, 
the heavenly light and food supplied them 
enables them to rejoice exceedingly even in 
tribulation, even in matters which otherwise, 



according to the flesh, without the strength 

and enlightenment of the truth, would discourage 

them and cause them fear. Because they 

have entered into this fellowship with the Lord in his 

sufferings, with his spirit of appreciation, therefore 

they may be joyful even in the house of their pilgrimage 

—and when the pilgrimage of the present life 

is ended, and as new creatures they shall pass beyond 

the vail, there shall be fulness of joy for them as 

they enter into the joys of their Lord in the full and 

complete sense— made like him, seeing him as he is, 

and sharing his glory. 



R3054 : page 237 

NADAB AND ABIHU CUT OFF. 

-LEV. 10:1-11. -AUGUST 10.- 

Golden Text.— "Let us watch and be sober."— I Thess. 5:6. 

ALTHOUGH not directly so stated, there is 
sufficient ground for the inference that the 
sin for which Nadab and Abihu were smitten 
by the Lord, was committed while they were 
under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The basis 
for this inference is that immediately following the 
description of their wrong doing and its punishment 
comes the Lord's injunction,— "Do not drink wine 
nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when 
ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die; 
...that ye may put difference between holy and 
unholy, and between unclean and clean."— Vs. 9,10. 

The two young men smitten in the prime of life, 
were Aaron's oldest sons; there were two younger 
brothers. All had just been consecrated to the 
priesthood, under their father Aaron as the chief 
priest, by the direction of their uncle Moses, carrying 
out the divine arrangement. With many advantages 
every way, they had corresponding responsibilities, 
as well as grand prospects for the future, all of which 

R3055 : page 237 

were destroyed because of their lack of reverence for 
the Lord— their carelessness respecting his regulations, 
and the vows which they had just taken upon 
themselves as his special servants. Their experience 
furnishes an excellent temperance lesson. How many 
others in highly favored situations in life have come 
to disrespect the Almighty's arrangements through 
the use of intoxicating liquors!— how many have 
similarly blighted their prospects in life, hastened 
their death, and brought sorrow upon their kindred! 



The Chicago Tribune has collected statistics respecting 
the murders in the United States, between 
the years 1891 and 1901, and declares that 53,000 of 
these murders resulted more or less directly from the 
use of intoxicating liquors. The statistics of the State 
of Massachusetts for the year 1895 show that over 
ninety-six percent of those convicted for crime 
in that State, were users of strong drinks. In 1899 
the New Voice obtained the testimony of one thousand 
jailors (whose terms of office would aggregate more 
than six thousand years of experience), and their returns 
showed that seventy-two percent of the 
criminals then in jails under their charge, were 
brought there by drink. The American Grocer using 
government statistics (April 1901) figures the total 
bill of this country for liquid refreshments during the 
year at $1,228,674,925. And of this amount it figures 
that alcoholic liquors cost $1,059,563,787,— the remainder 
representing the sum spent for tea, cocoa, 
coffee, soda water and the like. Some one has calculated 
that the money spent for alcoholic liquor 
would equal a pile of silver dollars 1754 miles high; 
and the Christian Observer remarks, "It would take 
ten men with scoop shovels to throw away money as 
fast as we are wasting it for grog." 

In the presence of such a stupendous evil, blighting 
earthly prospects for so many, depriving so many 
of the reasonable comforts and necessities of life, 
disqualifying so many for thoughts and deeds of 
purity and goodness, and accomplishing instead so 
much misery and sorrow, what Christian could feel 
interested in the traffic? What Christian would not 
be willing to forego personal rights and liberties in 
connection with this terrible adversary of the race 
and rejoice in any self-denials it might cause him, 
even though he might feel himself stronger than the 
majority of men, and thoroughly capable of withstanding 
its insidious attacks and undermining tendencies 
as respects character, etc? It is not for us 
at the present time to make "sumptuary laws" 
for the world, nor in any manner to attempt 
to rule the world; but as surely as we believe 
that when the Lord's Kingdom shall have fully 
come it will thoroughly chain up this monster evil, as 
one of the most powerful of Satan's agencies, just so 
surely should all who so believe show to others by 
precept and example their opposition to this curse. 

There is, however, a deeper lesson for us in the 
experiences of the two priests under consideration. 
As they were members of the tribe of Levi, so those 
whom they typified would be members of the "household 
of faith." As they went further than this and 
consecrated to the priesthood and were truly and 
properly accepted of the Lord as priests, their antitypes 

R3055 : page 238 



must be persons, classes, who have come under 

the terms of the "royal priesthood" in the full, proper 

sense of the word. They do not represent merely 

nominal Christians— merely such as imagine themselves 

consecrated to the Lord through a misunderstanding, 

as is the case with many in the nominal 

church of today: they represent persons, classes, in 

the true, consecrated Church of the Lord. 

The Scriptural account does not specify respecting 
the wrong doing of Nadab and Abihu. The expression 
"strange fire" does not clearly indicate to us 
whether their wrong doing consisted in using an incense 
other than the kind that the Lord had prescribed, 
or whether they used it at the wrong time, 
or in a wrong place, or whether the fire which enkindled 
the incense was taken from some other place 
than the altar, as the Lord had prescribed, or whether 
their incense was repulsive to the Lord because the 
offerers were in a state of intoxication— possessed of 
a wrong spirit. The latter, as we have suggested, 
seems to be implied in the declaration of the 10th verse 
respecting holy and unholy, clean and unclean 
conditions of approaching the Lord. 

The great lesson here for the royal priesthood 
is not so much in respect to intoxicating liquors, as 
in respect to a wrong spirit and unclean condition of 
mind and heart in approaching the Lord. We are 
bound to suppose that those who have made a consecration 
to the Lord and are seeking to "cleanse 
themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 
perfecting holiness in the fear of God." (2 Cor. 7:1), 
will not be guilty of literal intoxication. Those who 
have received to any degree the spirit of the truth 
and have come to appreciate in any measure the 
spirit of a sound mind, surely realize that in our soberest 
and most favorable condition, our minds are 
none too sound;— they realize that continually the 
Lord's people have need of his assisting grace supporting 
their imperfect judgments, and they could not 
ask for such grace to help were they not also using 
their best endeavors to preserve and exercise what 
sense they have naturally. 

The lesson for the consecrated, therefore, is in accord 
with what the Apostle has written, "Let us 
therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest, any of you should seem to come short 
of it." (Heb. 4:1.) Our consecration through faith in 
the Lord has brought us under the anointing of the 
holy spirit, has permitted us to enter into the holy and 
to enjoy the privileges and favors of those "deep 
things of God" which none can see or appreciate 
without the anointing of the spirit. Outsiders— 
not of the consecrated and accepted class, not of the 
royal priesthood, the peculiar people, and who therefore 
have no privilege in the way of offering incense 



to the Lord, have no such opportunities as we of offending 

the Lord by offering him unacceptable 

sacrifices,— unacceptable prayers, unacceptable services. 

As we do not know in which way these two 

sons of Aaron offended against the divine arrangement 

or whether they both offended alike, we may 

lay to ourselves, as the antitypical priesthood, lessons 

all along the line. 

(1) When we approach the Lord we are not to 

come to him under the influence of an evil spirit, intoxicated 
with the spirit of the world or of Babylon, 
by whose wine it is declared all the nations have been 
made drunken.— Rev. 14:8; 18:3. 

(2) When we would approach the Lord even in 
a right spirit, we must make sure that we have the 
proper incense which he has stipulated will be acceptable 
to him, whose ingredients represent the 

perfections of our Lord Jesus reckonedly appropriated 
to us. 

(3) Additionally we must be sure that we do 
not get fire for our incense from any other quarter 
than from the altar— consecrated fire or zeal, sanctified 
by the merit of our Lord's sacrifice. 

In "Tabernacle Shadows of the Better Sacrifices" 
we have offered the suggestion that these two 
priests possibly represent two different classes in the 
church— two classes amongst those who have made 
consecration to the royal priesthood and have been 
accepted, both of which classes will fall from the 
priesthood. We have suggested that one may represent 
the class who will die the Second Death (Heb. 6:4-6; 
10:26,27) and that the other may represent 
the class who lose their membership in the royal 
priesthood because of an insufficiency of zeal to make 
their calling and election sure; but who, nevertheless, 
are at heart loyal to God and will be "saved so as by 
fire," through great tribulation. (Rev. 7:14.) True 
there is nothing in the type to indicate any difference 
between these two, nothing to indicate any hope in 
the future for either of them. We think it not unreasonable, 
however, to surmise that the type merely 
shows that both men lost their standing in the 
priestly company by reason of failure to rightly appreciate 
their privileges. We are assured that all 
these matters are typical, yet we find it difficult to suppose 
this type to mean that one-half of all who consecrate 
to the Lord as members of the royal priesthood, 
will suffer the Second Death. Yet this would seem 
to be the only alternative interpretation, if we reject 
the thought that the two men merely represented 
the two classes who lose the priesthood without indicating 
their proportion as respects the whole. The 
two should have a meaning;— either as one half of the 
whole or as two classes. We accept the latter view; 
because the Scriptures clearly show two classes who 
will lose the royal priesthood, and because the other 



proposition, that they represented one-half of the 
consecrated lost in Second Death, seems to us wholly 
untenable. 

In any event the lesson to those who desire to be 
faithful to their privileges, is a strong one, having 
made our consecration to the Lord, having received 
of his anointing, let us seek carefully to "make our 
calling and our election sure" to the blessings and 
privileges of the future— as the dispensers of divine 
bounties to mankind in general, in the Millennial 
Kingdom, associated with our Lord. Let us take all 
the lessons out of this that we can, as respects due 
reverence to him with whom we have to do, and due 
appreciation of the proper spirit, the proper incense 

R3055 : page 239 

and the proper zeal to be used in coming before the 
Lord, that we may abide in his love and favor. 

MISCONCEPTIONS CAUSE DIFFICULTIES TO MANY. 

Those who do not see with us the great divine 
plan of the ages, with its wonderful opportunities of 
the future for the blessing of all the families of the 
earth;— who do not see with us that the present age 
is merely for the selection of the royal priesthood for 
the future work of glory and blessing of mankind;— 
who do not see with us that the Jewish system with its 
priesthood, sacrifices, incense, etc., etc., were merely 
types or shadows of the higher things in God's plan 
now being developed;— such are apt to look at the 
statements of this lesson with astonishment; and are 
apt to feel that God acted in a very arbitrary manner 
toward these two priests in striking them down in 
death, because of some failure to approach him in 
the prescribed manner. They fail to see that the Lord 

R3056 : page 239 

was instituting types which must be carried out to the 
very letter, and which must illustrate the exactness 
of his dealings with the "royal priesthood." 

Looking at the matter in a wrong light, they not 
only see the two men suddenly deprived of life, but 
they reason that if God's anger thus destroyed them 
—then, the very next moment, according to their 
theory, they would appear at God's bar for their 
eternal sentence; and since they could not believe 
that the two men who were unfit to live amongst men 
were any more fit to live in heaven, they feel obliged 
to conclude, according to their theory, that the Lord 
not only suddenly smote them down as respects their 
earthly life, but additionally turned them over for an 
eternity of torture at the hands of devils. Those 
who really believe this misrepresentation of the divine 



plan must necessarily be unfavorably influenced 
by it in their own dealings with their children, their 
neighbors, etc.,— their ideas of justice and of love, 
etc., must necessarily be blunted by such misconceptions 
of the divine character and procedure. 

To our understanding of the teachings of the 
Lord's Word, on the contrary, there would be no 
such difficulty as this. Nadab and Abihu were men, 
members of the fallen race, all of whom are under 
sentence of death. They had been merely reckonedly, 
not actually, justified, because "the blood of bulls 
and goats could never take away sin." They were, 
therefore, although typically occupying the place of 
priests, not really different from the remainder of 
the world— for they had received no release from the 
Adamic condemnation. Hence, since their position 
and all were typical, so also their death under the 
circumstances could mean no greater loss to them 
than death under other circumstances would mean 
to their fellows— they merely went into the tomb a 
little sooner than they otherwise would have done. 
But long centuries after their death and the death of 
their fellows,— better and worse,— in God's appointed 
time, the great antitypical sin-offering appeared; 
—and the great antitypical Priest, offered the great 
sacrifice for sins accomplished at Calvary, and the 
whole world was brought back from the sentence of 
sin and death— including Nadab and Abihu, Aaron 
and Moses, and all the remainder of our race,— including 
also us who were not yet born. 

The Atonement day sacrifices begun by our Lord 
and Redeemer, continue; and we, his called ones of 
this Gospel age, are privileged to participate in the 
sacrificing work with our great High Priest, as the 
sons of Aaron participated with their father. Soon 
the entire work of sacrificing will be at an end; soon 
the great High Priest will finish the work of making 
an atonement, and will then, as did the priest in the 
type, come out to the altar and lift up his hands and 
bless all the people— the dead and dying world. The 
day of blessing will be a long one, because "a day 
with the Lord is as a thousand years." It will be 
quite sufficient to accomplish the purposes intended, 
of lifting up, helping, strengthening, blessing, bringing 
to full restitution, all who will come into harmony 
with the Father. In that day Nadab and Abihu 
with others of mankind, who have done better and 
who have done worse, will be on trial before the judgment 
seat of Christ,— the Church, the royal priesthood, 
being associated with Him in the judgment. 
(I Cor. 6:2.) In proportion as any have had favorable 
opportunities and used them unfavorably, in 
similar proportion have they degraded themselves so 
that they will proportionately experience stripes and 
difficulties in getting started upon the great "highway 
of holiness," which will then be opened up for 



the whole world of mankind,— that they may return 
thereon to the Lord and to eternal life; and only 
those who fail to come back under such gracious 
opportunities, into full harmony with the gracious 
divine plan, will be destroyed irrevocably in the Second 
Death. 

"LET US WATCH AND BE SOBER." 

The Apostle's exhortation in our Golden Text is 
well worthy of being continually borne in mind by 
all who would make their calling and election sure 
to a place in the glorious priesthood of the future— 
"Let us watch and be sober." Let us watch in the 
sense of taking careful notice of all the directions 
which the Lord our God has given us, respecting 
what would not be acceptable service to him. Let 
us watch ourselves, striving to walk as nearly as 
possible in the footsteps of the great High Priest, 
who was, we are sure, right and acceptable to the 
Father in every particular. Let us be sober— not 
only not literally intoxicated with ardent spirits, but 
let us not be intoxicated with "the spirit of the 
world," or the spirit of Babylon, churchianity. Let 
us have the spirit of Christ, the spirit of a sound mind, 
the spirit of meekness, the spirit of gentleness, the 
spirit of love for God, for our fellows, and for all men, 
seeking as we have opportunity, to do them good. 
Let us be sober in the sense that we will not be 
frivolous; that while happy, joyous in the Lord, free 
from the anxious cares that are upon many others 
through misapprehension of our Father's character 
and plan, we may, nevertheless, be sober in the sense 
of earnest, appreciative of present opportunities and 
privileges in connection with the Lord's service;— 
not thoughtlessly negligent, letting opportunities and 
privileges slip through our hands to be afterwards 
regretted. 



page 241 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. AUGUST 15, 1902 No. 16. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 243 

Industrial Feudalism 243 

What Will the Higher Critics 

Do With Paul? 244 

Is There a Crisis in Methodism? 244 

Living by Every Word Out Of 



the Mouth of God 245 

Journeying Toward Canaan 248 

Interesting Questions Answered 251 

We are Well Able to Overcome it 253 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

Every letter you send through the mail may be a more 
or less potent messenger of the truth, even on its outside, 
by the use of these envelopes. They catch the attention 
not only of those to whom they are addressed, but postmen 
and others have an opportunity, and often the curiosity, to 
read their message of peace; the gospel in a condensed 
form. Price 25c per hundred post paid. 



WE ARE HOLDING some of the new Bibles for a time, for 
some of those who hope to find it more convenient to send the 
money later. We still have some of both styles of binding ($2 
and $3), and those desiring may order. 



"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES" is out of 

stock temporarily (both English and German), but we 
hope to have plenty very soon. 



WALL CHARTS painted on cloth, on rollers, 5 ft. long, similar 
to the one in Dawn I. are again in good supply. They are 
of good appearance suitable for sitting rooms and small halls. 
Express prepaid $1.50. 



PAPER CHARTS 36 in. long with hangers, metal bound, 
showing chart of the ages and prophetic outlines, prepaid 25c 
each. 

We are preparing a smaller edition of this chart on very 
tough paper, suitable for inserting in the new Bibles. They 
will be very convenient for reference. Price postpaid 10c. 



R3056 : page 243 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
INDUSTRIAL FEUDALISM. 



The Independent has recently published an article 
from the pen of Mr. W. J. Ghent which has attracted 
general attention. Mr. Ghent points us back to the 
days of feudalism when lords and barons led and 
governed the residents of their estates almost like 
slaves through under chiefs, and declares that in 
many respects similar conditions are now approaching. 
"The next distinct stage in the socio-economic 
development of America.. .will be something 
in the nature of a benevolent feudalism," is the way 
he puts it; "concentration of capital and the increase 
of wealth will continue,... 'the rich will grow 
richer, and the multi-millionaires will approach the 
billion-dollar standard.'" He proceeds:— 

"The more the great combinations increase their 
power, the greater is the subordination of the small concerns. 
They may, for one reason or another, find it possible, 
and even fairly profitable, to continue; but they 
will be more and more confined to particular activities, to 
particular territories, and in time to particular methods, 
all dictated and enforced by the pressure of the larger 
concerns. The petty tradesmen and producers are thus 
an economically dependent class; and their dependence 
increases with the years. In a like position, also, are the 
owners of small and moderate holdings in the trusts. The 
larger holdings— often the single largest holding— determines 
the rules of the game; the smaller ones are either 
acquiescent, or, if recalcitrant, are powerless to enforce 
their will. Especially is this true in America, where the 
head of a corporation is often an absolute ruler, who determines 
not only the policy of the enterprise, but the 
personnel of the board of directors." 



"The laborers and mechanics were long ago brought 
under the yoke through their divorcement from the land 
and the application of steam to factory operation. They 
are economically un-free except in so far as their organizations 
make possible a collective bargain for wages and 
hours. The growth of commerce raised up an enormous 
class of clerks and helpers, perhaps the most dependent 
class in the community. The growth and partial diffusion 
of wealth in America has in fifty years largely altered the 
character of domestic service and increased the number of 
servants manyfold. Railroad pools and farm-implement 
trusts have drawn a tightening cordon about the farmers. 
The professions, too, have felt the change. Behind many 
of our important newspapers are private commercial interests 
which dictate their general policy, if not, as is frequently 
the case, their particular attitude upon every public 
question; while the race for endowments made by the 
greater number of the churches and by all colleges except 
a few state-supported ones, compels a cautious regard on 
the part of synod and faculty for the wishes, the views, 
and prejudices of men of great wealth. To this growing 
deference of preacher, teacher, and editor is added that of 
two yet more important classes— the makers and the interpreters 
of law. The record of legislation and judicial 
interpretation regarding slavery previous to the Civil War 
has been paralleled in recent years by the record of legislatures 
and courts in matters relating to the lives and 
health of manual workers, especially in such cases as employers' 
liability and factory inspection. Thus, with a 
great addition to the number of subordinate classes, with 
a tremendous increase of their individual components, and 
with a corresponding growth of power in the hands of 
a few score magnates, there is needed little further to make 
up a socio-economic status that contains all the essentials 
of a renascent feudalism." 

"Macaulay's famous dictum, that the privileged classes, 
when their rule is threatened, always bring about their 
own ruin by making further exactions, is likely, in this 
case, to prove untrue. A wiser forethought begins to prevail 
among the autocrats of today— a forethought destined 
to grow and expand and to prove of inestimable value 

R3057 : page 243 

when bequeathed to their successors. Our nobility will 
thus temper their exactions to an endurable limit; and 
they will distribute benefits to a degree that makes a tolerant, 
if not a satisfied people. They may even make a 
working principle of Bentham's maxim, and after, of 
course, appropriating the first and choicest fruits of industry 
to themselves, may seek to promote the 'greatest happiness 
of the greatest number.' For therein will lie their 
greater security." 

Mr. Ghent considers "the present state machinery 
is admirably adapted for the subtle and extra-legal 
exertion of power by an autocracy" and hence 



that neither new laws nor violent methods will be 
invoked. He continues:— 

"The prevention of discontent will be the prior study, 
to which the intellect and the energies of the nobles and 
their legates will be ever bent. To that end the teachings 
of the schools and colleges, the sermons, the editorials, the 
stump orations, and even the plays at the theaters will 
be skilfully and persuasively molded; and the questioning 
heart of the poor, which perpetually seeks some answer 

R3057 : page 244 

to the painful riddle of the earth, will meet with a multitude 
of mollifying responses.... Literature will take 
on the hues and tones of the good-natured days of Charles 
II. Instead of poetry, however, the innocuous novel will 
flourish best; every flowery courtier will write romance, 
and the literary darling of the renaissance will be an Edmund 
Waller of fiction. A lineal descendant of the famous 
Lely, who 

'...on animated canvas stole 
The sleepy eye that spoke the melting soul,' 
will be the laureled chief of our painters; and sculpture, 
architecture, and the lesser arts, under the spell of 
changed influences, will undergo a like transformation. 

"This, then, in the rough, is our benevolent feudalism 
to-be. It is not precisely a Utopia, not an 'island valley 
of Avilion'; and yet it has its commendable, even its fascinating 
features. 'The empire is peace,' shouted the partizans 
of Louis Napoleon; and a like cry, with an equal 
ardency of enthusiasm, will be uttered by the supporters of 
the new regime. Peace and stability will be its defensive 
arguments, and peace and stability it will probably bring. 
But tranquil or unquiet, whatever it may be, its triumph 
is assured; and existent forces are carrying us toward it 
with an ever-accelerating speed. One power alone might 
prevent it— the collective popular will that it shall not be. 
But of this there is no fear on the part of the barons, and 
but little expectation on the part of the underlings." 

The writer of the above seems to have a clear 
grasp of the subject and presents it well. Our only 
disagreement with his hypothesis is that it will not 
work out as the wealthy intend it shall. The next 
great world-wide financial depression which we believe 
to be but a few years ahead of us will disconcert 
these plans and confound the whole world. Stockholders 
will demand dividends even on watered 
stocks; and managers however benevolently disposed 
and however prudent will be compelled either to advance 
prices or to curtail expenses or both and in the 
end the lower classes are sure to be so hard pressed 
that the Scripture predictions respecting our times 
will be fulfilled.-James 5:1-5; Dan. 12:1. 

WHAT WILL THE HIGHER CRITICS DO WITH PAUL? 



"Let the Gospel accounts of the resurrection of Jesus 
be given up as non-historical, there still remains the unquestionably 
historic and authentic testimony of Paul." 
This is the keynote of an article by Rev. Dr. William 
Cleaver Wilkinson, of Chicago University, in which he 
dwells upon the incalculable need the Christian Church 
has for Paul, as one whose testimony "no fiercest crucible 
fires of historical criticism can possibly in the least affect." 
Dr. Wilkinson (who writes in The Homiletic Review, 
June) does not think that this importance of Paul's testimony 
is adequately appreciated. He says: 

"The cry, so rife everywhere about us, 'Back to Christ!' 
really means, from the lips of many who utter it, 'Away 
from Paul!'— nay, even, almost, 'Away with Paul!' With 
many zealously active and widely influential Christian 
teachers and writers the feeling has been growing stronger 
every day for now a decade of years or more that the 
Apostle Paul has too long been suffered to dominate, too 
exclusively, our conceptions of Christianity. The view 
has been propagating itself by boldly declaring itself that 
the proper way to regard Paul's writings is to regard them 
as setting forth, not authoritatively the true doctrines of 
Christ, but only as setting forth one great mind's own individual 
way of conceiving those doctrines. The doctrines 
themselves, it is urged, in their unadulterated purity, are 
to be sought in the words of the living Jesus, as those 
words are reported by the four evangelists, but especially 
by the three synoptic evangelists so called, Matthew, Mark, 
and Luke. The records of these historians, we are told, 
are to be carefully sifted; for the truth which they give 
is mingled with error— the error of imperfect report and 
imperfect transmission. Besides this, so we are further 
given to understand, there is the error, an uncertain 
amount, to which Jesus himself, as proved by his own admissions 
of ignorance on some points, was liable." 

From this "pitiable state of hopeless incertitude," Paul 
rescues us by his witness to a "living, an ascended, a 
glorified Christ." It was for the sake of this service that 
Christ waited until after his resurrection and ascension 
before calling Paul to the apostleship. It is Paul alone 
who gives to Christ's pre-existence and to his exaltation 
after death the proper prominence, making almost nothing, 
in comparison, of the Lord's earthly life. It was not upon 
Jesus as a man among men, but upon Jesus as supreme 
divine Lord over men that Paul laid commanding emphasis. 
Dr. Wilkinson continues: 

"The Christian Church can not afford to obey the call 
'Back to Christ!' if that call be understood to mean back 
to the earthly Christ of the Gospel histories, away from the 
heavenly Christ of the epistles of Paul. The tendency, 
now so strong and prevalent so widely, to deal with Jesus 
on severely 'scientific' principles of historical criticism, 
simply as a man who lived once in Palestine, and whose 
words and deeds were very imperfectly reported by very 



ill-qualified biographers, biographers that must be halted 

with challenge at every point and not confidently relied 

upon, unless they all three happen to relate the same thing 

in the same way— I say all 'three,' not all four, because 

John is to a great extent discredited and counted out as 

not John, but another man by the name of John— this tendency, 

however it may suppose itself to be peculiarly loyal 

to Jesus is, in deepest truth, the most specious and the 

most dangerous disloyalty to him that he has ever encountered 

in all the centuries since he finished the work 

on earth that was given him to do. 

"Let it be duly considered, if Christ comes at length 
to be measured by this rule, the time will then not be distant 
when he will be still further reduced; and from being 
the pre-eminent, the ideal, the flawless man, will be 
found out to be at best a man not well enough known to 
deserve such distinction, and, at worst, a man shown to 
have had his limitations, his weaknesses, his infatuations, 
even his faults of temper in speech and in behavior, such 
as bring him down after all quite comfortably near the 
level of the better sort of average human nature." 

In the opinion of Dr. Wilkinson, however, "nothing 
even conceivable, except the actual literal resurrection of 
Jesus Christ from the dead, can account for the undoubtedly 
historical phenomenon of the Apostle Paul, his career, 
and his written words." 

The above from the Digest is a great satisfaction 
to us. We rejoice that the Chicago University 
has one professor still sufficiently true to God's Word 
and to logic to acknowledge the Apostle Paul's 
sound words, and their accord with the mind and 
words of our Lord Jesus. None who appreciate the 
divine plan of the ages can for a moment question that 
the Lord specially raised up the great Apostle to the 
Gentiles. We, yes, the entire cause stands or falls 
with this great mouth-piece of God. 

IS THERE A CRISIS IN METHODISM? 



Rev. Dr. L. W. Munhall, an evangelist of the Methodist 
Episcopal Church, is very sure that there is a crisis 
and that he knows what has caused it. The cause is "the 
dishonor put upon God's Holy Word" by Methodist professors, 
editors, and preachers. He does not hesitate to name 
them, and his list includes the names of many of the most 
notable in the denomination. Dr. Munhall's charges are 
not strictly new. He has been making them for at least 
three years. On June 23 he repeated them before a Methodist 
ministers' meeting in Philadelphia, where he secured 
the passage of resolutions denouncing "higher criticism" 

R3057 : page 245 

as "wretched stuff." He has now published his views in a 



pamphlet entitled "A Crisis in Methodism," in which he 
asserts that the spiritual life of Methodism is dying out. 
He writes: 

"What is the real cause of our spiritual decline? 
Many causes have been named, some of which explain in 
part; but, for myself, I believe the real cause of it all is the 
dishonor put upon God's Holy Word in many of our educational 
institutions, by some editors of church periodicals, 
and not a few preachers; because of which the Holy Spirit 
has been grieved and withdrawn His power in large measure 
from us. Because of their commanding influence, our 
educational institutions are the chief offenders. Of course, 
I know that all these institutions are not given to this mischievous 
business, but most of the leading ones are. In 
the faculties of these institutions are men who are skeptics 
and rationalists; who do not at all believe the Bible is 
God's Word and in the doctrines of Methodism, and who 

R3058 : page 245 

do not hesitate to let the students know their position. 
They repeat infidel objections to the Bible and call it modern 
scholarship, and then give the young men under them 
for instruction to understand that they believe it all, and 
many of these young men take up with these skeptical 
views, and go out into the ministry, not to preach the 
Gospel of the blessed God, but their questionings, rationalism, 
and agnosticism." 

Dr. Munhall includes in this indictment, by name, 
Prof. H. G. Mitchell, of Boston University School of Theology, 
who is accused of boasting that "he would revolutionize 
Methodist theology"; Prof. C. W. Rishill, acting 
dean of the same institution, whose book, "The Foundations 
of Christian Faith," "is full of poison"; Prof. Milton 
S. Terry, of Garrett Biblical Institute, who is charged with 
teaching the unhistoric character of Genesis; President 
Charles J. Little, of the same institute, and President 
Samuel Plantz, of Lawrence University, who are charged 
with "a denial of the omniscience of Jesus"; President 
Bradford P. Raymond, of Wesleyan University, who also 
teaches the limitation of Christ's knowledge; President 
William F. Warren, of Boston University, who indorses 
Professor Mitchell's "extremely rationalistic and Unitarian 
position"; President J. W. Bashford, of Ohio Wesleyan 
University, who is "a little more cautious in his statements 
than the other presidents named, but sympathizes with 
their views"; and, especially, Chancellor James R. Day, of 
Syracuse University, who is charged with staying away 
from Dr. Munhall's evangelistic meetings in that city three 
years ago because the latter assailed the critics who "teach 
infidel objections to the Bible." Others named in the indictment 
are the editors of Zion's Herald and The Methodist 
Review, and Prof. "Borden P. Bowen" (Bowne), of 
Boston University. Dr. Munhall quotes Dr. James M. 
Buckley as saying three years ago to Prof. M.S. Terry that 
if the latter were a professor in Drew, he (Dr. Buckley) 



would prefer charges of heresy against him. Dr. Munhall 
expresses himself as follows: 

"I solemnly, positively, and most emphatically declare 
such teachings to be unbiblical, unmethodistic, and infidel; 
that they are destructive of spiritual life in the church 
and subversive of the Christian faith and hope. If any one 
doubts this, it is with him to explain why revivals that 
were once common in our educational institutions are seldom 
or never known; and why the faith of many of our 
young men is being wrecked while in college." 



R3058 : page 245 

LIVING BY EVERY WORD OUT OF THE MOUTH OF GOD. 

"Man shall not live by bread alone; but by every word that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God."— Matt. 4:4. 

BREAD is a general name for food; for that 

which satisfies the cravings of hunger; for 

that which builds up and strengthens; for 

that which enables the continuance of life. It was appropriate, 

therefore, that the Lord should use bread 

as a symbol, or figure of that heavenly sustenance 

which God has arranged should now upbuild and 

strengthen his people, and eventually, by the first 

resurrection, impart to them life everlasting. Divine 

truth is represented as being such spiritual food; 

and our Lord himself, because in the divine plan he is 

the channel of the truth,— "the way, the truth, the 

life,"— is spoken of as being also "the bread of life" 

for his people. We are to eat, or partake of the life-giving 

qualities which he freely gives us in himself, if 

we would reach the goal of our hope— eternal life. 

Our text is our Lord's reply to the Tempter 
when he was in the wilderness fasting and hungry. 
The Tempter had suggested the use of the powers 
which Jesus had received a few days previous when, 
at his baptism in Jordan, he received the holy spirit, 
and with it the gifts and powers which subsequently 
enabled him not only to heal the sick, but to turn 
water into wine and to feed a multitude by increasing 
the two barley loaves and the two small fishes. 
The Adversary's proposition was that the Lord should 
use this power for the gratification of his own appetite. 
He said, "Command that these stones be made 
bread." 

However pleased the Lord was to have these divine 
powers communicated through the holy spirit 
he had received, however glad he was, at appropriate 
times, to perform the miracles incidental to his 
ministry, he knew that the powers were not given 
him for any selfish use, for any self-gratification; and, 
therefore, he declined the suggestion and his reply 



is our text. In passing, we note that there is a lesson 
here worthy of the attention of all God's people; 
that spiritual and divine things are not to be used in 
a mercenary or selfish manner. So far as they can 
discern matters, the Lord's people are to keep separate 
and distinct their own personal preferences, desires 
and appetites, from the heavenly and spiritual 
things; and not use the latter for the services of the 
flesh, however pure and good the fleshly desires may 
be. 

Our Lord's words accept the suggestion that 
bread, food, necessary to human sustenance under 
present conditions; but they carry the thought further 
—they draw our attention to a higher life than the 
present one. The present life is not really life, but 
death: the world is under divine sentence of death; 
and only those who have come by faith into relationship 
with God have "passed from death unto life;" 
as our Master on another occasion said, "He that 
hath the Son hath life, he that hath not the Son shall 
not see life." And again he said to one who was 
thinking of becoming his servant, his follower— "Let 
the dead bury their dead, follow thou me." 

From this standpoint we see that man cannot live 
by bread alone. He has the divine sentence against 
him, "dying thou shalt die"; and he can find no kind 
of bread, no kind of food, that will produce life in 
the full and complete sense of that word— that will 
swallow up death in life. He must look for another 
kind of "bread of life" than any earthly food; he must 

R3058 : page 246 

have another kind of "water of life" than any earthly 
drink. It is this heavenly food or supply to which 
our Lord refers; saying, "Man shall not live by bread 
alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God." 

But how is it possible for us to live by the 
words that proceed out of the mouth of God? 
What did Jesus mean? How can God's words give 
us life? 

He meant that all hopes of eternal life depend upon 
God— upon the divine plan and its promises. 
Looking into these promises we can see distinctly 
that the divine plan, dating from before the foundation 
of the world, is that all of God's creatures, created 
in his likeness and abiding in faith, love and 
obedience, in harmony with him, shall have life everlasting 
This is God's general word upon the subject; 
namely, that obedience is the condition of life everlasting. 
This is, undoubtedly, what our Lord had in 
mind in using the words of our text: he may also 
have had the thought that he had come into the world 
upon a special mission, to do the Father's will, and 
that his understanding from the beginning was that 



his perfect obedience to the divine will would insure 
him glory, honor, immortality with the Father, eventually; 
but that any disobedience would mean the forfeiture 
of divine favor, and would involve the sentence 
of disobedience; namely, death. 

Our Lord's prompt decision, therefore, was that 
to disobey the Father's will, and thus to secure bread 
for the sustenance of his body, would be a great mistake; 
that food thus secured could sustain life for 
but a little while;— that his better plan would be to 
trust in the Word of God, the divine promise that 
those who love and serve and obey him shall ultimately 
come off conquerors and more, and have eternal 
life with God. And this, our Master's conclusion, 
is full of instruction for us who are his disciples, 
seeking to walk in his footsteps. We are to learn the 
lesson that a man's life consists not in the abundance 
of things which he possesseth— food and raiment— 
but that his life in the fullest, grandest, highest sense, 
is dependent upon his complete submission to the divine 
will— his careful attention to every word that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God. 

The words of God's mouth to us are not exactly 
the same as to our Lord Jesus and to the holy angels; 
—because we are by nature children of wrath even 
as others— sinners: we must, therefore, be addressed 
from a true standpoint to begin with. Thus it is that 
we hear the words of God's mouth in different languages 
at different times in our experiences. 

(1) The first word of God's mouth to us is the 
message of justice— informing us that we are sinners, 
imperfect, helpless, as respects our own restoration 
to the divine image. This first word which proceedeth 
out of God's mouth to us is alarming; he declares 
us to be under a sentence or curse of death because 
of sin;— that "the soul that sinneth shall die"; 
that "the wages of sin is death." It tells us that by 
nature we are "children of wrath even as others,"— 
strangers and foreigners, aliens from God and all his 
blessings, which are held in reservation for those who 
love him and obey him and maintain the perfection 
in which they were created. It is necessary that we 
should hear this voice; necessary that we should be 
alarmed and feel fearful of the penalty of death; and 
necessary that we feel lonely and discouraged in our 
separation from God and our alienation from his 
gracious provisions for those who love him and whom 
he loves. This fear and dejection are necessary in a 

R3059 : page 246 

general way to prepare us for the next word which 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God; namely, 

THE WORD OF GOD'S PITY AND AID. 



(2) The message that God, while manifesting his 
absolute justice and the immutable integrity of his 

first word and sentence, is, nevertheless, kindly disposed 

toward us— that he pities us in our fallen condition. 

This word is not to the effect that divine pity 

will admit us as sinners into divine favor, present and 

future; but that divine pity contemplated in advance 

a ransom-price which, meeting the claims of divine 

justice, would permit of man's recovery from his condition 

of sin and death,— back to a condition of holiness 

and life everlasting— as though he had never 

sinned, had never been sentenced. This word which 

proceeded out of the mouth of God, prophesying a 

blessing and opportunity for recovery to as many as 

will accept, was first a voice to Abraham saying, 

"In thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the 

earth be blessed." As this hope begins to dawn in 

the heart of the penitent one, seeking life-eternal at 

the fountain of grace and truth, the ears of his understanding 

listen intently for other words of life 

from his Creator and he hears (Acts 10:36), 

THE VOICE OF GOD "SPEAKING PEACE BY 
JESUS CHRIST." 

(3) The message of peace is that God has already 
provided the ransom price for sinners;— that 
Jesus Christ by the grace of God tasted death for 
every man"; that "Christ died for our sins according 
to the Scriptures and rose again for our justification." 
This word from God's mouth informs us that through 
this transaction, which is entirely his own without 
our instigation or aid, "He may be just and yet the 
justifier of those who believe in Jesus." (Rom. 3:26.) 
Oh, what joy, what hope of life comes into our 
hearts as we hear this word which proceeded out of 
the mouth of God! We exclaim with the Apostle, "If 
God be for us who can be against us?" If God so 
loved us while we were yet sinners, much more does 

he love us since we are seeking him, desirous of returning 
to fellowship with him, and since we accept 
the provision of his grace in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
Thus to all who accept the atonement which is in 
Christ Jesus, through his blood, God indeed speaks 
words of grace and peace— forgiveness, reconciliation, 
mercy, love, kindness. 

GOD'S WORD TO RECLAIMED SONS. 

(4) Another word or message proceeds from 

the mouth of God, to such as have heard of his grace 
in Christ and have accepted it. He calls them children— 
not now "children of wrath," not now "children 
of the Evil One," but he addresses them as reclaimed 
children, as his own, as those to whom he is pleased 
to give his blessings upon certain conditions which 



R3059 : page 247 

he specifies; saying, "My son, give me thine heart." 
This call for the heart is a call for full consecration, 
for complete setting apart to the Lord and to his 
service. Our will is the center of our intelligence, our 
being; if the heart, the will, be given to God, it carries 
with it the title to every action, word and thought. 
It is such only as delight to respond to this Word or 
message from the mouth of God that he is pleased to 
own in the special sense of sonship which pertains 
to this Gospel age— sonship in the house of sons, of 
which Christ Jesus, our Lord, is the Head. 

"THE WORD OF PROMISE." 

(5) In our ignorance of the greatness of our 
Heavenly Father and the richness of his grace toward 
us in Christ Jesus our Lord, we might fail to 
appreciate the necessity or desirability of a full consecration 
of our hearts to him. In our ignorance we 
might prefer to say, 

"Some of self and some of thee." 
Knowing this, God, in his compassion, has been 
pleased to set before us certain features of his plan, 
and hence we hear his voice again in the "exceeding 
great and precious promises" of his Word. In these 
he points out to us the wisdom of a full consecration 
and complete obedience to him— assuring us in these 
promises that by obedience to them we may become 
partakers of the greatest of all blessings,— the divine 
nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) Oh, how wonderful that the 
great Creator should condescend not only to redeem 
sinners but to urge, to entice them to receive his 
bounties and blessings! From the time the consecration 
begins a measure of the holy spirit is granted, 
that the consecrated one may, by application— by 
hungering and thirsting for the words which proceed 
out of the mouth of God, and by feeding upon them, 
—be enabled to "Comprehend with all saints what 
is the breadth and length and depth and height, and 
to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge." 
(Eph. 3:18,19.) Ah, yes! those who have heard and 
have fed upon "the words which proceed out of the 
mouth of God" thus far, find indeed a new life begun, 
a new vitality, a new energy,— new hopes, new 
aims, new ambitions, "old things are passed away," 
everything is tinged with the glories of the heavenly 
things which "eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither 
hath entered into the heart of man to conceive"— the 
things which God hath in reservation for them that 
love him;— an understanding and appreciation of 
which God, in some measure, gives to such by his 
spirit, which "searcheth all things, yea, the deep 
things of God." 



FEEDING ON THE WORD OF ADMONITION. 

(6) Hearkening further for the words which 
proceed from the mouth of God— "Beautiful words, 
wonderful words, wonderful words of life"— we hear 
a word of admonition. The Father instructs us, that 
the glorious things to which he now calls us cannot 
possibly be ours unless our consecration to him and 
submission to the influences of his providences and 
promises shall change, transform, renew our minds; 
—so that the things once loved we will hate, and the 
things once hated we will love. As a father spareth 
not the rod of chastisement from the son whom he 
loves, so the Lord will not spare the rod of affliction 
and chastisement from those who are truly his; because 
he loves them, and because he desires to develop 

in them such a character as will be pleasing to 
him, and as will permit him eventually to make them 
his sons on the plane of glory, heirs of God, joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ, their Lord. 

This word respecting the necessity of chastisement 
and our correction in righteousness, that 
we may become conformed to the image of God's dear 
Son (Rom. 8:29), is accompanied with assurances of 
love from the Father— assurances that "Like as a 
Father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them 
that reverence him." He says to us also, through another 
apostle, "Faint not when thou art rebuked of 
him: for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and 
scourgeth every son whom he receiveth." He explains 
that such discipline is not prompted by anger 
towards us, but by his love, and if we are rightly exercised 
by the disciplines, trials, experiences of life, 
they will "work out for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory;"— they will work out in us 
such characters as the Lord will be able to use in the 
service to which he hath called us— the service of 
the Millennial age— the service of the royal priesthood, 
to be associated with Christ in the work of judging 
and blessing the world of mankind. The proper 
response of all who have the true spirit of sonship is 
expressed in the language of our Lord and Master, 
"Not my will but thine be done," O Lord; "I delight 
to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my 
heart." Such as thus respond to the chastisement of 
the Lord, step more and more into divine favor, and 
hear other words of comfort, of grace, of help. 

"YE HAVE NEED OF PATIENCE." 

(7) God's Word or message of patience is, "Let 
patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect 
and entire, wanting nothing." (Jas. 1:4.) How necessary 
to our perfection is this divine counsel— this 

Word which proceeds from the mouth of God! We 



might imagine that we had received sufficient testing 
and proving to indicate our loyalty to the Lord, to 
the principles of righteousness, long before we had 
been sufficiently proved according to the Lord's 
standards in the testing of character. He therefore 
graciously explains to us how necessary patience will 
be, that we should not think it strange concerning the 
fiery trials which must test us, as though some 
strange thing had happened unto us. (I Pet. 4:12.) 
On the contrary he points out to us as we grow in 
grace and in knowledge and in ability to comprehend 
—that the glory, honor and immortality to which 
he has invited the Church of this Gospel age, is so 
high, so grand a position, that those who would share 
those honors must expect, necessarily, to be severely 
tried and tested that their absolute loyalty to 
the Lord and to the principles of his righteousness- 
justice, truth, love— shall be beyond question. Our 
characters must become crystalized along these lines, 
firm as adamant, before we shall be ready to be received 
as the "overcomers" who shall inherit all 
things, and share the kingdom and glory with the 
Captain of our salvation. He points out to us, further, 

R3059 : page 248 

that if it was necessary for the Captain of our 
salvation to be tempted and tried, tested and proved, 
much more reasonable is it that we who were children 
of wrath, and justified only through his grace, should 
be thoroughly proven as respects our loyalty. 

WORDS OF CONSOLATION FROM THE MOUTH OF GOD. 

(8) We might well be exercised with the 
strictness of the divine requirements as respects this 
overcoming class, and might say to ourselves, Others 
may attain to such glories and blessings; but we are 
too weak in the flesh through the fall and cannot hope 
to come off victors— cannot hope to stand the trials 
and tests which the Lord would impose. And here 
the Lord speaks again, a gracious word of comfort, 
consolation and encouragement, informing us that 
the perfection he is expecting is not a perfection in 
the flesh and of the flesh which is weak and imperfect, 

R3060 : page 248 

but a perfection of the heart, of the will, of the mind, 
of the intention. He informs us that he is not judging 
us as human beings according to the flesh, but as 
new creatures according to the mind, the new will. 
He informs us that although he will expect the new 
mind to do its very best in the matter of controlling 
the flesh and bringing it into subjection, yet, nevertheless, 
he knows that the flesh being imperfect, perfection 



according to the flesh is an impossibility to 

any of the fallen race: and that, therefore, his arrangement 

through Christ under the New Covenant 

is, that the imperfections of the flesh which are not 

assented to by our wills are not counted as ours. 

They are covered by the merit of Christ's sacrifice, 

and are ignored in the Heavenly Father's reckoning 

with us. He assures us that we are to be judged according 

to the spirit (will, intent) and not according 

to the flesh. 

What comfort and consolation are in these assurances ! 
These are wonderful words of life, indeed! 
They inspire us with hope. If God will accept perfect 
heart-intentions, as instead of the absolute perfection 
of the flesh,— then indeed we have hope of 
attaining to the standard which he has marked for 
us,— the standard of perfection. We can be perfect 
in intention, in will, or, as the Master expresses it, 
"pure in heart", even though we cannot be perfect in 
the flesh. We hear through the Apostle the word 
proceeding out of the mouth of God to this effect, 
"The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us who 
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit." (Rom. 8:4.) 
We can walk after the spirit, though, so far as 
our mortal bodies are concerned, we cannot walk up 
to the spirit's requirements. Our minds can walk up 
to the spirit, our intentions can be perfect; and this 
is what our Heavenly Father seeks in us, perfection 
of intention. 

THE WORD OF RESURRECTION. 

(9) A further word from the mouth of God assures 
us that he knoweth our frame, he remembereth 
that we are dust— under sentence of death, "Dust 
thou art and unto dust shalt thou return"— weak, imperfect, 
dying; and that it is not his purpose that we 
shall always be in conflict with ourselves— perfect 
will against imperfect body,— that he has provided 
that in the resurrection we shall have new, perfect 
bodies in full accord with our new minds. He assures 
us that he is able and willing to do all this, and that 
he proposes to give to his "elect" bodies of a still 
higher order than the human— that he will give us 
spiritual bodies. They shall have a part in the first 
resurrection, and thenceforth be able to do the 
Father's will perfectly in every respect— as they now 
show themselves desirous of doing his will so far as 
they are able. Oh, gracious provisions! O wonderful 
words of compassion, inspiring us to wonderful 
hopes of eternal life and glory! It will be to such as 
thus overcome in spirit, in faith (I John 5:4), that 
the Lord will give the final word of his mouth— "Well 
done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the 
joys of thy Lord." 

Every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of 



God— every admonition, every encouragement, every 
promise, is necessary to the development of those 
whom God is now calling to eternal life as joint-heirs 
with his Son in the Kingdom. The eating of natural 
food could not bring this life-eternal, nor its attendant 
glories; but the eating and appropriating of these 
words from the mouth of God can bring to us all these 
blessings which we crave. Let us then, more and 
more, as the disciples, pupils, of the Lord Jesus, keep 
in memory and act upon the suggestion of the words 
of this text, "Man shall not live by bread alone: but 
by every word which proceedeth out of the mouth of 
God." 



R3060 : page 248 

JOURNEYING TOWARD CANAAN. 

-NUM. 10:ll-13,29-36-AUGUST 17.- 

Golden Text:— "For thy name's sake 
lead me, and guide me."— Psa. 31:3. 

ISRAEL spent nearly a year in the vicinity of 
Mt. Sinai. It was about a year and fifty 
days after their departure from Egypt that, 
by the Lord's instruction, they broke camp to journey 
toward the promised land— Canaan. Doubtless, 
their first impressions respecting the matter were that 
the Lord, through Moses, would lead them directly 
into the Land of Promise, and no doubt they wondered 
at the delay. We can see, however, that a nation 
reduced almost to the condition of slavery, 
would need many lessons to prepare the people for 
the glorious heritage which the Lord had promised 
them. In previous studies we have seen how the 
Lord inculcated lessons of trust, duty, obedience, worship 
and temperance, and subsequent events will 
prove to us that even with all these instructions the 
people were not yet ready to trust and obey the 
Lord so as to be properly fit for their inheritance. 
During the eleven months spent in the vicinity 
of Mt. Sinai, important arrangements were effected 
—all tending to a larger degree of organization, government 
and personal responsibility amongst the people. 

R3060 : page 249 

When ready to leave Mt. Sinai they had not 
only their tribal organizations, but were additionally 
grouped in companies of ten and these into fifties 
and these again into larger groups or commands, so 
that the entire host was well marshalled. Besides 
this, they had in each tribe a Judge or lawgiver for 



minor questions; weightier matters being brought to 
Moses and through him to the Lord. Moreover, the 
Lord put his spirit upon seventy of the elders of the 
people, of all the tribes, so that they prophesied or 
taught the people, each in his own department; while 
the tribe of Levi had been specially set apart to the 
divine service. The Tabernacle had been made with 
all its appurtenances, and the regular order of worship 
had been established— typical, like the people, 
of the better things coming afterward. 

If, as we see, it was appropriate that Israel according 
to the flesh should have training-lessons in 
trust, obedience, etc., we can readily understand that 
their antitype, spiritual Israel, has much need of instruction, 
much need to learn lessons along the 
same lines,— and still more particularly, if they would 
be prepared to enter into typical Canaan. We need 
to learn to trust the Lord implicitly after we leave 
Egypt, the world, and set forth on the way to our 
Canaan; we need to learn that he alone is able to deliver 
us from the spirit of the world which would still 
pursue us and bring us back into captivity; we need 
to learn to trust the Lord for the heavenly manna 
and to gather it day by day; we need to learn confidence 
in the Lord, not only in the presence of the 
leaders whom he raises up for us, but also in their 
absence, and not to set up for ourselves earthly idols 
to draw our hearts away in any measure from the 
Lord and his arrangements, and the great purpose 
for which we have started under his leadership; we 
need to learn the import of the Covenant which he 
has graciously made with us, sealed with the precious 
blood;— to be faithful to our share therein to 
the extent of our ability, and to trust the remainder 
to our great Mediator. 

We need also to learn the Tabernacle lessons- 
how and under what conditions we may have fellowship 
with God— may enter into the court and still 
further into the Holy, and ultimately, as members 
of the High Priest's body, into the Most Holy. We 
need to learn order in respect to natural as well as 
spiritual things; and that while the liberties of the 
Lord's people are to be conserved and bondage to 
evil is to be avoided, that, nevertheless, in all of the 
Lord's arrangements there is order, as represented in 
the order established amongst the Israelites. We are 
to learn first of all to be subject to the Lord, and 
secondly, to every ordinance of God; we are to consider 
the truly consecrated people of God as a unit 
and are to seek to co-operate one with another, and 
to remember the Apostle's words, "Remember them 
which have the rule over you," (Heb. 13:7), and 
again, "Yea, all of you be subject one to another." 
(I Pet. 5:5.) All of these lessons are necessary to us, 
as similar lessons in type were necessary to typical 
Israel. 



The cloud, representing the Lord, rested over 
the Tabernacle during the sojourn in the vicinity of 
Sinai; but in harmony with the instructions given 
through Moses, when the appointed time had come, 
the cloud lifted from the Tabernacle and went before 
the people and about one hundred and fifty 
miles distant, rested over another wilderness nearer 
Canaan. The people followed it in marching order 
and apparently at first with great enthusiasm, praising 
the Lord. Vs. 35 seems to refer to Psalm 68 
which describes the journey; see also Psa. 132:8. 
But whatever were the joyful anticipations of the people, 
they found the wilderness of Paran into which 
the Lord led them the scene of great trial, for it was 
much more rugged than the wilderness of Sinai and 
much less adapted to the care of their flocks and 
herds. This brought to the people fresh trials of faith 
and courage and endurance and confidence in the 
Lord and appreciation of his promises. 

So with spiritual Israelites: after the Lord has 
given us certain lessons and experiences, some of 
which come to us under quiet and restful conditions, 
the order of procedure may be changed, and the indication 
of the Lord's providences may lead to some 
breaking up of conditions which had been both favorable 
and unfavorable in some respects— leading into 
new circumstances and conditions. It is not for the 
true spiritual Israelite to murmur or complain or 
even to express a choice; but to look to the Lord 

R3061 : page 249 

for guidance. If he can discern the leadings of divine 
providence, even though it be in a wilderness 
condition more arid and undesirable than that in 
which he has previously been, he is to follow the 
Lord's leadings unquestioningly and with songs of 
faith and confidence. We are marching toward Canaan 
and know that other experiences are due us 
and must be undergone ere we can inherit the promises. 
The lesson for us is prompt and thorough obedience 
to the Lord's leadings without murmurings— 
with joyfulness; and this can only be expected on the 
part of those who have learned the lessons previously 
given them, and above all the lesson of faith,— 
confidence in the Lord's power and goodness and 
faithfulness. 

REBELLION AGAINST GOD'S PROVIDENCE. 

It was while in Paran that the people began to 
murmur again— for the leeks and onions and garlic 
and fish, etc., of Egypt. As little children to a father, 
they lamented to Moses— even regretting that they 
had been led out of bondage. Moses appealed the 
matter to the Lord, and the latter granted the request 



in displeasure, telling Moses that he esteemed the 
people to be murmurers against himself; because he 
was the real Leader and Moses merely his servant. 
The people wanted more meat, expressing themselves 
as wearied of the manna, so God sent them quails. An 
immense flock of quails was blown by a providential 
storm from the south and east over the Elantic Gulf 
into their camp. A writer on Eastern subjects says: 
—"These quails cannot sustain themselves long on 
the wing, and after crossing the desert 30 or 40 miles 
they would scarcely be able to fly.. ..When exhausted 
they would easily be taken as they flew at 
a height of about two cubits (3 or 4 feet) from the 

R3061 : page 250 

ground." The people got an abundance; but ate so 
greedily that a pestilence broke out among them, 
which cost the lives of many, so that they called that 
place Kibroth-Hattaavah— "Graves of Greediness." 
Thus the Lord permitted their discontent and spirit 
of rebellion to work out a severe penalty in a natural 
way. 

Is it not sometimes after the same manner with 
the Spiritual Israelites? Do not some after being well 
fed on spiritual manna permit a selfish, craving spirit 
to interrupt their fellowship with the Lord to some 
extent— hankering for earthly, fleshly, good things; 
—forgetting the wisdom of our Leader, the Lord, and 
that his love which thus far has delivered us, and fed 
and led us, is still with us, as wise and as good as 
ever? Sometimes it is a repining against our lot in 
life, a desire for more ease and comfort and wealth 
and social influence, than are within our reach: sometimes 
it is a protest against our share of the aches 
and pains of the groaning creation and our inability 
to get rid of these: sometimes it is a protest against 
the illness and death of a loved one. 

How unwise! Should not those who have been 
fed on the spiritual manna realize that all of Spiritual 
Israel's affairs are under the Lord's care and supervision? 
Should they not remember that,— He doth 
not willingly afflict the children of men, but for their 
good? (Lam. 3:33; Heb. 12:10.) Ah! some have 
found that the prayers of murmurers, even when answered, 
as were Israel's, sometimes bring unexpected 
drawbacks;— that selfish prayers are too expensive. 
Some have gained wealth and lost the truth and its 
service: some have gained health only to find that 
with it they gained other trials no less severe: some 
have had their dear ones restored to them from the 
very jaws of death, only to wish afterward that God 
had not answered their prayers;— or, more correctly, 
to wish that they had accepted the Lord's wisdom 
and providences trustfully, contentedly, 
uncomplainingly. 



The lesson to Israel was, that they should trust 
the Lord implicitly; and accepting and using all that 
they had, all that the surroundings would supply, they 
should have used it as wisely and as thoroughly as 
possible— accepting all things, natural as well as miraculous, 
as God's gifts. And therewith they should 
have been content, thankful, happy. So, too, Spiritual 
Israel should use wisely such things as are within 
their reach— accepting all as God's gifts with thanksgiving; 
but their petitions should be for spiritual gifts 
—including patient-endurance and heart-contentment. 

REBELLION AGAINST THE DIVINE ORDER. 

It was in Paran that Miriam and Aaron rebelled 
against Moses' leadership asserting themselves his 
equals in authority. Miriam, the prime mover in the 
matter, referred to Moses' marriage to a negress 
(Ethiopian) as an evidence of his general incapacity 
to manage his own affairs, much less those of a nation. 
The text of the complaint is given only in part, 
but undoubtedly the fact that they were now near to 
Canaan and well organized and that it was now comparatively 
easy to lead the people, led to this wrong 
position. Both were quite willing that Moses should 
be leader when the start was made and when all the 
chances seemed to be against the success of the 
movement. 

Poor Moses ! If it almost crushed him when the 
people murmured against him, how must he have 
felt when his two most trusted advisers thus showed 
that they too had a wrong view of the Exodus, and 
considered Moses a self-appointed leader! True, it 
does appear to us as though his meekness had led him 
into a marriage in every way beneath his education 
and station in life; but then, was he not under divine 
supervision in all his affairs? And could not the 
Lord have hindered the marriage unless he saw some 
way in which it could prove advantageous? And 
should not Miriam and Aaron have remembered this, 
and minded their own business? As a matter of fact 
we believe that the Lord was favorable to the marriage; 
—that thus he forestalled any inclination on 
the part of Israel to accept the children of Moses as 
their kings and lawgivers to the subversion of the divine 
program. 

The Lord's indignation was shown in smiting 
Miriam with leprosy and refusing to heal her for 
seven days even at the entreaty of Moses;— that 
thus the camp of Israel might also get a lesson in harmony 
with a subsequent statement,— "Touch not 
mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm." 

The lesson of trusting to the Lord's vigilance in 
minding his business and the lesson that each Israelite 
indeed should mind his own business, are still 
closely identified. Many, nay all, still need to learn 



these lessons. The officiousness which inclines so 
many to think that the Lord's work will go to wreck 
unless they control the lever and pass their judgment 
upon everybody and everything, is dangerous to all 
who have it, and their name is legion. It is born of 
too great self-conceit mixed with lack of respect for 
God's wisdom and with a desire to meddle as "busybodies 
in other men's matters." Each should early 
learn that while doing his own part with his might he 
should trust much to the Lord, and that to him each 

"COME THOU WITH US AND WE WILL 
DO THE GOOD." 

servant stands or falls. Failure to do this leads to 
leprosy— sin. 

Hobab, here introduced to our attention (vs. 29), 
was Moses' brother-in-law. (Judg. 4:11— R.V.) 
Raguel is here given as the name of Moses' father-in-law 
and is supposed to refer to the same person called 
Jethro in another place. The explanation offered is 
that Raguel was his proper name and Jethro, which 
signifies Excellent, was his title as a chieftain of the 
Midianites, of the clan known as Kenites which 
dwelt in Midian east of Sinai. Hobab, therefore, was 
also a chieftain amongst the Kenites and undoubtedly, 
as Moses' words suggest, was well acquainted 
with the country through which Israel would pass. 
Moses invited him to cast in his lot with the Israelites 
promising him that thus he, and such of his tribe 
as would come with him, should become joint-participators 
with the Israelites in the promises God had 
made them,— "Come thou with us and we will do 
thee good, for the Lord hath spoken good concerning 

R3061 : page 251 

Israel. ..and it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, 
it shall be, that what goodness the Lord shall do to 
us, the same will we do unto thee." Although Hobab 
at first refused, the promise of a share with Israel 
apparently influenced him favorably; because 
mention is made elsewhere of the Kenites as having 
share with Israel in the promised land.— Judges 1:16; 
4:11; I Sam. 15:6;IChron. 2:55. 

Doubtless this narrative of divine arrangement 
with Hobab through Moses, was intended to convey 
a lesson to spiritual Israelites also. It represents 
that some who are not children of the promises according 
to the flesh, were, nevertheless, accepted of 
God because of the exercise of faith,— because of 
their willingness also to endure the trials and difficulties 
and warfare of the children of Israel, that they 
might be participators with them in the rewards and 
promises. So to-day, we may say to those who are 
still aliens, strangers, foreigners to the Lord's covenants, 



"Come thou with us and we will do thee 
good." We may tell whoever has an ear to hear of 
the gracious things which the Lord has promised, of 
everlasting life in Paradise, to all who are his,— 
faithful to the end of the journey; and yet, it will be 
a matter for the exercise of their wills: if they share 
in the blessings, they must also be willing to share 
the difficulties of the way, and the reproaches of the 
Lord's people. Not only may we thus speak to people 
orally, inviting them to join with us, but our lives 
in general should be "living epistles," giving testimony 
of our faith in the Lord and in his promises;— 
helpful, encouraging and attractive to others. 

Our Golden Text applies to every spiritual Israelite, 
and surely all such must recognize the leadership 
of the Lord, else they cannot have peace and 
joy and blessing, and cannot make progress toward 
our Canaan. The Israelites learned to look for the 
movement of the cloud by which the Lord led them, 

R3062: page 251 

and only once is it recorded that they ever disobeyed 
its leading— and that once was accompanied by their 
reverse in battle before their enemies, which doubtless 
impressed the lesson. (Num. 14:44,45.) Similarly, 
one of the most important lessons for the spiritual 
Israelite is to learn to look to the Lord for leading 
in all of life's affairs— never to attempt any undertaking 
either temporal or spiritual without seeking 
to note the will of the Lord concerning the same. 

The sooner this lesson is learned, the sooner disasters 
in life will be obviated; nevertheless, we are 
to remember that the Lord's providences may lead 
us into trying circumstances and conditions, and not 
always into pastures green. Yet in these, faith will 
be tested and developed and faithfulness to the Lord's 
leading will gradually bring us assurances that all 
things are working together for our good, for our 
spiritual welfare— the matters which appear to be favorable 
and comforting, and the experiences which 
seem to be rough and distressing. We are not to ask 
or expect the Lord's leading for our own sakes, nor 
for any merit or worthiness in us, but, as our Golden 
Text expresses it, for the Lord's sake— in accordance 
with his promise to us as spiritual Israelites, the 
seed of Abraham;— for his own name's sake and 
work's sake, in that he has purchased the blessing of 
the world, and is now taking out a people for his 
name to be his agents in this work of blessing,— for 
his own name's sake in that he has invited us, promised 
us the victory if we abide in his love. 



R3062: page 251 



INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



IS THE COVENANT STILL BINDING ON THE JEW? 



Question.— Does the Jewish Law Covenant still 
exist? or was it fully terminated at the introduction of 
the New Covenant sealed by our Lord's death? If it 
still exists as a covenant, are all Jews now living still 
under and bound by that Sinaitic covenant? and if so, 
is the offer to the Jew still good that if he can still fulfil 
his part of that Law Covenant, he may have eternal 
life as a reward therefor aside from Christ? 

Answer.— The Law Covenant was an agreement 
between God and the nation of Israel by which God 
pledged himself to give certain rewards to that nation 
if obedient; and Israel in turn bound itself to keep that 
law, and consented in event of failure to do so, that 
they had no claim upon the promises, but that they 
would justly come under divine sentence afresh. That 
covenant ceased, so far as God was concerned, when 
that nation was rejected at the time they rejected Jesus, 
and their rejection was noted in our Lord's words, 
"Your house is left unto you desolate." The rewards 
of the law were, nevertheless, secured by one Jew; 
namely, our Lord Jesus, because of his perfect obedience 
—even unto death. To him therefore, legally 
went all the blessings and privileges contained in and 
implied by the Law Covenant and the Abrahamic 
Covenant, to which it was merely "added." Thus we 
see that from God's standpoint the covenant arrangements 
have been fulfilled in Jesus, the faithful Jew, 
and that its provisions, therefore, cannot in any manner 
be extended to others now— nor could others ever hope 
to claim its provisions, even if they were open now. 

However, while God has thus accomplished his 
side of the covenant, the Jews have never accomplished 
their side. Every circumcised Jew comes under the 
provisions of the Law Covenant and is subject to all 
its conditions, and can escape those conditions only in 
the divinely appointed way— by accepting Jesus as his 
Savior, the curse of the law: for he is the end of the law 
for righteousness [righteously] to every one that believeth 
(Rom. 10:4), but not to others. A believing Jew, in 
accepting Christ, ceases to be a Jew and becomes a 
Christian. Consequently all Jews not thus believing 
are still under the Law Covenant to which they have 
subscribed and to which they are bound by their own 
covenant or engagement; and there is no way for them 
to get free from their obligation to keep the whole law, 
except by believing into Jesus and thus in his sacrifice, 
having the righteousness of the law fulfilled in them. 



(Rom. 8:4.) The curse which they brought upon their 
own heads remains with them. "His blood be upon 
us and our children." (Matt. 27:25.) They can only 
escape the curse of the law and the additional curse of 
this gross violation of it, by having the merit of his 

R3062 : page 252 

blood, his sacrifice, imputed to them, as a sin sacrifice, 
the atonement of their guilt. 

A COMPARATIVE ESTIMATE OF THE ELECTION. 



Question.— There is a difference of opinion 
amongst us respecting your meaning in the article "A 
Comparative Estimate of the Election," page 26, in 
Jan. 15, 1902 number of the WATCH TOWER, hence I 
inquire, Is it your thought that the consecrated number 
includes only those who have come to a knowledge 
of present truth? If so, are we to understand that for 
every one who now comes into fellowship in the light 
of present truth, some other one has gone out of this 
light into darkness? 

Answer.— Quite to the contrary. We understand 
that consecration to the Lord is necessary in every case 
before there will be a proper ability to receive the truth 
in the love of it— the truth respecting the deep things 
of God. It is our thought that of the suggested 3 1 ,500 
already consecrated in 1881, scarcely any had any 
knowledge of what we term "present truth." Our 
thought is that a knowledge of present truth will be 
brought to all of these consecrated ones and will constitute 
a test of their consecration, of their sincerity; 
just as at the first advent our Lord offered himself not 
to the Gentiles, the unconsecrated, but to Israel the 
consecrated, typical people. The offering constituted 
a test to the Israelites; such as were meek and lowly 
of heart were the better prepared to receive the Messiah; 
such as were proud, vain-glorious either of their 
own persons or of their sects or parties, were thereby 
blinded and stumbled and hindered from accepting the 
truth. So it is today; the meek, the humble, the lowly 
of heart who are following the Lord implicitly have 
much advantage every way over the majority of God's 
consecrated people now, beset by worldliness and personal 
or sectarian pride and ambition. Nevertheless, 
having made a consecration and having been accepted 
of the Lord, a reasonable time should properly be 
granted to such to make their calling and election sure, 
to learn life's lessons respecting the emptiness of pride 
and ambition, and the fact that the true peace and joy 
in the Lord are to be found in humility of heart and 
closeness to the Master. We believe that in the Lord's 
providence "present truth" has been presented time 



and again to many of these consecrated ones and that 
some were ready and received it the first time, while 
to others it came two, three, four times before they 
had learned their lessons properly so as to be able to 
discern the emptiness of sectarianism and the bitterness 
and nausea of human creeds and theories in order 
that they might be able to appreciate the good tidings 
of the Word and plan of God. Others failing to profit 
by experiences granted them will, we believe, be rejected 
from the "overcomers" class. 

In all reason we must expect that the period of 
favor with many of these is expired and that the 
crowns apportioned to them at the time of their consecration 
are no longer held for them, but will be granted 
to others who will take their places; and that their 
names will no longer be written amongst the victors, 
but will be blotted out from that glorious place, though 
not blotted out of God's memory, nor blotted out of 
existence, but rather that they may be re-entered as 
members of another class, the "Great Company," who 
shall pass through the great tribulation which, peradventure, 
may work in them blessings which they were 
not prepared otherwise to receive. 

We are not to expect that the Lord would wait 
until these names began to be stricken from the list 
before he would begin to prepare others for their places: 
rather we are to presume that he would have in training 
a considerable number already consecrated but not 
accepted to the high calling (because the general call 
has ceased) and therefore not at once made acquainted 
with present truth. As vacancies shall occur amongst 
the accepted, or "elect" class because of failure to fulfil 
consecration vows, it will open the way for these later 
consecrated ones to be accepted to the "high calling" 
and then it will be proper for them to come to an appreciation 
of present truth, and to discern clearly the 
prize of our high-calling, the race course leading to it 
and the requirements of every faithful runner. That 
this has been the Lord's method since 1881 is evidenced 
very clearly by the fact that now at the time when we 
would expect that a good many names would be blotted 
from the roll as having failed to be victors, there 
are, we find, a considerable number consecrated since 
1881, ready to receive the truth. And so deep is their 
consecration and earnestness and zeal that once they 
come into contact with the truth they assimilate it 
quickly, with understanding and appreciation, and 
make rapid progress in the race course toward the mark 
of the prize— perfect love. 

Of course we must expect that some, even after 
receiving the light of present truth, will prove unfaithful 
to it and go out into the "outer darkness" of the 
world, where shortly, in the great time of trouble, 
they will share in the predicted "weeping and gnashing 
of teeth;" and we must expect that the going out 
of the race by these will be followed by the letting of 



others into the race course as well as in case of those 
who were consecrated prior to 1881, and whose testing 
largely consists in their coming into contact with the 
light of present truth. However, those who have come 
into the light of present truth under consecration made 
since October, 1881, will be much less likely to be 

R3063 : page 252 

finally rejected than those who were consecrated prior 
to 1881; because the receiving of the light of present 
truth constitutes one trial or sifting in every case, and 
this test is already past by those now being accepted. 

"GOD GIVETH IT A BODY." 



Question.— In explaining the resurrection of the 
dead, in I Cor. 15:36-38, the Apostle uses the illustration 
of wheat, or any kind of grain, saying, "That 
which thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that shall 
be, but a bare grain," "but God giveth it a body as it 
hath pleased him." My question is respecting this 
latter part of the text— "giveth it a body." Would 
not this seem to imply that as in a grain of wheat or 
corn there is a germ which survives the death of the 
remainder of the kernel, so in mankind there must be 
something to survive the death of the body— some kind 
of an "it" to which the Lord will give a body in the 
resurrection? What is this "it" in humanity? 

Answer.— If we say that the "it" represents the 
soul we state the matter truthfully, but in a manner 
liable to be misunderstood by the average reader or 
hearer, because very few seem to understand what a 

R3063 : page 253 

soul is, according to the Bible usage. There are any 
number of views and theories respecting what a soul is, 
yet all of them, except the Scriptural definition, are 
vague, indefinite, inconsistent, unreasonable. According 
to the Scriptures the word "soul" is the equivalent 
of the word "being;" and stands for the intelligent 
person or "sentient being." The body is not the soul, 
though there could be no soul without a body; and the 
breath of life or spirit of life is not the soul, though 
there can be no soul without the spirit of life. As 
elsewhere explained,* when a body has been organized 
and infused with the spirit or energy of life, so that 
intelligence and thought result, that resultant condition 
is sentient being, or soul condition. 

God's sentence of death as the wages of sin is 
against the soul: "The soul that sinneth, it shall die." 
And this sentence is executed through the deterioration 
of the body, either by sickness or otherwise, snapping 



the golden cord of life, causing the spirit or energy of 
life to break its union with the body. The result we 
call death, even before the putrefaction sets in which 
destroys the body. It is the death of the soul, the 
cessation of being, which has occurred. 

In the divine arrangement God has provided in 
the death of our Lord Jesus a ransom for all (I Tim. 2:5,6), 
—all the souls of the human family— for Adam 
and Eve, and all the souls begotten, generated, by 
them. Consequently, although the divine sentence is 
upon every soul of man unto death, in view of this 
atonement which God has provided we who have faith 
in the efficacy of the atonement and in the ultimate 
carrying out of the divine plan are permitted to speak 
of these dead souls as though they were not dead, but 
merely asleep— "them that sleep in Jesus." (I Thess. 4:13,14.) 
All who were dead in Adam, having been 
bought by Jesus are not yet made alive by him, nor 
even in any measure resuscitated, but are spoken of as 
no longer extinct but reckonedly sleeping— waiting for 
the Millennial morning, when all that are in their 
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and shall 
come forth again to being and to the opportunities of 
a raising up, or restoration to all that was lost— the 
process of raising up being betokened by the judgments 
of the Millennial age— rewards for those who will do 
well, chastisements for those who do ill, destruction if 
they persevere in ill doing. This judgment, in our 
common version Bible, is mistranslated "damnation." 
-John 5:29. 

The "it" in the case of the world is the soul, or 
being which became extinct in death, but which was 
redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, and is to be 
the subject of restitution power at his second advent. 
Each "it," each soul, each sentient being of the human 
family, redeemed by our Lord, was designed to 
have a body. Indeed, it cannot awake or come into 
being at all without a body. It will be necessary that 
the body shall be produced, created, and that, so far 
as the brain at least is concerned, identical with the 
body that perished when the soul fell asleep. Thus 
for the world the Lord will give "it" a body of its own 
kind;— human kind— a body which can go onward and 
upward to restitution and full human perfection, if the 
mind, the will, the soul, governing it, shall become 
obedient to the great Prophet, Priest and King, the 
glorified Christ, during the Millennial age; otherwise 
it will be cut off in the Second Death, and that without 
hope of recovery.— Acts 3:21-23. 

In the case of the Church, a justification by faith 
is granted to believers, by which they are accounted 
free from the sentence of death, and permitted to consecrate 
their justified lives as sacrifices in the Lord's 
service— joint-sacrificers with their Lord, in whose 
foot-steps they are called to follow. These, in their 
consecration, are reckoned as dying to the human nature 



entirely, and their new minds are reckoned as 

having been transformed, as being no longer human 

minds or wills, but spiritual minds or wills— "We have 

the mind of Christ." This will, still exercised through 

a human body, is by the Lord and by his children accounted 

as the beginning of the new nature, the nucleus 

or new will of the "new creature." This new 

creature, however, has no suitable spirit body at the 

present time, but tabernacles in the earthly, dying 

body— which indeed perishes as the new creature develops. 

The faithful of this class will constitute the 

first resurrection, described by the Apostle. (I Cor. 15:42-44.) 

The new mind is the "it" in this case; 

no longer a human mind or will or spirit, but a new 

spiritual one, changed; and in the resurrection God 

will give "it," this embryo new creature, a spiritual 

body, as he has promised, and as it hath pleased him. 



♦Millennial Dawn Vol. V., Chap. 12. 

R3063 : page 253 

"WE ARE WELL ABLE TO OVERCOME IT." 

-NUM. 13:26-14: 10.-AUGUST 24.- 

"Blessed is the man that maketh 
the Lord his trust."-Psa. 40:4. 

ISRAEL having been taught certain great lessons 
in the wilderness, journeying toward 
Canaan, and having learned them to some 
extent, was now at Kadesh Barnea on the southern 
borders of the land of promise. The people suggested 
the sending of spies to investigate the condition 
of things in Palestine before going further. (Deut. 1:22.) 
The Lord acceded to the proposition and 
through Moses made selection of twelve chief men, 
one from each of the tribes— excepting the tribe of 
Levi and counting both Ephraim and Manasseh for 
Joseph. This caution in sending the spies was not 
condemned of the Lord; nevertheless, the people who 
for more than a year had been guided in all of their 
affairs by the pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of 
fire by night— directing their marchings, locations 
and camps, the time of their stay, etc.,— the people 
who had been miraculously fed with the quail and who 
had experienced the continuous miracle of the manna, 
and who had witnessed the discomfiture of their 
enemies by divine power when the hands of Moses 
were held up;— these people might have had faith 
enough in the Lord to have continued under his leadership 



whensoever and wheresoever he led them, confident 
of his care and of his power. 

R3063 : page 254 

The twelve spies quite probably separated into 
small groups and thus made the more extensive investigation; 
however, their return seems to have been 
at one time, which is rather against this supposition. 
Ten of the number reported favorably as respected 
the land, but unfavorably respecting the possibilities 
of conquering it; the other two, Joshua and Caleb, 
with greater faith in the Lord, were less apprehensive 
and assured the people, "Let us go up at once 
and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it." 
However, the people had not fully learned the lesson 
of faith in God their Leader, and hence the report of 
the majority thoroughly aroused their fears and discouraged 
them from attempting the conquest. 

The majority report was given with an appearance 
of great equity, telling, on the one hand, that 
the land indeed was a goodly one, and exhibiting 
in demonstration some fruits, amongst which was the 
renowned bunch of grapes from Eshcol, which they 
had carried suspended on a pole between two of their 
number; but, on the other hand, they seem to have 
exaggerated in their description of the difficulties:— 
having reached a conclusion in their own minds they 
sought to impress it upon their report; and, like many 
of our own day, considered that in order to secure 
their end, a little exaggeration was justifiable;— the 
people were giants and the Israelites in comparison 
as grasshoppers; the cities were immense and were 
walled up to heaven; the land though rich, as evidenced 
by the fruits they brought, they reported "eateth 
up the inhabitants thereof";— meaning either 
that local warfare was prevalent or that it was a pestilential 
land, not healthy, or that as a whole it was 
a barren land and the samples of fruitage they 
brought represented exceptional portions. 

No wonder the people who had looked forward 
so longingly to this land of promise felt greatly discouraged; 
such a report would be well calculated to 
discourage anybody. Yet it was just such a report 
as the people in general would have made, since it 
was made by their representatives out of every tribe. 
The report was an "evil" one, not only in that it exaggerated 
the difficulties, but in that it also entirely 
ignored the divine supervision of the past. Among 

R3064 : page 254 

other things that inspired fear was the report of the 
giants— Nephilim: these they represented as being 
descendants of the Nephilim, or giants which had 
caused such terror to the world before the flood. 



(Gen. 6:4.) The people were so thoroughly disheartened 
that they set up a great wail of despair;— 
it was a night of sadness when they had expected joy; 
it seemed to crush out all the hope which had previously 
buoyed them up in the journey; they murmured 
against the Lord as well as against Moses and 
Aaron, declaring that they would have preferred to 
have died in Egypt or in the wilderness. They seem 
to have concluded that the Lord through Moses 
would now force them into the land of Canaan,— 
seemed to see themselves destroyed by the sword, 
and their families a prey to their enemies. In their 
frenzy they said, Let us choose from our number a 
leader instead of Moses, reverse the program— return 
to Egypt and call it the land of favor! 

It must have been a sad occasion for the meek 
Moses: once before the people had proposed to 
choose another captain or leader, but this was during 
his absence in Mt. Sinai; now in his presence they 
repudiated him and all that he had endeavored to do 
for them. Only Joshua and Caleb stood by the Lord 
and defended Moses and Aaron who had fallen on 
their faces before the assembly; these two professed 
faith in the Lord; saying, "If the Lord delight in us, 
then he will bring us into this land, and give it us; a 
land which floweth with milk and honey. Only rebel 
not ye against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of 
the land; for they are bread for us; their defense is 
departed from them, and the Lord is with us; fear 
them not." But these noble and courageous words 
of faith were lost upon the angry people: discontent 
and fear had gained thorough control of their minds, 
so that instead of loving and appreciating these noble 
men and their counsel, they were about to stone 
them to death. 

Then the Lord interfered as on a previous occasion; 
a bright light shining out from the Tabernacle 
reminded the people that the Lord their Leader was 
not only gracious and careful, but just; and that he 
could and would punish transgression as before. A 
pestilence broke out amongst them, and among its 
first victims were the ten spies who had brought the 
discouraging report. Moses pointed out these matters 
to them and showed what a lack of confidence in 
God their Leader they had manifested. He gave 
them also the Lord's message that because of unbelief 
they had failed to improve their opportunities, 
and in consequence none of them above twenty years 
of age should ever enter the land of promise— the 
youth and children, being held of the Lord as not responsible, 
were exempted. The Lord explained to 
them that for every day that the spies had spent in 
searching the land to bring an evil report, there 
should be a year of delay in eventually reaching it. 
Thus God here answered their prayer. "Would to 
God that we had died in the wilderness!"— God determined 



that they should all die there. 

Shortly their courage revived and they determined 
that having come thus far to enter the land of 
promise they would go forward and take possession 
of it;— they would ignore the Lord's declaration that 
they might not now have it;— they would take it anyway 
for themselves. Another evidence is here given 
of their lack of faith in the Lord; they did not realize 
as they should have done how much the Lord's hand 
had been connected with all their progress thus far, 
and that without him they could do nothing. When 
they informed Moses of their purpose, he refused his 
consent and co-operation, and forewarned them of 
disaster in any enterprise in which the Lord was not 
their leader, nevertheless they marshalled a host and 
went forth, soon to retreat in disorder before their 
enemies, leaving numbers of their brethren slain upon 
the field of battle. It was a difficult matter for 
them to learn to rely, not upon themselves, but upon 
the Lord. Thence their journey turned again into 
the wilderness. 

LESSONS FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES. 

That the land of Canaan and its rest from the 
wilderness journeying is intended to be a type for 

R3064 : page 255 

the spiritual Israelites, is clearly shown by the Apostle 
in his reference to it, and to how Joshua led the 
people into its rest. (Heb. 4:3-8.) Canaan evidently 
cannot typify the perfect heavenly state into which 
the Church hopes to enter; because when Israel did 
enter Canaan there were years of battling with the 
inhabitants thereof,— finally overcoming them by the 
Lord's assisting power. The Scriptures teach us, on 
the contrary, that when the Church shall have experienced 
the First Resurrection change, all her trials and 
difficulties, her conflicts with the Amalekites and Hittites 
and Jebusites and Philistines will be ended;— 
that which is perfect shall have come, and that which 
is in part shall have been done away. We must, 
therefore, understand Canaan to represent the Millennial 
Kingdom condition, into which all who are 
the Lord's people shall be brought, under the leadership 
of the antitypical Joshua (Jesus), the Church 
being the priesthood glorified. The antitype of Canaan's 
trials and difficulties will be experienced in 
overcoming the weaknesses pertaining to the flesh, 
and in developing more and more under the Lord's 
guidance and blessing into the full perfection of human 
nature— by restitution processes then in operation, 
rewarding every act of obedience and reproving 
and punishing every act of disobedience. 
Fleshly Israel not only made this type in the wilderness, 



but accomplished in considerable measure 
its antitype; for during the 1600 years of their experience 
they were, under the Lord's guidance, being 
prepared for the Millennial Kingdom (Canaan). 
At our Lord's first advent they as a nation had 
reached a place corresponding to Kadesh Barnea, a 
place of decision in respect to entering into the Kingdom 
condition. Had they been in the right attitude 
of heart, full of faith and trust in the Lord, they would 
have received him, and the Kingdom of God could 
at once have been established. But in unbelief they 
rejected him who was the antitype of Moses and 
Aaron and therefore did not enter into rest; instead, 
another long, wearisome journey in the wilderness 
has been their portion, for now nearly 1900 years. 
Shortly, at the second advent of our Lord, he, as the 
antitype of Joshua, will lead all his people Israel, as 
many as shall come into the faith of Abraham, and 
thus become his people, into the land of promise— 
into the Millennial Kingdom with its blessings, mercies 
and promises. 

But is there a lesson for spiritual Israelites in 
connection with these Canaan fightings, etc.? Yes, 
we answer: we are to be like Joshua and Caleb, and 
by faith are to enter into the land and confirm the 
Lord's promises and give a good report thereof. By 
faith we have already entered into divine favor; we 
must have already tasted that the Lord is gracious; 
we have already experienced forgiveness of sins; we 
know as the remainder of mankind know not,— even 
those who seek righteousness and harmony with God 
—that the Lord's power is not limited. We realize 
that we are fully able to meet the conflicts and difficulties 
and trials belonging to a consecrated life. 
By faith we are already living in this Kingdom; already 
we are battling with the world, the flesh and the 
devil, day by day, but at the same time resting— in 
the promises of the Lord; in the strength and grace 
which he supplies; in the victories which he grants us. 

It will be remembered that the name Joshua is 
otherwise translated Jesus (see Heb. 4:8) and means 
"deliverer of his people— help of God." The name 
Caleb signifies "dog"; and this reminds us that the 
poor of this world, rich in faith, who are to be heirs 
of the Kingdom with their Lord Jesus, were represented 
in our Lord's parable as being on a level with 
the dogs. As the rich man, representing Fleshly Israel, 
to whom belonged the promises as the child of 
Abraham, failed to enter into them because of his 
unbelief and rejection of Jesus, and was cast off from 
divine favor for a time, so Lazarus represented those 
"dogs" who have, during this Gospel age been accepted 
as children of Abraham through faith. Viewing 
Joshua and Caleb from this standpoint as representing 
the Lord and the faithful though despised 
few who share with him the people's wrath for their 



good report, we can see that these alone, at the 
present time, have the proper faith in God to enter 
into his rest in advance of the world, and to make 
full consecration of themselves to him and his service, 
and to battle with the world, the flesh and the 
devil, and to conquer through the blood of the Lamb. 
And these, now by faith fighting the good fight, shall 
in the near future as God's representatives lead forward 
all the hosts of his people— redeemed mankind 
—who, learning lessons of bitter experience in the 
wilderness condition, will eventually be glad to enter 
into Millennial Canaan, there to inherit the rich 
promises of God's Word. 

The essence of this lesson is represented in the 
Golden Text. Faith and trust in the Lord is the 
paramount essential for acceptance and blessing at 
his hand,— "Without faith it is impossible to please 
God." "This is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even our faith." If we leave the world (Egypt) 
to become the Lord's people, and receive the lessons 
of experience at his hand with proper faith in 
him, the outcome will surely be a readiness and 
promptness to make a full consecration, a full submission 
of ourselves to do the Lord's will; to follow 
his leadings; to inherit whatsoever he has for us. 
And if the faith be of the proper kind we will say with 
the Prophet, "I will fear no evil for Thou art with 
me— thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me." Such, 
and such alone, can be lead of the Lord in this present 
Gospel age, in which we must walk by faith, not 
by sight. Such alone will have the confidence to go 
forward encountering the various oppositions within 
and without in the present time. Such will eventually 
be God's representatives and leaders in the blessing 
of the world in the Millennial age. Let us learn 
well the lesson of faith, of trust: as God informs us 

R3065 : page 255 

of his appreciation of this quality, and that he can 
deal with us only in proportion as we possess it, so in 
our own experiences we find that we love most to 
assist and encourage those who manifest an abiding 
confidence in us. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. SEPTEMBER 1, 1902. No. 17. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 259 

Dr. Henson and The Fall 259 

A Lonely Voice of Protest 

Against Evolution 262 

Zionists Fail to Obtain From the 
Sultan the Kind of Concessions 

in Palestine They Desire 262 

Touched With the Feeling 

of Our Infirmities 262 

Striving Lawfully 264 

The Claims of Love and Justice 265 

Poem— "That I May Know Him" 266 

A Prophet Like Moses 267 

Love of God in Mouth and Heart 269 

page 258 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

Every letter you send through the mail may be a more 
or less potent messenger of the truth, even on its outside, 
by the use of these envelopes. They catch the attention 
not only of those to whom they are addressed, but postmen 



and others have an opportunity, and often the curiosity, to 
read their message of peace; the gospel in a condensed 
form. Price 25c per hundred post paid. 



WE ARE HOLDING some of the new Bibles for a time, for 
some of those who hope to find it more convenient to send the 
money later. We still have some of both styles of binding ($2 
and $3), and those desiring may order. 



"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES" is out of 

stock temporarily (both English and German), but we 
hope to have plenty very soon. 



WALL CHARTS are again out of stock. Orders must wait 
until painters' slack season— about November. 



PAPER CHARTS 36 in. long with hangers, metal bound, 
showing chart of the ages and prophetic outlines, prepaid 25c 
each. 

We are preparing a smaller edition of this chart on very 
tough paper, suitable for inserting in the new Bibles. They 
will be very convenient for reference. Price postpaid 10c. 



R3065 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
DR. HENSON AND THE FALL. 



HAVING BEEN obliged in the past to criticize 

the teachings of the celebrated Baptist 

preacher, P. S. Henson, in respect to the 

eternal torment of the large proportion of our race 

being the divine program, we are the more pleased 

now to be able to quote with approval his public utterances 

respecting original sin— the Fall of man— 

from the image and likeness of his Creator. He says: 

"The Bible does not declare how old are the heavens 
and the earth, but only that in the 'beginning,' whenever 
that was, the Lord created them. How long were the 
creative processes we are not informed, for the word 
translated, 'day' in Genesis is often employed in the Bible 
to denote great tracts of time. 

"As to the method of creation the Scriptures make no 



explicit statement, though an evolutionist might imagine 
that he found some shadow of support for his theory when 
he reads that the Lord said: 'Let the waters bring forth 
such creatures as live in the water, and let the earth bring 
forth such creatures as live on the land.' As to man, indeed, 
a different formula entirely is used, for God said: 
Let us make man in our image after our likeness.' 

THE FIRST MAN. 

"But whether He made man by direct creative act 
or by the slow evolutionary processes of the ages, the great 
fact remains that He made him, and this is all that the 
Bible directly declares. But whenever made and however 
made there must have been a first man, and as he had a 
name, or ought to have had, at least, for the purposes of 
history, there would seem to be no valid objection, save 
that which arises from the 'odium theologicum' to the traditionary 
name of Adam.' So far, then, there would seem 
to be no reasons for controversy between the foremost scientist 
and the most literal Scripturalist. 

"The great battle ground is rather to be found in the 
third chapter of Genesis, which gives an account of that 
tremendous transaction which by common consent through 
all the ages has been denominated 'the fall of man.' And 
never was there a more widely prevalent disposition than 
there is to-day to discredit the whole Scripture narrative 
and to brand it as preposterous and absurd. And many 
timid souls have been so overawed by the toploftiness of 
the modern critics that they scarcely dare affirm their belief 
in the substantial verity of the Bible story. 

FACTS FOR DOUBTERS. 

"Now, for the confirmation and the consolation of such 
quaking Elis there are a few things it may be helpful to 
remember. The opening and the closing scenes of man's 
'strange, eventful history' as portrayed in the Bible are 
each laid in a garden— the one in Eden and the other in 
Paradise. Whether the trees and rivers described in both 
stand for literal trees and rivers, such as we are accustomed 
to, does not concern our present purpose. But 
they stand for something, and no doubt the real fact will 
at last be found to be far beyond the figure. 

ARGUMENT PROVING FALL. 

"Now, whatever may be said of the figurative character 
of the language of Genesis, some things loom up as 
indubitably true unless the whole story be discredited as 
a tissue of lies. 

"One is that man's original state was a state of innocence. 
Of course it was if he came fresh from the hand 
of God by direct creative act. And the like might be affirmed 
if the life he wore was the last result of evolution 
from the brute creation. No brute is a sinner, for he always 



acts up to the nature that is in him, but man is a 

sinner, and therefore some time, somehow he must have 

fallen, for now he consciously lives below his proper level. 

His very nature is depraved in its propensities, and therefore 

now 'when he would do good evil is present with 

him.' 

"We excuse the sinner of to-day on the ground of bad 
heredity; but how came he by the bad heredity? We only 
dodge the difficulty by removing it farther back. And yet 
we cannot help asking whence flows the filthy stream that 
befouls all human history? The Scriptures locate the 
fountain. Has philosophy been able to do any better? 

R3065 : page 260 

INTERDICT AGAINST EVIL. 

"The second indubitable thing is that God laid upon 
man an interdict. What a pity and a shame, cries the 
horrified critic, that God should set a snare by which to 
entrap the unsuspecting creature of His hand! 

"And yet if man were to be a subject and not a sovereign 
it must some day and in some way be determined 
whose will was to be law upon this planet. If that matter 
once for all were to be tested, can any complainant 
conceive of a test more wise, more considerate, more conclusive 
than the one that was adopted? But what an outrage 
to interdict knowledge! and the devil has rung the 
changes on that outrage all down the ages. But he lies 
about this, as is his wont about everything else. It was 
not the tree of knowledge about which God drew a cordon, 
but the tree of the knowledge of good and evil— such 
knowledge of good and evil as comes from experience in 
evil doing. And the very words employed suggest their 
symbolic significance. 

MAN'S NATURE POLLUTED. 

"The third great fact that looms up darkly is that man 
transgressed the interdict and went beyond the bounds 
that God in wisdom and in love, and from the very necessities 
of being, had appointed, and so laid himself liable 
to the penalty which the Sovereign of the universe must 
needs attach to violated law. Not only so, but in the act 
of transgression he did violence to his own nature as well 
as to the law of God, and so became crippled and depraved. 
That nature he transmitted to his posterity; for 
the Word reads that 'he begat a son in his own likeness.' 
God never made a thing like Cain. Humanity in its totality 
was in Adam, and therefore in a very true sense what 
was done by Adam was done by us all, for the nature that 
was in Adam is in us all. It is not then without reason 
that we speak of the 'old man' in us, for it comes down to 
us from the very fountain head of humanity, and if the 
fountain head be foul nothing but the salt of the grace of 
God can purify the stream that flows from it. 



THE BIBLICAL REMEDY. 

"However much the language may be abused, there 
is such a thing as 'the solidarity of society' and the 'unity 
of race.' It is true that 'God hath made of one blood all 
nations to dwell on the face of the earth,' and hence if 
one member suffer all the members suffer with it, and being 
partakers of a common nature and all its heritage of 
pain and penalty, up from the depth of the sin and sorrow 
into which the first Adam has plunged us, we need to look 
to the Second Adam through whose atoning death we have 
redemption from the curse of sin, and through identification 
with whose risen life we are made partakers of the 
divine nature and are reinstated in the relationship of sonship 
to God. 

"Such we believe to be substantially the Scripture doctrine 
of the fall of man through Adam and the restoration 
of man through Jesus Christ." 

"THE WAY OF THE LORD MORE PERFECTLY." 

The foregoing is good— Scriptural and logical; 
but Brother Henson should carry the question farther 
on the same Scriptural and logical plane if he 
would have the whole truth. For instance: 

WAS THE REAL PENALTY NOT STATED IN THE 
SENTENCE? 

(1) Where does the Doctor get his theory of 
eternal torment? Answer. Undoubtedly from this doctrine 
of the Fall where all other "orthodox" people 
claim to find it. The claim is that our Creator not 
only meant all that he said in his threat to our first 
parents, and in the curse or sentence following it, 
but unutterably and infernally more: that 
when he said, "Dying thou shalt die," and, 
"Dust thou art and unto dust shalt thou 
return," he meant not only all the degradation 
and pain and anguish and dying of 
the past 6,000 years, referred to above by Dr. Henson, 
but included also an eternity of anguish beyond 
this mentioned dying— for the disobedient pair and for 
all their unfortunate offspring who would not be 
so blessed as to escape it by being of the "elect,"— 
brought to a knowledge of the Lord, assisted to faith 
and obedience and sanctification of spirit, and to correct 
views of baptism and obedience thereto. 

Where in the Scripture will the Doctor find for us 
this diabolical plan set forth as the divine plan 
of the ages which our Heavenly Father purposed in 
himself before the world was? Nowhere! Where 
will he find logic or reason to support such a 
theory? Nowhere! 

Logic and all the facts known to men corroborate 



the Scripture teachings that God declared the whole 
truth in the death sentence promulgated against our 
first parents when they sinned, and inherited by their 
posterity in a natural way. This sentence includes 
mental, moral and physical degeneracy, as Brother 

R3066 : page 260 

Henson in the foregoing statement admits; and both 
logic and Scripture declare that death, the total absence 
of life, is the climax of this course of degeneracy. 
"The soul that sinneth it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4,20.) 
"The wages of sin is death." (Rom. 6:23.) 
Eternal life is a gift of God through Jesus Christ 
our Lord, to be given only to the believing and obedient. 
He that hath the Son hath life; he that hath 
not the Son of God hath not life." I Jno. 5:12. 

(2) Brother Henson also lacks the appreciation of 
"The Biblical Remedy" as he states it. 

He perceives the solidarity of the race in the 
first Adam,— in the prevalence of his condemnation 
upon all his posterity. Why can he not see the 
solidarity of the race in respect to the sacrifice of 
Christ, that he "by the grace of God tasted death for 
every man." (Heb. 2:9.) Why can he not see that 
divine provision of a remedy for sinners is co-extensive 
with the blight of sin? Why does he fail to 
give weight to the clear Scriptural declaration that— 
Christ's sacrifice is "a propitiation [satisfaction] for 
our sins [the church's sins] and not for ours only, but 
also for the sins of the whole world"? (I Jno. 2:2.) 
If under the gloomy shadowings of creeds and theories 
formulated in "dark ages" or in the haze just 
following them, the Doctor has been in the habit of 
applying all these texts which so clearly specify "the 
whole world" to merely the elect church, it is surely 
time to see the error and to note the fact that our 
Heavenly Father's plan centered in Christ Jesus our 
Lord, is so high and so deep, so long and so broad, 
as to provide not only the special heavenly salvation 
of the elect church of this age, to "the divine nature," 
but also to provide through this elect church, the 
spiritual seed of Abraham, a general salvation,— 

R3066 : page 261 

which, beginning with fleshly Israel, shall extend 
through the Millennial age to "all the families of the 
earth"— as God's promise reads.— Rom. 11:25-32; 
Gal. 3:29. 

In this time when Evolutionism and Higher 
Criticism are making void the Word of God we are 
trusting that the true believers who hold fast to the 
Word may get still more widely opened "the eyes of 
their understanding," that they and we may be thus 
enabled to see "eye to eye," by being enabled to comprehend 



with all saints the true dimensions of our 
gracious Father's wonderful plans. (Eph. 3:18.) We 
are trusting in the same Savior and in the same 
Father; but by their grace our eyes have been opened 
a little wider, a little sooner than those of some 
of our brethren whom we sincerely love and long to 
assist out of darkness into the wonderful light of the 
Millennial dawn, now streaming in upon all who are 
awake and looking in the right direction to see the 
glorious Sunrise of the new dispensation— now being 
ushered in by our Lord's parousia. 

THE RESULTS OF WORLD -REDEMPTION. 

(3) As degradation even unto death was the penalty 
of sin, so God's provision is that restitution even 
unto life is the remedy. As the penalty was world-wide 
through Adam, so the remedy is to be world-wide 
through Christ;— an opportunity for reconciliation 
to God has been secured for every member of 
Adam's race by the sacrifice of Christ, who did not 
go to eternal torment for our sins, because eternal 
torment was not the penalty for sin; but who did pay 
the full penalty against Adam (and incidentally 
against his race) in that "he died for our sins" he "died 
the just for the unjust."-I Cor. 15:3; I Pet. 3:18. 

"BELIEVE ON THE LORD JESUS CHRIST AND THOU 
SHALT BE SAVED." 

We agree to this: we are not arguing for a glorification 
of sinners: we are prepared to go with the 
Scriptures farther along this line than Dr. Henson 
may be willing to follow. We hold that the 
above quoted words of the Apostle (Acts 16:31) are 
meant to teach not only that none but believers in 
Christ can be saved, but that, beyond believing, full 
consecration to the Lord is necessary to eternal salvation 
—eternal life. Dare the Doctor go so far and 
interpret this Scripture at its face value, realizing as 
he does so that it would cut off from salvation the 
vast majority of Baptists and of all other denominations 
of Christendom and the heathen world almost 
entirely? Dare any do this, having in mind the 
"orthodox view" that all not saved now must spend 
eternity with demons and in torture? To their credit 
be it said that they cannot so apply this Scripture. 
To their credit be it noted that they hope there 
is some great blunder somewhere, and that it will 
not come true as it seems to them to teach. But their 
great danger is, that the Adversary will prejudice and 
blind them against the only interpretation of God's 
Word which can harmonize the Bible and satisfy 
reason, until they shall have rejected the Bible in toto, 
because viewed from their wrong standpoint its teachings 
must more and more appear unreasonable, 



nonsense. 

"THERE IS NO OTHER NAME GIVEN UNDER HEAVEN 
AND AMONGST MEN WHEREBY WE 
MUST BE SAVED." 

Accepting this declaration as inspired and true, 
wherein is the hope for the world, not one-twentieth 
of whom have ever heard of this only name? We 
answer in the Apostle's language that it is "The hope 
of the resurrection of the dead." Only the saints of 
this Gospel age may hope to have share in the "First 
Resurrection"— to "glory, honor and immortality" 
and to joint heirship with their Lord in the Kingdom; 
but there is hope for almost all others of our race 
in the after-resurrection, which our Lord calls "the 
resurrection by judgment." (John 5:28,29, see Revised 
Version.) That resurrection will be for all the 
"unjust" (unjustified by faith and obedience); it will 
be for all the "evil,"— all who have not been approved 
of God in Christ as "good"— all who have not escaped 
"the condemnation that is on the world." 

That resurrection, open to earth's billions, will 
require a thousand years for its accomplishment— the 
Millennium— and the attainment of it at the close of 
the Millennium will require the development of meekness, 
patience, perseverance, gentleness, brotherly 
kindness, love on the part of all who would receive 
its blessing; all others being hopelessly cut off in the 
Second Death. To participate in this grand resurrection 
privilege will necessitate the awakening of all 
who "sleep in the dust of the earth," or as our Lord 
expressed it, all that are in their graves shall hear his 
mandate and come forth before they can share in the 
privileges of the "resurrection by judgment." The 
expression "by judgment" signifies (harmoniously 
with other Scriptures), that the Millennial age arrangements 
will differ from those of the present and 
past ages, in that while now judgments (rewards and 
punishments) are deferred then they will follow immediately 
each act and word of obedience or disobedience. 
"When the judgments of the Lord are 
abroad in the earth (as they will then be) the inhabitants 
of the world will learn righteousness." And 
the Lord through the Prophet assures us that in that 
blessed day every sinner refusing for one hundred 
years to make progress shall be accounted irreconcilable 
and shall be cut off forever— even though 
as compared with the life privileges of that time he 
would be but an infant at one hundred years of age 
—as in the antediluvian age. Isa. 26:9; 65:20. 

The only exceptions to the privileges of that 
"resurrection by judgments" will be the few who in 
the present life commit the sin unto death— 
"Second Death." These as described by the Apostle 
can be only such as by faith and consecration as 



true Christians, have received the blessings of special 
knowledge and the holy spirit, and then fall away 
either by turning heartily into wilful sin or by rejecting 
the wedding garment of Christ's imputed righteousness. 

We long to assist all the true "brethren" and urge 
any reading this and still finding any obstacles 
to faith and obedience to the "only name" to correspond 
with us. We will take pleasure in lending 
you a helping hand to the Heavenly Kingdom, and 
will gladly loan you the "Bible Keys," through the 

R3066 : page 262 

faithful and prayerful use of which the Bible will 
become to you "a new book"— the best of all books. 

A LONELY VOICE OF PROTEST AGAINST EVOLUTION 
AND HIGHER CRITICISM HERESIES. 



The Chicago Record Herald recently devoted a 
column article to a farewell sermon of Rev. W. T. 
Euster at Wheadon M.E. Church, Evanston, Ind., 
exposing the religious teaching of professors at "Garrett 
Biblical Institute" in that city. Following are 
some extracts. 

"What I say about the results and influence of 'higher 
criticism' here in this field may startle some, but no one 
can adequately realize this without living here for some 
length of time. I have in my ministry here taken every 
occasion to converse and argue with every theological student 
I could get acquainted with. Many of them have 
lived on the same street with me, and many have attended 
on my ministry. I have asked them all sorts of questions. 
I have not found one who would say that he accepted the 
miracles of the Old Testament as declared there: only four 
have I found in all this number who had enough faith in 
the Bible as it is, to stand the test of the discipline; many 
of them I found Unitarian and infidel in belief; not one 
could I find that would say that Jesus Christ knew more or 
as much about the Old Testament as some of these Unitarian 
professors. 

"The saddest thing is the number of bright young men 
and women whose faith is utterly wrecked here each year. 
Many of these young men say they never would have taken 
any interest in destructive criticism of the Bible had it not 
been forced upon them by those who are employed to teach 
the doctrines of the church. 

"It is sad, indeed, when young men come to the place 
where they feel that modern infidel professors know more 
about the Old Testament than did Jesus Christ! I have not 
been able to find one theological student here that would 
contradict this. 

"I am not a pessimist. I believe God will bring order 
out of this confusion, and that many of these preachers who 



go out of here Unitarian and infidel will be honest enough 

R3067 : page 262 

to step out of the Methodist pulpits unless they can get back 
to faith and loyalty to the church which has educated them. 

ZIONISTS FAIL TO OBTAIN FROM THE SULTAN THE KIND 
OF CONCESSIONS IN PALESTINE THEY DESIRE. 



Vienna, Aug. 7.— Dr. Theodore Herzl, founder of the 
Zionist movement and head of the Palestine association 
and Dr. Wolffson, president of the Jewish colonial trust, 
have returned here from Constantinople. They report that 
their conference with representatives of the sultan with 
reference to the proposed settlement of Zionists in Palestine 
has been without result. 

In reply to Dr. Herzl's written statements on the subject 
the sultan expressed sympathy with the Jews in their 
purposes and named certain concessions which he would 
grant. These, however, did not meet the requirements of 
the Zionists. 

Dr. Herzl says he still has hopes of being able to convince 
the porte of the beneficial results which would result 
from the settlement of Jews in Palestine. 

This set-back is of course only a temporary one: 
prophecy must eventually be fulfilled. Jews are still 
(since 1892) deprived of permission to settle in the 
Holy Land, and may only visit it by special permit 
for from 30 to 90 days. Ere long it will be different. 



R3067 : page 262 

TOUCHED WITH THE FEELING OF OUR INFIRMITIES. 

"For we have not an high priest which cannot 
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; 
but one who was in all points tempted like 
as we are yet without sin."— Heb. 4:15. 

WHILE in this our judgment day we find great 
comfort in this blessed assurance, realizing 
as we do our own weaknesses and shortcomings 
and manifold temptations, we call to mind this 
statement now for another purpose; viz., to remind 
the members of the elect Church of God who are to 
constitute the Royal Priesthood of the new dispensation, 
that they, like their Lord and Head, must also 
be touched with the feeling of the world's infirmities, 
else they would be totally unfit for so exalted and responsible 
a position. 
In the Royal Priesthood of that age the world is 



to have the same comfort in its priesthood that we 

in our present infirmities find in Christ. For this 

cause, chiefly, we apprehend that the priesthood is 

chosen from among men— that redeemed men who 

were once in the same plight with all the rest of humanity, 

being thus exalted to the divine nature with 

all its power to bless, might also, from their past experience 

and observations while they were men 

amongst men, be qualified to be very wise and merciful 

priests, knowing well how to deal with the poor 

sin-sick world; and that the world might find comfort 

and consolation in the realization of such sympathy. 

Such being the mission of the Church in the not 
far distant future, all who expect to be of its approved 
membership in glory should now be cultivating a 
broad and generous sympathy for all their fellows of 
the "groaning creation"— a sympathy which considers 
the weaknesses and temptations— mental, moral and 
physical,— of fallen men, and which is ready to forgive 
and to help the repentant erring; a sympathy 
illustrated by the verse— 

"A bending staff I would not break, 
A feeble faith I would not shake; 
Nor even rudely pluck away 
The error which some truth may stay, 
Whose sudden loss might leave without 
A shield against the shafts of doubt." 

It is not enough that we know the truth and rejoice 
in hope of a future personal exaltation: we 
must not forget the very object of that exaltation— the 
blessing of all the families of the earth— and the present 
duty of conformity to the word and example of 
our Lord, that thus by his Word and Providence he 
may fit us for the duties and honors to which he has 
called us. Only by so doing can we make our calling 
and election sure. 

If we turn our eyes to the pattern, we see in our 
Lord Jesus one who was deeply moved at the sight 
of human degradation, moral and physical. So must 

R3067 : page 263 

it be with all his followers. We must be in sympathy 
with every impulse of the world which is toward 
righteousness and reformation of character and life; 
we must rejoice at every movement that is made in 
this direction; and our sympathies should go out toward 
all who are laboring for the common uplifting 
as well as for all the oppressed everywhere. And so we 
trust they do. We sympathize with the temperance 
work and would not have one abandon the ranks of 
its laborers, except to engage in the higher work of 
this harvest time, to which the elect, consecrated sons 
of God are now specially called. And we say, God 



bless every truly philanthropic heart and hand that 
is trying to rescue the unfortunate victims of strong 
drink! We would have all such go on until the Master, 
noting their zeal, where it springs from love to 
him, shall say, "It is enough; come up higher"— to 
the higher work, the harvesting or gathering together 
of his elect from the four winds.— Matt. 24:31. 

We sympathize also with the social purity movement, 
which aims at the emancipation of woman and 
the elevation of man, and which eloquently appeals to 
the conscience of the present generation for the prenatal 
rights of the yet unborn generations of the 
twentieth century— their right to be well born and 
bred— with as little of the taint of hereditary evil as 
the present generation can give. It, however, grapples 
with an evil so deep-seated that little can be 
hoped for from it, except the creating of a more 
healthful sentiment on the part of thoughtful and well 
disposed people, and a greater realization on the part 
of many of the giant proportions and exceeding hatefulness 
of sin. 

We sympathize, too, with the demand of another 
class of reformers for a single standard of virtue for 
men and women alike— that public sentiment should 
be no more lenient toward the sins of men than toward 
the sins of women; and believe that a single 
standard of virtue, which would as completely ostracize 
a guilty man from society as a guilty woman, 
would be a safeguard to many a young man to whom 
the path of vice is made, alas! too easy. 

We sympathize with Law and Order Societies 
in their efforts to enforce laws, although their methods 
are not always the wisest. 

We have much sympathy with the Salvation 
Army in its attempts to rescue the submerged victims 
of the world's selfishness and wickedness. 

We are glad, too, to see the evidences of philanthropy 
and moral reform in some heathen lands, 
though we know how necessarily feeble must be the 
resistance to the mighty waves of corruption against 
which they battle. 

And so with every good work and with every 
noble sentiment our hearts are and should be in accord; 
and we rejoice with them over every victory 
they gain for righteousness and truth, however small, 
although we are not with them on the same plane of 
endeavor; for God has given us the higher commission. 
The priesthood may not despise the Levites, 
nor even the children of the camp. We rejoice that 
there are Levites— hewers of wood and drawers of 
water*, and that even in the world's great camp there 
are some who not only incline to righteousness, but 
who are bravely endeavoring to stem the overwhelming 
tide of evil. But we rejoice more in the fact that 
it will ere long be our privilege to take hold of all 
these much needed reforms with energy and power, 



and push them forward to glorious success, when in 
God's due time we shall be endued with power from 
on high.-Matt. 13:43; Gal. 3:29. 

Dearly beloved of the consecrated household, 
let us not forget to keep in touch with the groaning 
creation; to sympathize with its sorrows and its woes; 
to realize its deep degradation and misery; to remember 
its frailties, its awful burden of hereditary taints 
and consequent weaknesses; its present environments 
of ignorance and superstition; and its long established 
errors of public sentiment; remembering that we too 
are still in the sinful flesh, and that the motions of 
sin are still often painfully manifest in us, in some directions, 
at least, if not in many. And as the cries of 
the groaning creation come up into the ears of the 
Lord of hosts (Jas. 5:4) with strong and pathetic 
pleading to his loving heart, so let them come into 
our ears and gain our sympathies, and quicken our 
zeal to co-operate with our Heavenly Father's plan 
for the establishment of his Kingdom of righteousness 
and peace. 

But let us bear in mind that a real pity for the 
world, a full sympathy with every good work of reform, 
and an active co-operation with God in the 
necessary preparation for our great future work, imply 
also that we have no fellowship with the unfruitful 
works of darkness and that our lives be a standing 
rebuke to them. "How," says the Apostle, "shall we 
that are dead to sin live any longer therein?... 
Our old man [our justified human nature] is crucified 
with Christ that the body [organization] of Sin might 
be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve Sin"— 
nor in any sense recognize Sin as our master.— Rom. 6:2-6. 

It should be our constant effort, therefore, to seek 
to discern the course of righteousness on every question 
of moral obligation, and to see to it that our conduct, 
our sympathies and our influence, however 
small, are on the side of righteousness. In this day of 
searching judgment it should be observed that every 
principle of moral obligation is being brought forward 



*See "Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices." 

R3068 : page 263 

for searching examination. One cannot 
thoughtfully read the daily press without observing 
this tendency of the times in which we live. No matter 
how long and firmly established have been the old 
ideas, nothing can escape this scrutiny. And the 
principles of righteousness are being boldly set forth 
—here on one subject, and there on another; and that 
in defiance of the thundering anathemas from all the 
old fortresses of sin, iniquity and superstition. 



But right and truth must and shall prevail when 
our Kingdom has been established (Matt. 6:10; Luke 12:32; 
22:29), however feeble now may be the voices 
lifted in their defense. Let our sentiments and our 
course of action always be noble and pure, and on 
the right side of every subject that comes forward 
for ventilation and investigation; for we should be "a 
peculiar people, zealous of good works."— Titus 2:14. 



R3069 : page 264 

STRIVING LAWFULLY. 

"No soldier on service entangleth himself in the affairs of this life, 

that he may please him who enrolled him as a soldier. And also if a man 

contend in the games, he is not crowned except he have contended 

lawfully." "Know ye not that they who run in a race all 

run, but one receiveth the prize? So run that ye may 

obtain. And every man that striveth for the mastery is 

temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain 

a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible crown. 

I, therefore, so run, not as uncertainly; so fight 

I, not as one beateth the air: but I keep my 

body under and bring it into subjection, lest 

that by any means, when I have preached 

to others, I myself should be a castaway." 

2 Tim. 2:4,5; I Cor. 9:24-27. 

THESE EARNEST EXHORTATIONS of the 
faithful Apostle to the Gentiles were most 
clearly illustrated in his noble course of life. 
He shunned no danger, shrank from no labor or 
reproach or privation, and bravely and cheerfully 
endured hardness and suffered the loss of all things 
temporal that he might win Christ and be approved 
of him. As we look upon such a course and consider 
the fortitude and the strength of character necessary 
so to run, we may well conclude, that, except 
we be similarly supplied with the help of divine 
grace, we shall not be able to persevere to the end. 

Paul sped along in that race, not in his own 
strength, but in the strength which God supplied. 
And the promise of such aid is none the less ours 
than it was his. The divine grace is imparted to us 
through the exceeding great and precious promises 
of God inspiring us with new and glorious hopes beyond 
the wreck and ruin of the present order of 
things. Permitting our minds to dwell upon these we 
see in the now rapidly approaching dawn of the day 
of Christ a new heavens and a new earth; and by faith 
we sit together with Christ in the heavenly places of 
glory and honor, and together with him are crowned 
with immortality. By faith we see also the blessed 
privileges of such an exalted station, and the divinely 



appointed work in which we will be engaged together 
with Christ. 

A weary, groaning creation awaits our ministry 
of power; and in the proportion that we partake of the 
loving, pitiful spirit of our Master will we be able to 
appreciate such a privilege. If we are cold and selfish 
and untouched with the feeling of earth's infirmities; 
if the woes of our fellow-men awaken in us no feelings 
of sympathy and of desire to help, we can have no appreciation 
of the prize of our high calling. But if, on 
the contrary, we love our fellow-men as God and 
Christ loved them; if we pity their weakness and 
remember the hereditary cause, we will lay not all 

R3070 : page 264 

their sins and short-comings to their personal charge. 
We will be anxious to clear their minds from the 
mists of ignorance and superstition and the bias of 
prejudices; and to help them to more rational modes 
of thought and action, and to better ideas of life and 
its relationships and responsibilities. We will seek 
to gather out of their pathway all the stumbling 
stones whereby so many are now precipitated into a 
course of vice; and to cast up a highway of holiness 
upon which no lion of intemperance or other evil 
thing may be found. We will be ready to declare 
to them all the everlasting gospel of salvation, and 
to open their deaf ears to hear and their blind eyes to 
see the salvation of God. If such are our sympathies 
toward the world of sinners which God so loved, then 
we are able to appreciate to some extent the privileges 
of our high calling, when, as joint-heirs with 
Christ in His Kingdom and power, we shall be able 
to put into actual execution all our benevolent desires 
for the uplifting and healing of our sin-sick world. 

Any who have ever experienced the joy of converting 
even one sinner from the error of his ways, 
or of establishing the feet of one of Christ's little 
ones, may have some idea of the joy that 
will attend the ministry of the saints when they are 
fully endued with divine power for the great work 
of their Millennial reign; for they will not be hampered 
as now, but every effort put forth will be a 
success. 

The privilege of such a blessed work, even aside 
from the precious thought of association with Christ 
and of our blessed relationship to the Father, is a 
wonderful inspiration to every benevolent heart 
which, even now, would fain take upon itself the burdens 
which it sees oppressing others whom they love 
and pity. 

But though inspired with such a hope of benevolent 
service for the whole world in God's appointed 
time, and of blessed association with Christ in it, we 
must remember that we have yet to "strive" for the 



prize of our high calling; and not only so, but we 
must strive "lawfully." We must run our race, not 
only with diligence, energy, patience and perseverance, 
but we must run according to the prescribed 
rules, as otherwise our labor will be in vain. First 
of all we must enter into this course by the "strait 
gate"— by a full consecration of our all to the Lord, 
after exercising faith in the precious blood of Christ 
as our ransom price. If we do not enter by this door, 
we are not counted in the race for the prize, no matter 
how zealously we run. This is the first rule for 
those who would so run as to obtain. "Enter ye at 
the strait gate;. ..because strait is the gate 
and narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and few 
there be that find it." 

Having so entered, the Apostle now urges that 
we be filled with the Spirit of Christ, that we may 
not be led by the desires of the flesh away from God 
and from the course which he has marked out. Then 
the body, the human nature, must be kept under the 
control of the new mind, the spirit of Christ in us. Its 
ambitions and hopes and desires must be kept down; 
and the only way to do this is to keep filled with the 
spirit. "Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfil 
the desires of the flesh."— Gal. 5:16. 

If we are filled with the spirit— with the same 
mind that was in Jesus Christ— we will act from the 
same motives: it will be our meat and drink to do the 
Father's will. We will engage in his work because 
we love to do it, even aside from the inspiring prize 
at the end of our course. Christ was so full of sympathy 
with humanity, and so thoroughly of one mind 
with the Father, that he could not do otherwise than 
to devote his life to the good of others. Yet in all his 
labors he strictly observed the divine plan. Though, 
like the Father, he loved the whole world, he did not 
go beyond Israel to bless the Gentiles with his ministry, 

R3070 : page 265 

because the appointed time for that work had 
not yet come. 

He observed God's times and seasons and 
methods. He never recklessly exposed his life until 
from the prophets he recognized that his hour had 
come to be delivered into the hands of his enemies. 
He taught his disciples not to go into the way of the 
Gentiles until the due time; and then he sent them 
forth. He did not make long prayers on the street 
corners to be heard of men, nor exhort the multitude 
with noisy harangue; as the prophet indicated, he 
did not lift up his voice nor cry aloud in the streets. 
(Isa. 42:2.) He chose God's methods which are 
rational and wise, and which are effective in selecting 
out from among men the class which he desires to be 
heirs of the promised Kingdom. Let those who would 



so run as to obtain the prize, mark these footprints of 
the Master, and be filled more and more with his 
spirit. 

If so filled with the same mind that was in Christ 
Jesus, we, like him, will desire to be as free as possible 
from entangling earthly affairs, and to have our 
time as free as possible for the Lord's service, and 
then to devote all energy, ability and effort to that 
service. 

To have the mind of Christ is indeed the one requirement 
of lawful striving— a mind which humbly 
and faithfully submits itself to the will of God as 
expressed in his great plan of the ages, and which 
devotes all energy to the accomplishment of his will, 
because of an intelligent appreciation of the ends he 
has in view. 



R3070 : page 265 

THE CLAIMS OF LOVE AND JUSTICE. 

THERE IS NOTHING more necessary to the 
peace and prosperity of the Church of God 
than that its members should have a clear 
understanding and appreciation of moral principles, 
with a full determination to be controlled by them. 
Even among Christians there are often differences of 
opinion, with reference to principles of action, which 
greatly interfere with spiritual growth and prosperity. 
Such difficulties most frequently arise through a failure 
to rightly distinguish between the relative claims 
of love and justice. Therefore we deem it profitable 
briefly to consider these principles and their operation 
among the children of God. 

Justice is sometimes represented by a pair of 
evenly poised balances, and sometimes by the square 
and compass, both of which are fitting emblems of 
its character. Justice knows no compromise and no 
deviation from its fixed rule of action. It is mathematically 
precise. It gives nothing over for "good 
weight" or "good measure:" there is no grace in it, 
no heart, no love, no sympathy, no favor of any kind. 
It is the cold, calculating, exact measure of truth and 
righteousness. When justice is done, there is no 
thanks due to the one who metes it out: such a one 
has only done a duty, the neglect of which would have 
been culpable, and the doing of which merits no 
favor or praise. And yet, cold, firm and relentless as 
this principle is, it is declared to be the very foundation 
of God's throne. It is the principle which underlies 
all his dealings with all his creatures: it is his 
unchangeable business principle. And how firmly he 
adheres to it is manifest to every one acquainted with 
the plan of salvation, the first step of which was to 



satisfy the claims of justice against our race. Though 
it cost the life of his only begotten and well beloved 
Son to do this, so important was this principle that 
he freely gave him up for us all— to satisfy its legal 
claims against us. 

The principle of love, unlike that of justice, overflows 
with tenderness and longs to bless. It is full 
of grace, and delights in the bestowment of favor. 
It is manifest, however, that no action can be regarded 
as a favor or a manifestation of love, which 
has not underneath it the substantial foundation of 
justice. Thus, for instance, if one comes to you with 
a gift, and at the same time disregards a just debt 
to you, the gift falls far short of appreciation as an 
expression of love; and you say, We should be just 
before we attempt to be generous. 

And this is right: if justice is the foundation 
principle in all of God's dealings, it should be in ours 
also; and none the less so among brethren in Christ 
than among those of the world. As brethren in 
Christ, we have no right to presume upon the favor 
of one another. All that we have a right to claim 
from one another is simple justice— justice in the 
payment of our honest debts to each other, justice 
in our judgment one of another (which must make 
due allowance for frailties, etc., because we realize in 
ourselves some measure of similar imperfection), and 
justice in fair and friendly treatment one of another. 
This is all we have any right to claim; and we must 
also bear in mind that while we have a right to claim 
this for ourselves from others, we are just as fully 
obligated to render the same to them. 

But while we may claim justice— though there is 
no obligation to demand it for ourselves, and we may 
if we choose even suffer injustice uncomplainingly— 
we must, if we are Christ's, render it. In other words, 
we are not responsible for the actions of others in 
these respects, but we are responsible for our own. 
And, therefore, we must see to it that all our actions 
are squared by the exact rule of justice, before we 
ever present a single act as an expression of love. 

The principle of love is not an exact principle to 
be measured and weighed like that of justice. It is 
three-fold in its character, being pitiful, sympathetic 
or reverential, according to the object upon which it 
is centered. The love of pity is the lowest form of 
love: it takes cognizance of even the vile and degraded, 
and is active in measures of relief. The love 
of sympathy rises higher, and proffers fellowship. 
But the love of reverence rises above all these, and 
delights in the contemplation of the good, the pure 
and the beautiful. In this latter sense we may indeed 
love God supremely, as the personification of all that 
is truly worthy of admiration and reverence, and our 
fellow men in proportion as they bear his likeness. 



R3071 : page 266 

Although we owe to every man the duty of love 
in some one of these senses, we may not demand it 
one of another, as we may the principle of justice; 
for love is the overflow of justice. Justice fills the 
measure full, but love shakes it, presses it down, 
heaps it up and overflows justice. It is therefore 
something not to be demanded, nor its lack to be 
complained of, but to be gratefully appreciated as a 
favor and to be generously reciprocated. Every one 
who craves it at all should crave it in its highest 
sense— the sense of admiration and reverence. But 
this sort of love is the most costly, and the only way 
to secure it is to manifest that nobility of character 
which calls it forth from others who are truly noble. 

The love of sympathy and fellowship is also very 
precious; but, if it come merely in response to a 
demand, it comes robbed of its choicest aroma: therefore 
never demand it, but rather by manifestation of 
it toward others court its reciprocation. 

The love of pity is not called out by the nobility 
of the subject, but rather by the nobility of the bestower, 
who is so full of the principle of love that 
it overflows in its generous impulses toward even the 
unworthy. All of the objects of pity are not, however, 
unworthy of love in the higher senses; and 
some such often draw upon our love in all the senses. 

To demand love's overflow of blessing— which is 
beyond the claims of justice— is only an exhibition of 
covetousness. We may act on this principle of love 
ourselves, but we may not claim it from others. The 
reverse of this exhibits a manifest lack of love and 
a considerable measure of selfishness. 

Thus, for instance, two of the Lord's children 
were once rooming together and, through a failure 
to rightly consider the relative claims of love and 
justice, one presumed upon the brotherly love of the 
other to the extent of expecting him to pay the entire 
rent; and when the other urged the claims of 
justice, he pushed the claim of brotherly love, and 
the former reluctantly yielded to it, not knowing how 
to refute the claim, yet feeling that somehow some 
Christians had less principle than many worldly 
people. How strange that any of God's children 
should take so narrow and one-sided a view! Cannot 
all see that love and justice should work both ways 
and that it is the business of each not to oversee 
others in these respects, but to look well to his own 
course, and, if he would teach others, let it be rather 
by example than by precept? 

Let us beware of a disposition to covetousness, 
and let each remember that he is steward over his 
own goods, and not over his neighbor's, and that 
each is accountable to the Lord, and not to his 
brother, for the right use of that which the Master 



has entrusted to him. There is nothing much more 
unlovely and unbecoming to the children of God 
than a disposition to petty criticism of the individual 
affairs of one another. It is a business too small for 
the saints, and manifests a sad lack of that brotherly 
love which should be specially manifest in broad 
and generous consideration, which would rather 
cover a multitude of sins than magnify one. 

May love and justice find their proper and relative 
places in the hearts of all of God's people, that so 
the enemy may have no occasion to glory! The 
Psalmist says, "Oh, how love I thy law [the law of 
love, whose foundation is justice] ! it is my meditation 
all the day." (Psa. 1 19:97.) Surely, if it were 
the constant meditation of all, there would be fewer 
and less glaring mistakes than we often see. Let us 
watch and be sober, that the enemy may not gain an 
advantage over us. 

R3068 : page 266 

THAT I MAY KNOW HIM. 

-PHIL. 3:8-10.- 

"Lord, let me talk with Thee of all I do, 

All that I care for, all I wish for, too. 

Lord, let me prove Thy sympathy, Thy power, 

Thy loving oversight from hour to hour! 

When I need counsel, let me ask of Thee: 

Whatever my perplexity may be, 

It cannot be too trivial to bring, 

To one who marks the sparrow's drooping wing. 

Nor too terrestrial since Thou hast said 

The very hairs are numbered on our head. 

Tis through such loop-holes that the foe takes aim, 

And sparks unheeded, burst into a flame. 

Do money troubles press? Thou canst resolve 

The doubts and dangers such concerns involve. 

Are those I love the cause of anxious care? 

Thou canst unbind the burdens they may bear. 

Before the mysteries of Thy Word or will, 

Thy voice can gently bid my heart be still, 

Since all that now is hard to understand 

Shall be unraveled in yon heavenly land. 

Or do I mourn the oft-besetting sin, 

The tempter's wiles, that mar the peace within? 

Present Thyself, Lord, as the absolving priest, 

To whom confessing, I go forth released. 

Do weakness, weariness, disease, invade 

This earthly house, which Thou, Thyself, hast made? 

Thou, only, Lord, canst touch the hidden spring 

Of mischief, and attune the jarring string. 

Would I be taught what Thou wouldst have me give, 

The needs of those less favored to relieve? 

Thou canst so guide my hand that I shall be 



A liberal 'cheerful giver,' Lord like Thee. 

Of my life's mission do I stand in doubt? 

Thou knowest and canst clearly point it out. 

Whither I go, do Thou Thyself decide 

And choose the friends and servants at my side. 

The books I read, I would submit to Thee, 

Let them refresh, instruct and solace me. 

I would converse with Thee from day to day 

With heart intent on what Thou hast to say; 

And through my pilgrim walk, what e'er befall, 

Consult with Thee, O Lord, about it all. 

Since Thou art willing thus to condescend 

To be my intimate, familiar friend, 

Oh, let me to the great occasion rise, 

And count Thy friendship life's most glorious prize!" 



R3068 : page 267 

A PROPHET LIKE MOSES. 

--DEUT. 18:9-19.-SEPTEMBER7.- 

"This is of a truth that prophet that should 
come into the world."— John 6:14. 

AMONG THE GREAT ONES of earth, Moses 
stands out pre-eminent as a leader, lawgiver 
and ruler. He really combined in himself 
the three offices, prophet, priest and king. As a 
king, the representative of the great King, Jehovah, 
he would be classed as an autocrat whose meekness 
and gentleness, nevertheless, protected those under 
his care against any arbitrary use of his power and 
authority. Although Aaron was the high-priest 
proper, yet in a still larger sense he performed his 
services under, and as representative of Moses— and 
the latter had equal privilege of going into the Holy 
and Most Holy, and joined with Aaron at the close 
of the atonement day in giving the atonement blessing 
to the people. As a prophet, or teacher and lawgiver, 
he, under the instruction of the Lord, was far in 
advance, not only of others of his time but, of the 
many who have sought to copy and to improve upon 
the laws which he laid down. In all of this, however, 
he was merely a type of the great Prophet, Priest and 
King whom God purposed should in due time, accomplish 
a still greater deliverance for a still mightier 
host to a still better kingdom of promise,— the 
Millennial Kingdom. Moses did not take the title of 
king or priest, although the humbler title of prophet, 
teacher or representative of God, represented also in 
his case the kingly and priestly functions that we 
have seen. 
By this time Israel had reached the borders of 



Palestine on the east of the river Jordan, and had conquered 
the Amorites and the forces of Og, king of 
Bashan,— famous in the Psalms,— the giant of the 
noted iron bedstead. Moses, now one hundred and 
twenty years old, being forewarned of the Lord that 
his mission was at an end and that because of his 
transgression in the matter of striking the rock the 
second time he could not enter into the land of 
promise, had called the Israelites to deliver to them a 
closing message— a valedictory, as it were. 

Our lesson is a part of that valedictory address 
which, we may presume, was delivered in the great 
teacher's most impressive style, and represented his 
most solicitous thought in the interests of the people 
in whose behalf he had sacrificed the honors of Egypt 
and for whom he had spent his life. For forty years 
the people had been trained and disciplined in the 
ways of the Lord, and yet their great leader realized 
that they needed special guarding against the evils 
which had degraded the people of Canaan;— the besetments 
of Satan, and the fallen angels operating 
through human agents and mediums. Wherever we 
may look, amongst all the heathen nations, we find 
that the evil spirits have had much to do with the 
degradation of the human family. Operating along the 
lines of man's natural and religious instincts, they 
have perverted these to sensualities of various kinds 
and have diverted his worship from God, sometimes 
directly to themselves and devils, and sometimes to 
four-footed beasts and creeping things and idols of 
wood and stone, as the Apostle declare.— Rom. 1:23; 
Rev. 9:20; I Cor. 10:20. 

Those who investigate the matter will find no 
room, we believe, to doubt our statement that the 
fallen spirits are at the bottom of all the religious delusions 
of the world,— their ability to deceive and 
mislead being correspondingly less in proportion as 
the gospel of Christ has shined into a heart or a community 
or a nation.* 

The great lawgiver enumerates here eight different 
forms of spirit-deception and miracle-working; 
(1) Divination, the receiving of information from occult 
sources, from the spirits by means of omens, 
oracles, etc. (2) Augury, the fixing of lucky and unlucky 
periods and the observance of these which tends 
to bring the mind into bondage to the evil spirits. At 
the present time amongst many, Friday is considered 
an unlucky day, as also certain stages of the moon. 
(3) An enchanter, one able to exercise superior 
mental control, known to-day as hypnotism. (4) A 
witch or sorcerer, one who claims to be able to exercise 
a power over the affairs of others, and in many 
cases does so, though not to the degree he has frequently 
gotten credit for, and certainly never in opposition 
to divine power. (5) A charmer— serpent charmers, 
etc., including also those who claim to be able to 



put spells upon people and animals, to tie magic knots, 
etc., by a power something akin to hypnotism. (6) 
Consulters with familiar spirits, amongst spiritualists 
to-day there are mediums who claim to have their 
special familiar spirit while others claim a general 
intercourse with the spirits. (7) A wizard, one who 
claims to be wise in hidden or occult wisdom— possibly 
as some suggest, describing one who has general 
intercourse with the spirits as in contradistinction 
to one who has intercourse only with the "familiar 
spirit." (8) A necromancer, one who professes to 
hold communion with the dead— as do spirit mediums 
of to-day. Moses declared that all who take part in 
such proceedings are an abomination to the Lord 
and that the nations already inhabitating Canaan 
were being dispossessed and their land given to 
Israel, in large measure because they had gone over 
to these doctrines of devils and communion with 
devils. The Israelites in this respect were to be perfectly 
free from everything of this kind— were to obtain 
their information, not from fallen spirits personating 
the dead or otherwise, but from God 
through his appointed oracles, laws, commands, etc. 
We feel that we cannot too strongly impress upon 
spiritual Israelites everywhere the necessity of having 
nothing whatever to do with the present day representatives 
of these evils. It is not a light thing, 
therefore, for one who has heard the message of the 
Lord on this subject, to attend spiritualistic seances, 
to visit a fortune-teller, or to practice or be practiced 
upon in any manner by hypnotists, or any 
other representatives of Satan and the fallen angels 
and the black arts, or to use any of the various implements 
of divination now in vogue, such as 
planchets, etc. In olden times as well as now 
many of these villainies were practiced by the 
same individual, as for instance, the witch of 



*See pamphlet, "Proofs that Spiritism is Demonism."- 
This Office. 

R3068 : page 268 

Endor was also a necromancer. So stringent were 

the laws of ancient times that not only the practitioners 

of these wrongs were condemned to death, 

but also those who encouraged them by seeking their 

counsels, etc. Had it not been for these drastic laws 

no doubt Israel would have come under these debasing 

influences to a much larger extent than it did, 

and would have been correspondingly degraded like 

the heathen nations whose worship is, as the Apostle 

declares, divergent from the worship of God to the 

worship of devils, and their instructions instead of 



being from the Lord are from devils, evil spirits, "seducing 
spirits." 

We have no hesitation whatever in saying that 
these evil spirits which ever since the flood have been 
seeking to gain power over humanity through deceptions 
and through the operation of various occult 
powers, have enticed them, bewitched them, brought 
them under the influence of fear and superstition, 
and into mental slavery so that they can be and are 
guided by falsehood instead of by the truth. This is 
one of the ways in which, as the Apostle states, "The 
god of this world hath blinded the minds of them 
which believed not," and has hindered the light of the 
goodness of God in the face of Jesus Christ from shining 
into the hearts of men. As already intimated this 
same power is still at work even in Christendom, 
operating through spiritism, theosophy, hypnotism 
and Christian Science— yea, and we believe also operating 
deceptively in some who claim to be filled 
with, and moved by, the holy spirit, producing trance 
conditions, the vagaries of the "Holy Rollers" and 
various unseemly things done by people who mistakenly 
claim that they are filled with the holy spirit, 
but who are in fact, filled with and controlled by the 
evil spirits,— for their works they do. Our Lord 
Jesus and the Apostles were filled with the holy spirit 
and we may be sure that its character and its manifestations 
have not changed since their day: we may 
be sure, therefore, that spirits that cause people to behave 

R3069 : page 268 

themselves unseemly are "lying spirits." 

It was under the teaching of these evil spirits that 
the people of Canaan first established the valley of 
Hinnom as a place of torture. This valley outside 
the city of Jerusalem, now known in the Greek 
language as Gehenna, had erected in it a brass figure 
of the god Moloch which, being hollow was heated 
intensely and then into its outstretched arms were 
occasionally placed children offered thus in sacrifice. 
God forewarned his people against this and every 
form of cruelty and also against the evil spirits 
which would so seduce them and pervert their 
minds as to lead them to such horrible and insane 
practices and beliefs. With Israel, therefore, this 
valley instead of being a valley of sacrifice, became 
the symbol of the Second Death in that it was made a 
crematory for the carcasses of dead animals, and for 
the bodies of certain vile criminals not deemed 
worthy of honorable burial. Under the Lord's arrangement, 
however, no torture was permitted in this 
valley or elsewhere in Israel— not the living, but the 
dead were consumed in it. 

We are glad that we are living in a day when this 
Moloch torture is detested, a day in which civilized 



people, at least, look upon all such practices with 

abhorrence; nevertheless, the evil spirits operating 

upon the higher plane to suit the higher conditions 

of the spiritual Israel, have introduced false doctrines 

among them to such an extent that for centuries the 

masses of Christendom have attributed to the Almighty 

God of love a character and disposition far 

worse than that of Moloch. These false theories 

have cast into the fire not only a few sacrifices to 

satisfy Jehovah, but have made the whole human 

family to occupy this position, to be subjects of eternal 

torture— except a comparative few who with sincerity 

of heart and faith and obedience, lay hold upon 

Christ in this present life and are thus saved from an 

eternity of suffering. This doctrine of devils was introduced 

amongst spiritual Israel during the period 

which we denominate the Dark Ages; it finds no countenance 

whatever in the Word of God, neither in the 

Law nor in the prophets, nor in all the dissertations 

of the apostles of the New Testament; at very most 

it claims to base itself upon certain misunderstood 

parables of our Lord and upon certain misunderstood 

symbolical figures of speech in the Apocalypse. 

Yet, so completely have the evil spirits done their 

work, that the masses of Christendom thoroughly believe 

that the Bible is the authority and groundwork 

for that awful doctrine of eternal torment,— this 

Moloch cruelty ascribed to the God of Love, and now 

that their minds are becoming emancipated so that 

they can no longer believe such doctrines, they are 

disposed to reject the entire Bible, the Word of the 

Lord, because they think that it is the foundation for 

this awful, blasphemous error. Thus the fallen 

spirits again mislead many into new devices— Christian 

Science, Theosophy, Spiritism, etc., anything, 

everything to get them away from the simplicity, 

beauty and grandeur of the divine Word and plan. 

THE ANTITYPICAL PROPHET. 

Having thus forewarned the people, Moses reminds 
them that he is only a type of the greater 
Prophet whom the Lord had previously promised. 
The previous promise was at Mt. Sinai in Horeb, 
when God typically represented the giving of the 
New Covenant and when the people saw the lightnings, 
heard the thunderings, and felt the tremblings 
of the earth, which represented the great time of 
trouble in the end of this age; then they cried out 
unto the Lord entreating that instead of directly 
communicating with them he would do so 
through Moses as mediator. It was there that the 
Lord intimated that in the introduction of the antitypical 
New Covenant it would be at the hands of a 
still greater Mediator than Moses,— that great Prophet 
whom the Lord would raise up. 



Our Golden Text points us to the Man Christ 
Jesus as this great Prophet! but the people who made 
this declaration did not fully comprehend the situation. 
Had they done so they would not a few days after 
have crucified the Lord. As a matter of fact, Jesus in 
the flesh was not the great Prophet, though his work 
in the sealing of the New Covenant with his blood at 
Calvary was necessary before he could be made alive 
in the spirit— as the new creature, put to death in the 
flesh but quickened in the spirit; put to death in weakness 

R3069 : page 269 

but raised in power; put to death in dishonor, 

but raised in glory, put to death in the flesh, an animal 

or human body, but raised a spiritual body on a 

plane of glory, honor, immortality. This great 

Prophet that God has promised is not a man, not 

of the human nature; but is the Lord of glory who 

has bought the whole world at the cost of his own 

life and shortly is to be its great Prophet, Priest, 

and King, to lead, to direct, to rule, to correct, to uplift 

and to ultimately bring to perfection whosoever 

wills to be in harmony with God— and the remainder 

will be cut off in the Second Death. The Apostle 

Peter brings out this feature of the ultimate end of 

all who will not obey the great Prophet, in his discourse 

recorded in Acts 3:23, "It shall come to pass 

that every soul which will not hear [obey] that 

Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people" 

—the Second Death. 

But still more wonderful than this is the divine 
plan: from the divine standpoint our glorified Lord 
Jesus is to be the Head, and the faithful of his Church 
are to constitute the members of this great Prophet. 
The Lord God raised up our Lord Jesus as the Head 
of this Prophet more than eighteen centuries ago, 
and since then he has been finding amongst the redeemed 
children of men, those who shall ultimately 
be counted worthy through him to be reckoned in as 
joint-heirs of the Kingdom, members of the body of 
this great Prophet. Although in all a little flock, 144,000, 
the calling has been so special and the testing or 
approving and disciplining, so thorough, that it requires 
the entire Gospel age to find and to perfect 
these members, and when all shall have been found, 
and all shall have been raised up by first resurrection 
power to glory, honor and immortality and join t-heirship 
with their Lord and Head, then the great 
Prophet shall have come and then his great work 
will be before him. Then will come the deliverance 
of all who are God's people, who desire to sacrifice 
to him, to worship him and to be separate from sin; 
all such will have an opportunity for deliverance and 
for leading and guidance into Millennial Canaan 
under this great Prophet. Praise God on behalf of 



the world for such a glorious outlook! praise God 
for the privilege of our present blessings of invitation 
and opportunity to become identified with this 
great Prophet, by faithfulness to him who bought 
us with his own precious blood! 



R3071 : page 269 

LOVE OF GOD IN MOUTH AND HEART. 

--DEUT. 11:20. --SEPTEMBER 14.- 

IN HIS VALEDICTORY Moses proceeded to 
rehearse to Israel the Law of the Lord in 
full, reciting the blessings that would come 
from obedience to this Law, and the curses which 
would surely follow a disobedient course. He even 
proceeded to prophesy, and in the same chapter, in 
verses preceding our lesson, he points out that Israel 
would experience both the blessings and the curses, 
and that as a result they would ultimately be scattered 
throughout the earth, but that God, in infinite mercy, 
would remember them and finally bring them back 
to himself, and circumcise their hearts, a type of 
which circumcision they already had in the flesh.— 
Compare Rom. 11:25-30. 

Here the words of our lesson come in and seem 
to apply specially to Israel restored under the new 
conditions of grace. Even the most faithful under 
the Law were obliged continually to say, "O wretched 
man that I am ! Who shall deliver me from this 
death-condemnation" in which I am, under this Law? 
—Behold the Law of God is just and good and right, 
and I approve the same with my heart, but am unable 
to comply with its conditions because of weakness, 
—death working in my mortal body! The time of 
Israel's return to divine favor at the close of the 
Gospel age is the period mentioned by the Lord 
through the Prophet Jeremiah; saying, 'After those 
days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward 
parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be 
their God, and they shall be my people; and they 
shall teach no more every man his neighbor and 
every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for 
they shall all know me, from the least of them unto 
the greatest of them, saith the Lord, for I will forgive 
their iniquity, and I will remember their sin 
no more."— Jer. 31:33,34. 

Under that blessed arrangement of the New Covenant, 
established in the hands of the greater Mediator, 
the Christ, the great Prophet, the desires and 
intentions of the heart, accompanied with the best 
endeavors of the flesh, will be accepted, even tho the 
latter be imperfect for a time, and require the blessed 



influences of the "times of restitution" to bring 
them to perfection. Moses' prophecy looks down to 
this time, grasps the new situation, sees Israel 
turned to the Lord with new hearts, enabled to keep 
his Law perfectly; it will not be too difficult for them, 
but new and plain and possible. 

That this is the proper thought to be attached 
to this prophecy of Moses, is shown by the Apostle 
Paul. (Rom. 10:4-10.) He applies these words to 
the Church during this Gospel age, as in contrast to 
the conditions of the Jewish age, which had just 
closed. The Gospel Church enters into the privileges 
and opportunities of the New Covenant now, in advance 
of Israel and the world in general. It is the 
privilege of the spiritual Israelite now, beforehand, 
by the exercise of faith to realize 
in himself acceptance with God, justification 
by faith; to realize further that the 
merit of Christ covering all his imperfections, 
which are not of the heart, continues him in this justified 
relationship with God, notwithstanding 
the imperfections of his flesh and of 
his works— for we "are not under the Law 
but under grace." To those who can now 
exercise the faith, all the blessings that will 
come to the world in the Millennial age are possible 
—and more. To such these greater blessings are not 
hidden, but may be seen with the eye of faith. To 
such they are not far off— pertaining to another age- 
but are possibilities of the present time, through the 

R3071 : page 270 

operation of faith. Such, having the ear of faith, are 
not saying, We cannot know the mind of the Lord, 
for he is afar off in heaven; who shall bring us a 
clear, definite statement of his will? These already 
have this declaration of the divine will in the person 
of Christ, in his teachings, personally and through the 
apostles. Neither will such say, Christ indeed has 
come, has died, has gone into the sleep of death; 
who shall now bring him forth that he may instruct 
us? For with the same eye and ear of faith they 
both hear and see that he is no longer dead, but is 
risen, glorified, empowered of the Father, and that 
he ever lives to be the blesser and High-priest for all 
those who approach the Father through him. 

What then is this message which can thus be 
heard with the ear and recognized by the eye of 
faith? The prophet as well as the Apostle declares 
that it is possible for us to have this salvation, an 
ever-present power within us, in our hearts and in 
our mouths. The Apostle declares that this which 
Moses prophesied is the Gospel which he preached, 
which we have received; viz., the confession of the 
Lord with our mouths and faith in him in our hearts. 



It is noteworthy that both the Prophet Moses 
and the Apostle Paul state the matter in the same 
manner; first, the confession with the mouth; second, 
the belief in the heart. This form of statement is 
probably not of accident, either. The confession 
with the mouth is the first outward evidence given of 
a faith in the heart; and indeed it seems to be a part 
of the divine arrangement that all confession of the 
truth is necessary to a full appreciation of it. True, 
we cannot properly confess what we do not believe; 
hence a belief must have precedence to a confession; 
but the confession is necessary to the expanding, 
enlarging and completing of faith in the heart. Who 
ever thinks that the light he has received in his heart 
can be maintained without a public confession of it 
is deceived, and hence it is declared, "With the heart 
man believeth unto righteousness; and with the 
mouth confession is made unto salvation." The 
righteousness started by faith cannot go on and 
reach the completion which will mean eternal salvation, 

R3072 : page 270 

unless it be accompanied by acts of faith, 

most prominent of which is the confession of the 

lips. 

We would like to impress this feature of the 
divine truth upon all of the Lord's dear people everywhere; 
realizing that many are weak, puny, sickly, 
in their spiritual health, because of their failure to 
follow the Lord's direction— to declare courageously 

—and as wisely and lovingly as possible— 
what great things the Lord hath done for 
our souls. It is not sufficient that we 
confess the first blessing received, tho that 
is necessary before we can receive additional 
blessing. But each blessing as received should be 
promptly confessed, to the praise of him who has 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 
This is the law of spiritual development. This is the 
command to the spiritual Israelite. If he is not 
obedient, that which was nigh, in his heart and in 
his mouth, will ere long become far off to him;— 
the eye of his understanding will cease to see 
clearly; the ear of faith will cease to distinguish 
plainly and he will gradually go further and further 
away from the glorious privileges which are ours, 
as new creatures in Christ under the New Covenant. 

LIFE AND GOOD; DEATH AND EVIL. 

To Spiritual Israelites, who have been begotten of 
the spirit, adopted into the family of sons of God, 
and made prospective joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
their Lord, the message is the same that it will be 
during the Millennial age to the world of mankind; 



viz., choose life or death. Thank God we have gotten 

free from that horrible doctrine of Moloch which, 

perverting the plain Word of God, would declare 

to us that God has set before us eternal blessing or 

eternal torment! Not so; his Word is most explicit; 

the rewards are life or death. Thus our Lord 

positively announced, "He that hath the Son hath 

life; he that hath not the Son shall not see life" — 

and those not seeing life, of course could not experience 

eternal torment. Nevertheless, this proposition 

of life or death is a very serious one; much 

more potent in its influence than any other, because 

we can believe it; because we can see its reasonableness. 

How reasonable it is that God should declare 

to his spiritual Israel of this Gospel age that if, after 

they come to know him, taste of his good Word, experience 

the power of the age to come; after they 

have had the eyes of their understanding opened; 

after they have heard, seen, appreciated, the divine 

plan— if after all this they do not love the Lord 

their God, and trust him in their hearts, and sufficiently, 

too, to confess him with their mouths, they 

are unworthy of eternal blessing which he has to 

give— their lack of appreciation of divine mercy 

means their unworthiness of life! 

How reasonable, too, is this declaration as respects 
the world of mankind during the Millennial 
age! Life and death will be the alternatives set before 
them also. The great Prophet, the Christ, Head 
and body, as representative of the Father and of his 
Law, will make matters very clear, very plain, to all 
those who, when they know the Lord's goodness, 
have any desire or appreciation thereof. But they 
too must learn to acknowledge the Lord in their 
lives, in their hearts, and to confess him with their 
mouths, else they will be unworthy of the future 
life. The difference between the two classes,— we of 
the Gospel age, they of the Millennial age,— will not 
be as respects the question of life and death. The 
penalty in either case will be Second Death; the reward 
in either case will be eternal life. The difference 
in the reward will be that the faithful overcomers 
of spiritual Israel will be granted join t-heirship 
with their Lord on a higher plane of life, sharing 
with him his glory, honor, immortality; while the 
faithful of the world, tho blessed in lower degree 
with a restoration of human perfection and life, will, 
nevertheless, be blessed fully and completely up to 
their very highest ability to appreciate and desire. 

The essence of this command, now applicable to 
the Gospel Church, by and by to be applicable to restored 
Israel and all who, under the favorable conditions 

R3072: page 271 

of that Millennial age, will be accepted as the 



children of Abraham, is the Law of Love. "I command 
thee this day to observe the Law of the Lord 
thy God, to walk in his ways and keep his statutes, 
and his commandments and his judgements." It is 
the correct thought that love to God must be from 
the heart,— voluntary, in order to be of the kind 
which he desires and will appreciate. "He seeketh 
such to worship Him as worship Him in spirit and 
in truth." Why, then, does Moses say, "I command 
you"? Why does the Lord command love, through 
the Prophet, since a commanded love would not come 
up to the standard of voluntary love? 

We answer that the Lord sets before us the standard 
of love necessary to be attained if we would enjoy 
the blessings which he purposes to give. He 
commands, in the sense of laying before us plainly 
and distinctly His only terms for life eternal. As 
previously pointed out, love is a matter of development 
and begins with a kind of duty love, which 
gradually growing out as we grow in grace and in 
knowledge, expands into gratitude, then into admiration, 
and finally ridding itself of all dross and selfishness, 
becomes pure and fervent love. The Lord is 
pleased if in our hearts he sees this endeavor to approach 
in truth the way of life which he has opened 
through the death of his Son. He is pleased to note 
our expansion and development under the light of 
his favor. He is pleased to grant us the covering 
of the Lord Jesus' merit, and to reckon to us perfection, 
and to adopt us from the very beginning of 
our love and consecration; and he will be pleased 
when we have finished our course, when we have attained 
the mark, when we have come up to the standard 
he has set— perfect love— to grant us the blessing 
of life eternal, which He cannot grant upon any 
other condition. 

These things, really intended for spiritual Israelites, 
were spoken to natural Israel, as were all the 
prophecies of the Old Testament. Hearing, Israel 
heard but did not understand, as now it is our privilege 
to understand, because we are of the "house of 
sons," adopted and begotten of the spirit; whereas 
they were of the "house of servants," for "Moses 
verily, as a servant, was faithful over all his house; 
but Christ as a son, over his own house, whose house 
are we, if we hold fast the beginning of our confidence 
firm unto the end." To the extent that any 
natural Israelite comprehended even in part this Law 
of Love, and endeavored to grasp it, in that proportion 
he was blessed, notwithstanding the fact that he 
was under the Law and bound by the Law, and thus 
a servant and unable to become a Son. We see noble 
illustrations of these faithful ones of the past, in 
Moses himself, Joshua, Caleb, Samuel, David, and all 
the prophets, whose faithfulness the Apostle records, 
as having been pleasing to God, and who shall have 



corresponding rewards, altho they will not have 
the reward that is promised to the Church— "they 
without us shall not be made perfect."— 
Heb. 11:39,40. 

In the closing words of this grand oration, the 
Prophet cautioned his brethren again concerning any 
disposition to leave the Lord and accept instead other 
gods. His words are specially applicable to spiritual 
Israelites, and we do well to give them earnest heed. 
We are already by faith in this blessed condition; we 
have heard the words of eternal life. We already 
have entered the Canaan-rest condition by faith in 
our Lord. We, therefore, are in danger from the 
besetments of our own flesh and from the 
besetments of sin abounding and from the 
Adversary— in danger of making other gods, 
and turning our hearts away from the 
proper center of their affections, either to the god 
of wealth or the god of fame or the lesser gods of the 
family circle and home, or to the most ignoble of all, 
self. We are not to be drawn away by any of these 
from our loyalty to God, nor to render worship or 
service in any sense to any of these. To 
do so would mean to turn away from 
the hopes and joys and blessings now ours. 
To resist these temptations, and to abide 
in the Lord's favor, on the other hand, will mean to 
continue in the joys and blessings and rest of our 
present state of grace. Thus the Lord sets before us 
the blessings and the curses, the advantages and the 
disadvantages, the right course and the wrong course, 
life and death. 

Our choosing of life and blessing and righteousness 
and God are not merely the choice of a moment; 
the daily trials and testings of life prove whom we 
love and whom we serve. Let us examine our hearts 
and our daily course of life, and note for what we are 
spending life's energies, what fills our affections, what 
"satisfies our longings as nothing else could do." To 
the extent that we find the Lord the center of our 
lives, our hopes, our aims, and his will the ruling law 
in every affair of life, in that same proportion we find 
joy and peace and blessing and growth spiritually. If 
we thus, under present conditions and trials and oppositions 
of the world, the flesh and the devil, separate 
from them and cleave to the Lord, we are choosing 
the better part, the part of blessing, choosing life, and 
we shall live and shall inherit the goodly land of 
promise, the Millennial Canaan, and there be joint-participators 
with our Master in bringing God's 
promised blessing to the world, that they also may 
hear and know and obey his voice, and cleave to him 
and thus have life, and inherit the other, the earthly, 
features of the Abrahamic blessing. 

Our Golden Text is quite appropriate to this lesson. 
It is in vain that we say we love the Lord if we 



do not seek to do those things pleasing in his sight. 
He is not seeking those who merely give outward 
allegiance, but those who at heart love him and his 
righteous arrangements. He is satisfied, indeed, to 
accept us at the beginning, largely upon our professions 
of faith and devotion, under the robe of Christ's 
righteousness, knowing that in our imperfect development 

R3073 : page 271 

we could not love perfectly; but he expects us to 
grow in grace, knowledge and love, and only by so 
doing can we abide in his love, and only by abiding 
in his love can we hope to attain the glorious things 
which he has in reservation only for those who love 
him. 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. SEPTEMBER 15, 1902. No. 18. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 275 

"There Were Giants in Those 

Days" 275 

Prof. Moorehead Much Troubled 277 

Our Present Civilization 280 

Our Annual Conventions 280 

Poem— A Savior and A 

Great One 281 

"So Moses the Servant of God 

Died" 282 

"Be Strong and Of Good Courage" 284 

Quarterly Review 286 

Interesting Questions Answered 287 

page 274 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 



Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 
than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the DAWNS at 25 cents each, 
cannot be for money -making: that it is merely another way of 
preaching the truth. No other religious books are sold at any 
such price. Indeed few subscription books sell for less than two 
to three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are invited 
to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 



OUR NEW BIBLES. 

The three dollar grade is gone, except a few which we have 
agreed to hold until the end of the year. We still have a hundred 
or two of the two dollar grade, but they will not last long. 

We have a few of both grades without pictures, to permit 
their being sent by mail to foreign countries. We will hold 
these for the foreign friends until November 15th: after that 
they will be open to all, for same prices, $2 and $3 postpaid. 



"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES" is out of 

stock temporarily (both English and German), but we 
hope to have plenty very soon. 



WE REGRET inability to supply charts promptly— except 
the 25c wall chart with metal hangers. Will fill orders for others 
as quickly as possible. Painters as well as printers in this 
vicinity are extremely busy at present. 



R3073 : page 275 



VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
"THERE WERE GIANTS IN THOSE DAYS. 



Recently W. F. Clarke, of Wilkesbarre, Pa., addressed 
to President Baer of the Reading R.R., appealing 
to him on religious grounds to end the anthracite 
coal strike. Mr. Baer's reply, which has excited 
general criticism, follows:— 

"My Dear Mr. Clark: I have your letter of the 16th 
inst. 

"I do not know who you are. I see that you are a religious 
man, but you are evidently biased in favor of the 
right of the workingman to control a business in which he 
has no other interest than to secure fair wages for the work 
he does. 

"I beg of you not to be discouraged. The rights and interests 
of the laboring man will be protected and cared for 
—not by the labor agitators, but by the Christian men to 
whom God in His infinite wisdom has given the control of 
the property interests of the country, and upon the successful 
management of which so much depends. Do not be discouraged. 
Pray earnestly that right may triumph, always 
remembering that the Lord God omnipotent still reigns, and 
that His reign is one of law and order, and not of violence 
and crime. "Yours truly, 

"GEORGE F. BAER, President." 

Now that the world is passing under the dominion 
of the "giants" (trusts, combines, etc.), it should 
not surprise us to find the claim advanced that these 
are of divine creation and have divine rights. Mr. 
Baer's view is not hypocritical in our opinion; but 
is the result of failure to discern that Satan is the 
"prince of this world" or dispensation, who under 
his law of selfishness is permitted of God to "deceive 
the whole world:" in order that eventually all may 
see to what lengths Selfishness would lead— ultimately 
wrecking the present order— social, political, 
financial and religious— and thus preparing for the 
establishment of Christ's Millennial Kingdom of love 
and righteousness upon the ruins of Satan's dominion 
and the binding of Satan that he may "deceive the 
nations no more until the thousand years are ended." 
-Rev. 20:1-4. 

Seeing present conditions foretold in Scripture 
we can look with sympathy on both parties to the 
coming conflict. We see the battle between them 
clearly set forth in God's Word. We see both parties 
to that struggle awake to certain truths and blind 
to each other's arguments. From our vantage point 
we see both right and both wrong— both contending 
conscientiously for "rights", yet both missing the real 
standard of right, because blinded by selfishness. We 



see that the fault lies less with the people on both 
sides of these controversies, and more with the false 
selfish standards which constitute the warp and woof 
of all present institutions: so much so that it cannot 
be patched, but will be permitted of the Lord to work 
out its own destruction, as a preparation for the new 
order of things promised the groaning creation under 
the glorified Christ and his Kingdom. 

The New York Times declares that President 
Baer's utterance "verged very close upon unconscious 
blasphemy." The New York Tribune declares: 

"Strict-construction theologians have before now insisted 
upon the close relations between Calvinism and coal. 
It is something new, however, to find a hardheaded financier 
setting up as a doctrine of the business world the predestination 
of the Pennsylvania coal mines to the all-wise 
control of President Baer and his fellow presidents of coal 
companies. Doubtless good Calvinists have accepted the 
management of the coal operators, like everything else that 
is, as being somehow or other in some mysterious way in 
harmony with the ultimate designs of a God who endures 
evil and makes even the wrath of men to praise Him. But 
few of them have reached the point of considering the so-called 
'coal barons,' as shining examples of God's perfect 
work, in which His loving designs for the welfare of the 
whole human race were made manifest. It seems, however, 
that is the true doctrine which all religious men should 
hold.... 

R3073 : page 276 

"It will take a load from the consciences of many earnest 
people to have this authoritative declaration that God, 
through the kindness of the coal operators, will be able to 
manage this strike in accordance with the dictates of infinite 
wisdom. There have been some persons who believe 
in law and order, and have no sympathy with riotous strikers 
or demagogic agitators, who have not hitherto been 
able to detect infinite wisdom sitting at any of the coal 
presidents' desks, but doubtless they were mistaken. In 
their blindness they have said it was the duty of the operators 
to operate; that they should either meet their men 
half-way and settle the difficulty, or, under the protection 
of the State, put other men to work and mine coal. They 
have had a notion that God put the coal in the earth to 
furnish heat for men's needs, and thought there was some 
slip in the cogs of the universe when they could not buy 
coal because President Baer, God's vicegerent at the mines, 
would not work them. But if it is a part of the divine order 
that we should all pay $10 a ton till the surplus stock is 
worked off, so let it be. Only we should like to ask a question 
or two. Are the coal operators infallible individually, 
or only when they are gathered together, like a church 
council, about an office table to fix rates and say what each 
retailer must sell his coal for on pain of having his God-given 
supply cut off? Was the agreement of two years ago, 



which the operators say was so unwise and has made so 
much trouble, also dictated by infinite wisdom?" 

The New York American & Journal, always extremely 
caustic in referring to labor troubles, and evidently 
predisposed to score the wealthy to the extremest 
limit, uses the following very severe 
language:— 
THE ASTOUNDING BLASPHEMY OF A MODERN PIRATE. 

'"The rights and interests of the laboring man,' writes 
President Baer, of the Philadelphia & Reading Railway 
Company, to a correspondent who appealed to him as a 
Christian to end the coal strike, 'will be protected and cared 
for, not by the labor agitators, but by the Christian men 
to whom God in His infinite wisdom has given control of 
the property interests of the country.' 

"Mr. Baer, as one of the most influential members of the 
Coal Trust, no doubt sincerely feels that he is especially 
commissioned to carry out the Divine will as a protector of 
labor and manager of the property interests of the country. 
He is so happily constituted that he can see no satire in 
the old syllogism: 

"The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof. His 
saints shall inherit the earth. 

'"We are the saints: 

'"Therefore we inherit the earth.' 

"Heaven, whose deputy Mr. Baer so ingenuously and 
modestly declares himself to be, while endowing him with a 
shark's appetite and capacity for seizing things, has mercifully 
denied him the sense of humor. Thus is he spared the 
consciousness of sin when he blasphemes. Indeed, when 
Mr. Baer blasphemes he does so solemnly, with a warming 
and uplifting feeling that he is performing a religious rite 
and doing a virtuous deed. This blessing is vouchsafed only 
to those who in all things except money-getting are dense 
beyond the understanding of ordinary men. 

"Not since last February has one of the pious plutocracy 
—who protect the 'rights and interests of the laboring man' 
and 'to whom God in His infinite wisdom has given the 
control of the property interests of the country'— favored 
a subject people with a specimen of unconscious blasphemy 
at all approaching in stupendous insolence and monstrous 
self-righteousness that of Brother Baer. 

"It was in February that young Mr. Rockefeller, heir 
apparent to the Standard Oil millions, informed the Young 
Men's Christian Association of Brown University that the 
trusts are God's work— that it is by the Almighty's design 
that small competitors are killed off in order that a great 
monopoly may arise. He soared to flowery illustration, 
thus: 

'"The American Beauty rose can be produced in the 
splendor and fragrance which bring cheer to its beholder 
only by sacrificing the early buds which grow up around 
it. This is not an evil tendency in business. It is merely 
the working out of a law of nature and a law of God. There 
is no real difference between business and the Christian 



life.' 

"And the whole history of the Standard Oil monopoly 
is the history of a crime! 

"Brother Baer, proclaimed by himself an agent sent of 
God to take possession of and care for the property of the 
rest of us, though blind to blasphemy in himself, has doubtless 
a hawk's eye for detecting a sacrilegious spirit in 
others. 

R3074 : page 276 

"The Coal Trust, according to Mr. Baer, being, like that 
American Beauty rose in the commercial garden, the Standard 
Oil Trust, a Divine institution, it manifestly follows 
that he regards any meddling with its sacrosanct operations 
as an affront to Heaven. It is true the Coal Trust violates 
those human laws which forbid the railroad companies that 
comprise it to engage in coal mining and to form a combine, 
but the Coal Trust being of celestial origin and under 
the direct protection of Deity (President Baer vicegerent), 
what are human laws to it? 

"The pious pirate is no new thing. Often in the old 
days the prayerful buccaneer imperilled in a stormy sea 
vowed candles to the Virgin in exchange for a safe deliverance, 
and to add a wing or a tower to a church was not an 
unheard of act of gratitude after a voyage in which much 
booty had been gathered and many passengers and seamen 
on captured galleons made to walk the plank. 

"But President Baer and the relations between a just 
God and the thieving trusts must be left to the pulpit for 
adequate treatment. Only the pulpit can deal with blasphemy 
so crass and horrible as it ought to be dealt with, 
without seeming to be as blasphemous as Baer himself. And 
all the privileges and immunities of the sacred desk will be 
needed for a task which no layman may undertake who 
would not sin against reverence even in appearance. 

"The Lord God Omnipotent still reigns,' exclaims the 
amazing Baer of the Coal Trust, 'and his reign is one of 
law and order, and not of violence and crime.' 

"And still stands the Commandment, delivered through 
Moses on awful Sinai to all men: 

'"THOU SHALT NOT STEAL!'" 



To avoid extremes of sentiment on questions of 
this kind which appeal to the favored classes in one 
light and to the masses in another, it is necessary that 
we take a broad comprehensive view of the subject— 

R3074 : page 277 

past and present. Selfishness has been the law of our 
race ever since Sin and Death gained control; and 
even where the nobler organs are given a voice in 
shaping our convictions and conduct, Selfishness, 



more or less, twists and colors all conclusions. Even 
amongst those begotten of the Spirit to newness of 
mind the fact that the new mind must be exercised 
through the fallen flesh is very sure to pervert its 
judgment in some measure, for a time, at least, until 
the new will learns to use the Golden Rule with 
accuracy. 

It was natural that the doctrine of "the divine 
right of kings" should establish itself— that the favored 
classes and individuals should claim divine 
power in attaining and maintaining their authority 
and power over mankind. Indeed in ancient times 
the great rulers claimed not only divine favor, but 
further that they were related to the gods and were, 
therefore, properly objects of worship: in accordance 
with this thought the Emperors of Rome were styled 
Pontifex Maximus (Chief Priest), and their statues 
were set up for homage and adoration. This view 
possibly came originally from Israel, whose kings 
were, indeed, of divine appointment as part of a typical 
system which foreshadowed the yet to be Kingdom 
of Heaven established upon earth, for which we 
still pray, "Thy Kingdom come." With the passing 
of Israel's Kingdom as a type, all kingdom-types 
passed away and we now look only for the antitype. 
Nevertheless, the Czar of Russia and the Pope of 
Rome are each still accepted as "Pontifex Maximus" 
by millions; and all kings— especially the German 
Emperor— like to appeal to their people for obedience 
and support along this line. 

Mr. Baer in a recent interview with Senator 
Quay on the same subject declared:— 

"We are not fighting labor organizations. We fully 
recognize the right of men to organize to protect themselves 
from oppression and to benefit themselves in any legitimate 
way. But we do oppose their unreasonable interference with 
the discipline and ordinary management of our business. We 
will not permit them to select our employes. Neither politics, 
religion, nationality nor membership in labor organizations 
shall debar any competent man from working for us. 
We are fighting the battle of freedom for the individual, and 
his right to labor on his own terms. 

"The coal operators say that they cannot mine coal, because 
the miners make demands which render it impossible 
to mine coal profitably, and that the state has enacted laws 
prohibiting the employment of men in the mines unless they 
have worked two years in the anthracite mines, and therefore 
they cannot, for the time being, mine coal. How, then, under 
the circumstances can there be any violation of public 
duty? 

PROF. MOOREHEAD MUCH TROUBLED. 



Professor W. G. Moorehead of Xenia College, 



is well known to readers of Millennial Dawn and 

Zion's Watch Tower, as the one man in the world 

found capable of writing a tract against Millennial 

Dawn that has circulated widely. His has made the Professor 

famous in heaven and in earth; because no one 

else being able to write anything on the subject 

worthy of printers' ink, his tract has been reprinted 

by the hundreds of thousands by various of our enemies 

North, South, East and West. The Professor 

owes something to Millennial Dawn for his earthly 

fame surely; but alas, we fear he has a contra account 

in heaven where sophistical "dust" deceives 

none, and where a man's condemnation corresponds 

with his misuse of his talents!— Matt. 25:20. 

The "Moorehead Tract" may have blinded some, 
we know not, "God knoweth"; but we feel sure that 
it has injured and permanently blinded none of "the 
very elect," and we are giving ourselves no concern 
about it, but are trusting that the Lord will overrule 
it and all things to his praise, according to his own 
wisdom. Those who have seen it will remember that 
the Professor's chief objection to the Millennial Dawn 
was that it was being "forced upon the people at the 
ridiculously low price of 25 cents." Why he should 
object to this we do not know, unless he has some 
publications which look dear in comparison. However, 
he is even with us now, since his tract is absolutely 
free and being literally forced upon many. 

Brother Moorehead is a "Pre-Millennialist," too, 
by the way; and we presume that his wrath against 
Millennial Dawn is chiefly on account of our "following 
not with him." (Mark 9:38,39.) His tract was 
his method of forbidding us, and stopping us; though 
he must admit that it has proved a miserable failure; 
for Millennial Dawn has gone forward amazingly and 
his opposition and that of his friends has had no evil 
effect so far as we are aware, except upon those who 
use it to fight against God, and against the truth. 

Why do these so called "Pre-Millennialists" of 
whom Prof. Moorehead is an acknowledged leader, 
oppose the truths heralded by Millennial Dawn and 
Zion's Watch Tower? What different views do they 
hold? We don't mind advertising their views, and 
are sure that all of our readers are sufficiently in advance 
of them to appreciate the distinctions quite 
clearly. 

(1) They are generally members of so-called 
"Orthodox" sects and hold in common with them 
that the great mass of mankind have gone to an eternal 
hell and a small minority to heaven; and that the 
conditions of all of these are eternally fixed at death, 
so that "the Kingdom of God's dear Son" (Col. 1:13) 
will profit them nothing. They hold that all who will 
be so lucky as to be alive when the Kingdom is established, 
will be blessed with extravagant opportunities 
and privileges of which their fellow-members of 



Adam's race have for six thousand years been deprived, 
to the eternal torment of almost all of them! 
True, they accept as true the Lord's words "All that 
are in the graves shall hear his voice and shall come 
forth," (Jno. 5:28,29) but they explain the transaction 
a little differently— that all that are in heaven 
shall come down and all that are in hell shall come 
up, at the Lord's command. They generally conceive 
this to be the work of a 24-hour judgment day at the 
close of the Millennium, and that the poor creatures 
will merely come forth for a farcical exhibition and be 

R3074 : page 278 

remanded to heaven and hell, and that at the same 
time the Lord and the good of earth will go off 
to heaven and the earth then take fire and burn up. 

We, on the contrary, hold that none but the elect 
have gone into the heavenly condition; that the remainder 
of mankind are still sleeping in the tomb 
(sheol, hades) unconscious of the lapse of time or of 
anything else (see Eccl. 9:5), and that the Millennium 
is the promised time for the blessing of all with a 
clear knowledge of the truth and a full opportunity to 
embrace and obey it under the guidance and assistance 
of their Redeemer and his Bride; and that wilful 
rejectors will eventually be destroyed— not tormented. 
—Acts 3:23. We hold, with the Scriptures, 
that "the earth abideth forever" and that the "fire" 
coming is symbolic of the great social, financial and 
religious trouble which will overwhelm "the present 
evil world" and usher in the Millennium.— Eccl. 1:4; 
Zeph. 1:18; 3:8; Gal. 1:4. 

(3) They still hold the dark ages view of Trinity 
—that three times one is one. That Father, Son 
and Holy Spirit are three names for one God. Hence, 
that the Father and Holy Spirit died if Christ died. 
But that since God cannot die, and the universe could 
not be supposed to go on for even one day without 
its Creator and Ruler, and since Christ is "the same in 
substance" with the Father and Holy Spirit, therefore 
Christ cannot have died really, but merely in appearance 

R3075 : page 278 

—deceptively. That similarly, to produce an effect, 
our Lord cried on the cross "My God! My God! 
Why hast thou forsaken me?" That again for effect 
and deceptively he said to Mary, "I ascend to my Father 
and your Father, to my God and your God." 

That we may be seen not to misrepresent the 
subject of three Gods in one, we quote from the Presbyterian 
"Shorter Catechism:" 

"Q.5. Are there more Gods than one? 

"A. There is but one only, the living and true 
God. 



"Q.6. How many persons are there in the 
Godhead? 

"A. There are three persons in the Godhead: 
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and these 
three are one God, the same in substance, equal in power 
and glory." 

Surely it is high time that thinking Christians 
should repudiate such nonsense for which not a word 
of Bible testimony can be produced! Will not the 
Professor, if he still differs with us, take the trouble 
to publicly meet the editor of this journal in a candid, 
Christian, brotherly discussion of the disputed 
points, using for proof the Word of God only? We 
will bear all the expense, willingly. We suggest to 
him that in our opinion this would be a much more 
noble, much more gentlemanly, much more Christian 
method of procedure than sending out a scurrilous 
tract full of invectives and appealing only to the prejudices, 
and calling the writer "hydrophobic" and styling 
Millennial Dawn "nocturnal hallucination" and 
"the product of insanity," because it is perhaps too 
reasonable and logical and Scriptural for him to appreciate 
it. 

We promise not to retaliate but, on the contrary, 
to treat the Professor as though he were a Christian 
gentleman in every sense of the word. 

(4) They believe with us that Jesus was a spirit-being 
before he became a man; but they deny that 
in his resurrection he became a spirit-being as in 
the beginning. They claim that he is still "the man 
Christ Jesus" in heaven, altho they admit that all 
the holy angels are ministering spirits; and would 
doubtless admit that conditions suitable to spirit 
beings would be quite unsuited to fleshly beings. 
They hold that our Lord's second coming will be in 
flesh and that he and the apostles and all the saints 
will have thrones and palaces and earthly court and 
pomp and splendor much as earthly kings now do, 
only on a more lavish scale, etc., etc. 

We object to this as being contrary both to the 
Scriptures and to sound judgment. It is not reasonable 
to suppose that our Lord's obedience to the performance 
of the Father's will even unto death, (Heb. 10:9), 
should to all eternity cost him the encumbrance 
of the flesh— and that with scars and wounds, 
as is claimed. We hold with the Bible that "Now the 
Lord is that spirit" (2 Cor. 3:17); and that though he 
was "put to death in the flesh he was quickened in 
spirit" (I Pet. 3:18); and that "tho we have known 
Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth, know we 
him [so] no more." (2 Cor. 5:16.) We hold with the 
Bible that "flesh and blood can not inherit the Kingdom 
of God" (I Cor. 15:50), and that when that Kingdom 
is established it will be spiritual and invisible; 
and hence that men shall not say, "Lo here" or "Lo 
there!" for "the Kingdom of God cometh not with observation" 



(outward show) but shall be in the midst of 
men unseen.— See Luke 17:20,21. 

We hold that Christ and his glorified Church 
will be as invisible to men as are Satan and his angels 
now;— because they will be spirit beings; that this is 
the meaning of the "change" promised; "changed in 
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye" (I Cor. 15:51,52), 
"we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he 
is" (I Jno. 3:2), and share his glory; and his glory 
and presence are now like those of the Father, 
"whom no man hath seen nor can see," "dwelling in 
light which no man can approach unto." (I Tim. 6:16). 
Only because of her "change" can the Church 
behold her Lord's glory and that of the Father. 

THE PROFESSOR'S GRIEVANCE. 

We will let the Professor tell us of his troubles 
—how he stared, and rubbed his eyes and felt vexed 
and annoyed by our "astonishing translation of John 1:1", 
—the more so because he could not deny its correctness. 
The clipping (from Watchword and Truth) 
reads thus:— 

A NEW RENDERING OF JOHN 1:1. 

The publication of the little tract entitled "Brief Review 
of Millennial Dawn" by the Watchword and Truth seems to 
have disturbed somewhat the defenders of the heresies of 
that book. From three different sources there has come 
to the writer an astonishing translation of Jno. 1:1. One 
is found in "Zion's Watch Tower," dated April 1, 1902, and 
received a few days ago. The translation in this paper is 

R3075 : page 279 

heavily marked with a blue pencil, and on the margin are 
written in blue pencil the words, "Moorehead should 
read this." Well, yes; he has read "this," and 
had read it before with some attention. Here it is: 
"In the beginning was the Logos, and the Logos 
was with the God, and the Logos was a God: the same was 
in the beginning with the God." (The italics are in the 
paper referred to above.) When I first read this translation 
I rubbed my eyes and stared. When the last of the three 
came with its blue pencil emphasis and the marginal exhortation, 
I polished my glasses, re-read and stared! Obviously 
the import of it is, to remove this text from the sphere 
of testimony to our Lord's pre-incarnate Deity. It is thus 
employed in the little tract. Therein it is asserted the verse 
teaches (1), Christ's eternity: (2), His eternal separate existence: 
(3), His Deity. The Millennial Dawn translation 
seems intended to exclude this interpretation and to fasten 
another and a very different meaning on the verse. It 
makes Christ a God as distinguished from the God! 
The Millennial Dawn people may perhaps ask: "but is 



not our translation of the verse exactly literal?" Yes, surprisingly 

literal. The reader who is not acquainted with 

the Greek may be here informed that the definite article 

the is very often attached (not always) to the term God in 

the original of the N.T. Its use there is idiomatic. Our 

English forbids it save in certain well-defined cases, as e.g. 

"The God of Abraham," etc. Its presence or absence in 

each is governed by the genius of the two tongues 

respectively. 

But let us follow the example of the above queer rendering 
of Jno. 1:1, and apply the method to other places of 
Scripture. In this same first chapter of John four times the 
Greek word God is found without the definite article the. 
Let us read these and hear how they sound: verse 6. "There 
was a man sent from a God whose name was John:" verse 12, 
"But as many as received him to them gave he power 
to become the children of a God: verse 13, "Which were 
born. ..of a God:" verse 18, "No man hath seen a God at 
any time." Quite recently I read the eighth chapter of 
Romans through in the original, and found that ten times 
the apostle uses the name without the article, and in each 
instance the name is employed to designate the Supreme 
God. Let us read but one verse with Dawn-ist translation 
inserted: verse 14, "For as many as are led by the Spirit 
of a God, they are the sons of a God." How does it sound, 
brethren? This silly nonsense is matched only by the Reims 
version of Heb. 1 1:21: "By faith Jacob when he was a dying 

Nor is this all. One of the commonest rules of Greek 
Grammar as touching the use of the definite article the 
is this: In a simple sentence the subject generally takes 
the article while its predicate omits it. Jno. 1:1, third 
clause, is a simple, definite statement with a subject and a 
predicate; the subject is, "the Word" (Logos), and its predicate 
unquestionably is, "God," and hence the latter word 
does not take the article. Will some one kindly loan these 
gentlemen a Greek Grammar? 

Furthermore, there is a Greek adjective that expresses 
exactly the idea of a divine or god-like being, but who 
is not necessarily himself God. It is the word theios. This 
word John might have used had he wished to convey the 
idea that Christ in his pre-incarnate state was like a God. 
But John does not use this term, instead he employs the 
supreme title of God and applies it most emphatically to 
the Lord Jesus Christ in his eternal pre-existent state. 

Once more, if John had inserted the article the before 
the term God in the third clause of the verse, then the word 
would have embraced the entire Godhead, and a distinction 
of the Persons in the Trinity would have been obliterated. 
Had he written (to follow again the example of the Dawn 
translation), "and the Word was the God," then Christ 
would have been the whole of the Trinity. He might as 
well have written, "The Son is the Father," for that would 
have been the exact equivalent. 

But enough of this. The only justification of this brief 
article lies in the bizarre rendering of Jno. 1:1 which has 
been offensively thrust upon the writer as a triumphant reply 



to his use of that text as proof of Christ's everlasting 
equality with the Father, as himself God; and this, too, 
with blue pencil emphasis and marginal admonition. 
— W. G. Moorehead. 



We are sorry that such trifles so worry the Professor, 
and advise our friends that they hereafter remember 
that the more head a Professor has the 
more bother he has in using it,— if the arguments are 
against him. We reflect, that if the brief reference 
to John 1:1 made so much rubbing of eyes necessary, 
it is fortunate that the Professor did not first see the 
full and extended treatment of this and cognate passages 
in Millennial Dawn, Vol. V., for then he might 
have rubbed his eyes out. However, on the other 
hand, blind eyes need considerable rubbing and washing 

R3076 : page 279 

and especially anointing before sight comes. We 
hope and pray that the Professor may have such a 
blessing in this respect as the Apostle Paul prayed 
for the Ephesian Christians.— Eph. 1:17,18; 
3:17,18,19. 

And now, what about the above? It is certainly 
an improvement on the "Moorehead Tract" in that 
it is a little more honest and Christian in its general 
style, avoiding some of the slang and invective of 
the latter; yet, we must confess disappointment that 
ten years of "growth in grace" has accomplished so 
little improvement: that the Professor is still so willing 
to "handle the Word of God deceitfully" and to 
throw "dust" into the eyes of those who have reason 
to expect better things of him as a minister and a 
Professor of theology! See what the Lord says respecting 
such bell-wether professors who befoul the 
waters of truth so that his sheep cannot drink at the 
streams of truth.— Ezek. 34:18,19, read also 
verses 10-16. 

The Professor being unable to deny the exactness 
and literalness of the translation, acknowledges 
it in such a manner as to mislead those unacquainted 
with the Greek and who trust to his candor, by effecting 
irony, saying, "Yes, surprisingly literal" and again 
referring to it as "this queer rendering of John 1:1." 
Again, without denying the absolute correctness of 
the rendering, he throws more "dust" into the eyes 
of his credulous friends by a little "acting," to deceive; 

R3076 : page 280 

saying, "Will some one kindly loan these gentlemen 

a Greek Grammar?" His assurance in this 

is based upon the fact that only a small minority of 



his readers have Greek New Testaments or any ability 
to understand them and to see his trickery. 

We make no claim to originality in respect to 
John 1:1. It was written and printed nearly eighteen 
centuries before we were born. It is God's Word 
and not ours— the article showing emphasis and all, 
and any sport made of it is answerable for to God, 
and to him who said "Whosoever is ashamed of me 
and of my words of him shall the Son of Man be 
ashamed." We do not even claim originality as to 
the proper translation of John 1:1. Our attention 
was called to it by The Emphatic Diaglott— an interlineary 
word for word Greek and English New Testament, 
in general use and of high repute. 

The Professor's quotations from John 1, and 
Romans 8, "a God" is so much more "dust". We 
make no claim that the Greek article showing emphasis 
is used every time the Father is referred to as 
God; but, on the contrary, that its use in John 1:1 is 
made necessary to distinguish between God the Father 
and God the Son, and to show what our Saviour's 
words fully attested; saying, "My Father is 
greater than I." "I came down from heaven not to 
do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me." 
"I seek not to do mine own will, but the will of the 
Father which hath sent me. "-John 14:28; 6:38; 5:30. 

Notice carefully the next to last paragraph of the 
Professor's article. He here most positively acknowledges 
the correctness of our translation;— acknowledges 
that the article (the) in the third clause must 
be omitted, in order to show that Christ is not the 
God but a God. The Professor evidently has a Greek 
grammar and knows how to use it too, if only it suited 
his theory to tell the whole truth. 

OUR PRESENT CIVILIZATION. 



What is the real character of our present civilization? 
We may as well face the facts. It is gigantic in invention, 
discovery, enterprise, achievement; but it is 
gigantically worldly; sometimes and somewheres monstrously 
God-denying and God-defying. This "Christian 
civilization" has produced giants in these days, men of renown, 
but they often use their intellect, knowledge and 
fame only to break down, as with the iron flail of Talus, all 
Christian faith. Philosophy now blooms into a refined and 
poetic Pantheism, or a gross, blank Materialism, or a subtle 
Rationalism, or an absurd Agnosticism. Science constructs 
its systems of evolution, and leaves out a personal God; 
Spontaneous Generation becomes the only creator, Natural 
Law the only determining power, and Natural Selection the 
only Providence. 

"Such men as Strauss and Renan, Hegel and Comte, 
Goethe and Kant, Mill and Spencer, Darwin and Huxley, 



Matthew Arnold and Theodore Parker are specimens of men 
who owe their education, refinement, accomplishment, to 
the very Christianity they attack. The cubs first nurse the 
dam, and then turn and strike their fangs into her breast. 
Civilization itself is turned into the stronghold of unbelief; 
its imaginations and inventions are high towers that exalt 
themselves against the knowledge of God, and the thoughts 
of our great thinkers have not been brought into captivity 
to the obedience of Christ. 

"We have the ripest form of worldly civilization, but the 
ripeness borders on rottenness; while men boast of the fabric, 
its foundations are falling into decay, and that awful Anarchy 
which is the last result of Atheism even now threatens 
to dissolve society itself. Government is rendered helpless 
by the destructive forces which science has put into the 
hands of the ignorant and lawless. The ballot and the bullet 
alike become weak in competition with dynamite, and 
wars become impossible until men are ready for mutual 
extermination. Rev. A. T. Pierson, D.D. 



R3076 : page 280 

OUR ANNUAL CONVENTIONS. 

ON THE LAST page will be found notices of 

the two conventions for this year. In some 

respects we would have preferred to have but 

one, but the distances to be traveled, and hence the expense 

involved, would have been too great for many. 

By having the one at Washington and the other at 

Des Moines a much larger number of the Lord's people 

can be served, and thus the blessing which usually 

attends these meetings can be distributed to a larger 

number. Only yesterday we heard from a brother who 

last year attended the Cleveland Convention, relating 

how great a blessing he had received, and that it had 

continued with him throughout the year, and that he 

would attend one of the conventions this season. We 

do not write to urge any to attend who are not financially 

able— and we know that this is true of many of 

the Lord's faithful ones— but we do urge that those 

who propose attending shall promptly send us their 

addresses that accommodations may be secured for 

them in advance, and that thus they may be freed 

from annoyance and we also be spared the inconvenience 

of arranging during convention hours such matters 

as might better be all arranged beforehand. We 

desire that the convention time be appropriated wholly 

to spiritual matters— not only by the visitors, but 

also by the brethren and sisters of the home church. 

If, therefore, you have determined to attend either 

convention, and have not yet sent us your address 

with full particulars, as to the names, sex, color, etc., 

of your party, do so immediately— before you forget 



it. All rooms for the conventions ought to be engaged 
by now, as both cities will be full to overflowing 
on account of the cheap excursion rates. 

Such of the friends as may be able to afford the 
expense of travel, but not the expense of entertaining 
will please write us specially to this effect, and 
some arrangement will be made for them by our kind 
entertainers. 

On the mornings of the opening of the Conventions 
(and on preceding evenings if notified) representatives 
of the home churches will be on hand at 
the various depots, to assist and direct arriving 
friends. These may be known by carrying in their 
hands or other conspicuous place copies of the Watch 

R3076 : page 281 

Tower, and all visiting friends should likewise display 

copies of the Watch Tower, that they may be 

identified. However, should you arrive at another 

time, or should you fail to meet the watchers, the addresses 

furnished in the announcement on last page 

of this issue will be quite sufficient to enable you to 

reach the convention without trouble. 

We are hoping for delightful seasons of refreshing 
from the presence of the Lord, as usual, and trust 
that all who attend will come seeking to bestow a 
blessing upon others as well as to receive blessing 
upon themselves. Let the spirit of love, peace, contentment, 
joy in the holy spirit, rule in our hearts 
and make them thus receptive to the blessed influences 
of the word of grace and truth. 

Those who cannot attend, of course, will be many 
more than the few who will be present; but they will 
be remembered in our petitions, as we trust we shall 
be remembered in theirs. We hope that those not in 
attendance, will, during the sessions of the conventions, 
let us have their hearts and sympathies, that 
they too may share the blessing. And our trust is 
that, as on former occasions, those who do attend the 
conventions will carry home with them rich measures 
of the spiritual refreshment poured out upon the assemblies 
according to divine promise. Let us see to 
it that we bring our consecrated hearts and powers 
fully into accord with our Lord and his providential 
arrangements, that thus we may claim his promise to 
pour us out a blessing that we will not be able fully 
to receive, but which will overflow upon others far and 
near. 

We learn that tickets to Washington Convention 
will not be on sale in season to permit all to get 
there for the opening. We have therefore added another 
day. 

Some seem to get a wrong impression respecting 
the purchase of the excursion tickets to these conventions; 



R3077 : page 281 

they seem to think that it would be wrong 

for us who are not "Odd Fellows" nor members of 

the "Grand Army," to avail ourselves of these cheap 

excursions. This is a decided mistake; the excursions 

are open to anybody, and probably not more 

than one-half of those using the tickets will be members 

of the orders named. There is nothing dishonorable 

about it. It is fully understood by the railways, 

and not only ourselves but others make it a 

habit to hold conventions at the same time with these 

large conventions, so as to take advantage of the 

cheap rates granted by the railways— which are only 

granted because of the large numbers expected to be 

in attendance. The railways do what they can to 

get as much travel as possible on these excursion 

tickets. 

A SAVIOR AND A GREAT ONE! 

A ghastly sight shows in the shivering air 

On Calvary's brow: 
The Savior of mankind, in love, hangs there; 

While followers bow 
The head low on the breast and sadly sigh, 
"How can he be Messiah— if he die?" 

A jeering mob surrounds the cursed knoll 

And mocks the Lord; 
Yet to his lips comes from his stricken soul 

The precious word— 
"Father, forgive; they know not what they do—" 
E'er o'er his face creeps dissolution's hue. 

'"Tis finished," rings in triumph through the sky; 

He bows his head. 
And, while the querying soldiers mark the cry, 

The Lord is dead. 
All anguish past, his triumph doth begin, 
The world is saved, a death blow dealt to sin. 

Jerusalem, amazed, hears soldiers tell 

(With terror cold) 
How Christ has vanquished Satan, death and hell, 

As he foretold. 
And feeble fishers forcefully proclaim, 
"There is salvation in no other name." 

A Sabbath's journey from the city gate, 

With sorrow shod, 
Two sad disciples bear their sorry weight 

To their abode. 
The Christ appears, while holden are their eyes 
And doth expound wherefor Messiah dies. 



Emmaus reached, the Lord would further go. 

They gently chide— 
"Thou hast beguiled our weary tears, and so 

With us abide." 
He brake their bread,— then vanished from their sight. 
Their hearts did burn with holy joy that night. 

Still thus he comes; and though the faulty sight 

Of clouded eyes 
Perceives him not, he makes the burden light, 

And stills our cries: 
For, like weaned babes, we mourn, the while he would 
Our hearts sustain with stronger, richer food. 

The tale is old, but ever sweetly new, 

Why Jesus died. 
The nail prints, doubting one, he shows to you, 

And in his side 
A spear thrust gapes— a passage rent apart, 
For easy access to your Savior's heart. 

It was for you, my brother, that he shed 

His life so free. 
For you, for me, he bowed his godlike head 

On Calvary's tree; 
That, trusting in the merit of his name, 
We might be saved from sorrow, sin and shame. 

The past sufficeth, surely, to have spent 

In sinful deeds. 
Come, join our band; and be our footsteps bent 

Where Jesus leads. 
So in his righteousness serenely dressed 
We'll meet him face to face among the blest. 
H. Hardie. 



R3077 : page 282 

"SO MOSES THE SERVANT OF GOD DIED." 

-DEUT. 34:1-12.-SEPTEMBER 21.- 

OUR LORD ALONE EXCEPTED, no character 

of history stands out before us so 

grandly and majestically as that of Moses, 

the great Apostle Paul, even, being overshadowed by 

him. If we think of him as a man, we see a sublime 

grandeur and nobility of character, combining 

strength with humility, wisdom with love and gentleness. 

If we consider him as the leader and deliverer 

of Israel, we find that he accomplished a 

greater work than any of the kind before or since. 

If we consider him as the lawgiver, we find in his 

code of laws justice, wisdom, mercy and an appreciation 



of human nature far superior to anything of his 

day, and the basis upon which the laws of Christendom 

in this twentieth century are built. If we consider 

him as a statesman, we find him wise, prudent, 

careful, yet broad. We see how he brought order 

out of confusion, and changed a disorganized rabble 

of over a million into a thoroughly organized and 

well ordered nation. But it is when we come to consider 

him as the servant of God that his character 

shines out most brilliantly. His faithfulness to God; 

his faithfulness to the trust committed to him as the 

Mediator for his people; his self-sacrificing spirit in 

connection with the entire work, indicating that he 

served not the god of fame or of ambition or of self-love, 

but the Lord of hosts. 

The greatness of Moses would be incomprehensible 
to us from any other standpoint than that which 
the Scriptures set forth; viz., that he was under special 
divine direction as God's servant, and that, therefore, 
being naturally an able, efficient, humble, good man, 
had these manifold qualities of his character intensified 
by reason of the Lord's power working in him 
and through him for the effecting of the divine purposes. 

Moses was now 120 years old; 40 years of his 
life had been spent as an Egyptian prince, in the 
court of Egypt, educated, trained, and in the public 
service as a general and a ruler. The second forty 
years of his life he was a shepherd in the wilderness, 
because of his love for the Lord, his appreciation of 
the divine promise, and his preference to share these 
with his brethren, the Israelites, rather than to continue 
in the favor of the Egyptians, their enemies 
and oppressors. We have already seen how this wilderness 
experience was probably valuable to him, enabling 
him to transform and transmute the knowledge 
and experiences already gained into a broad 
and deep philosophy, the foundation of which was 
faith in God and respect for his promises. Thus does 
God sometimes work by natural means to prepare the 
instruments for his service. The closing forty years 
of his life were devoted to the exercise of all the 
knowledge, experience and mental philosophy and 
faith previously gained, to the service of Israel as 
their leader, lawgiver, statesman— prophet, priest 
and king. And now his work was finished— the 
work which the Lord intended him to do. Another, 
Joshua, was to take up the work of leader, and he had 
already, by the Lord's direction, been formally and 
publicly ordained to this office, and Moses was ready 
to die. 

In considering the fact that Moses was not permitted 
to go into the promised land, we are to bear in 
mind that he, as well as the nation of Israel, was being 
used of the Lord in a typical manner. We are 
not to go to the extreme of higher criticism, and to 
think of the deliverance from Egypt as an allegory. 



It was all true; the history of a series of facts; but 

truths and facts, under the Lord's guidance, may be 

so arranged as to be types of still higher facts, illustrations 

of still higher principles. One of the reasons 

mentioned why Moses was not permitted to lead Israel 

into the land of promise was the second smiting 

of the rock. The smiting the first time (Exod. 17:1-7) 

was by the Lord's direction, and the waters 

gushed forth, but the second time (Num. 20:2-12) 

the Lord said to Moses, "Speak unto the rock," but 

instead he smote the rock a second time. 

In this he spoiled a type, while he made another 
type. Christ Jesus, the true Rock, was to be smitten 
but once for our sins, and as a result of that one smiting 
at Calvary the water of life would be obtained 
for all true Israelites to all time; and if for a season 
the flow was stopped it was only necessary that the 
Rock should be invoked in the name of the Lord, that 
the waters might again flow forth. Christ dieth no 
more; death has no dominion over him; therefore in 
the type the Rock should not have been smitten a 
second time. But the second smiting, nevertheless, 
made a new type, because as the Apostle explains, 
there are some now who crucify Christ afresh, and 
put him to an open shame— some of his professed followers 
denying or ignoring the value of the original 
sacrifice, denying the blood that bought them, are 
counted as committing the sin unto death— Second 
Death— and of these Moses became a type, and as a 
type of a class which would have to do with the antitype 
of the rock, he was debarred from Canaan.— Heb. 6:4-6. 

But even aside from the making of this type, 
Moses would not have gone into the land of Canaan; 
because, from another point of view, he was the type 
of the Law Covenant, which must end before the 
people can enter into their rest. As Moses was the 
representative of the Law Covenant, so Joshua became 
the representative or type of the New Covenant 
and of its mediator, Jesus, the Deliverer. "The Law 
came by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus 
Christ." The Law was a pedagogue or guide to prepare 
and bring the Israelites along to the borders of 
Canaan, but the Law could never give them rest, 
could never take them into the land of promise. 
Christ, the antitype of Joshua, must do that. We are 
to remember, too, that Moses' error in smiting the 
Rock, did not involve him in the Second Death, nor 
will it work any injury to him as respects the future. 
It was comparatively a trivial matter, and taught him 
a valuable lesson which he evidently learned to the 
Lord's pleasement, and his failure to go into the land 
of promise, therefore, should not indicate a continuance 
of divine indignation against him, but merely 
a continuance of the divine purpose in making of him 
a type of a class who would have to do with the antitypical 



R3077 : page 283 

Rock, the antitypical water, and the antitypical 
smiting. 

We might remark here, too, that those who 
smote the Lord the first time, at Calvary, have the 
promise of full forgiveness. They shall look upon 
him whom they pierced, and shall mourn for him, and 
the Lord will pour out upon them the spirit of prayer 
and supplication, and they shall have full opportunity 
of recompense and reconciliation. (Zech. 12:10.) It 
is those who, with greater knowledge, and after they 
have become partakers of the holy spirit, and have 
tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the 
age to come, sin wilfully and count the blood of the 
covenant a common thing— these are they who commit 
the real sin unto death, and for whom the Scriptures 
suggest no hope, or further opportunity, because 
they have sinned wilfully. 

MOUNT PISGAH VIEWS. 

At this time the Israelites were in the land of 
Moab, at the northern end of the Dead Sea, opposite 
Jericho, and nearly in line with the city of Jerusalem. 
They awaited the Lord's direction, by the pillar of 
cloud, before crossing Jordan to take possession of 
Canaan. Here, Moses' work being accomplished, the 
Lord led him up to Mount Pisgah's top, a lofty peak 
3,586 feet above the sea-level. From this point an 
extended panoramic view was possible— is possible 
today. Here Moses saw much with his natural eyes, 
but much more with the eye of faith, seeing the promises 
which God had made to the tribes of Israel, 
through Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and by his own 
mouth. He saw of the travail of his soul, and was satisfied. 
We hear not a murmur respecting the transfer 
of leadership and the cessation of his own labors. 
If God had used him in his service to the extent that 
he was pleased to do, the servant was thankful and 
satisfied. 

"So Moses, the servant of God, died"— not from 
weakness and infirmity of age, for "his eye was not 
dimmed nor his natural force abated";— he died according 
to the word of the Lord. Throughout his 

R3078 : page 283 

life he had been the Lord's servant, used and blessed 
as such, protected and kept by the power of God 
through the many vicissitudes of life, and he who thus 
kept him, buried him in one of the many little inaccessible 
valleys of this Mount Pisgah. The Lord not 
only hid Moses in the grave, but hid the grave, so 
that no man knoweth its place. This also illustrates 
the divine wisdom; for, (1) had the place of the grave 



been known it no doubt would have been an object 
of veneration amongst the Israelites, a Mecca, to 
which pilgrimages would have been made, and the 
man Moses would have been honored, rather than 
the God whom this man represented, and whose 
servant and mouthpiece he was. (2) Doubtless, also, 
the hiding of the grave was typical, and represented 
that the Law Covenant, which died and passed away, 
was not to be revived; that the New Covenant, not 
only displaced, but thoroughly replaced it, so that 
there would never more be need for the Law Covenant 
in connection with the bringing of Israel to all 
the precious promises of God. 

"Lives of great men all remind us 

We can make our lives sublime; 
And departing leave behind us 

Footprints in the sands of time." 

This great truth, so beautifully expressed by the 
poet, finds a grand illustration in Moses. His life 
and character are a noble example, not only for the 
Lord's saints, but also for natural men. No one can 
study the life of Moses, and note its purity, its lofty 
ideals, its humility, its obedience to the Lord, its 
faithfulness to his fellows, without being bettered, ennobled, 
by the contemplation. And each one thus 
bettered himself by contemplating this noble character, 
should in turn seek to leave noble and enduring 
footprints for others, that perchance "some forlorn 
or shipwrecked brother seeing may take heart again." 

The Book of Deuteronomy is chiefly composed 
of addresses by Moses to the Israelites, setting before 
them the various lessons they had received from 
the Lord, expounding to them the divine law, their 
duty to God and to man. It closes with the Song of 
Moses, and Moses' blessing of the nation, two poems 
whose beauty and literary merit are acknowledged 
as being of the highest order. Jacob called his 
twelve sons when dying and pronounced over them 
certain blessings. So now Moses, as the father of the 
nation, in these poems, completes his admonitions respecting 
them, his warnings and encouragements; and 
in these prophecies, not only their trials and difficulties 
and failures are foretold, but also their final victories, as 
we believe these victories shall ultimately be attained by 
all the Israel of God— all who will become by faith the 
children of Abraham— the Jew first and also the Gentile, 
during the Millennial age. -Rom. 11:11,12,28-32. 

This song of Moses was evidently not merely for 
Israel, but prophetical, and was referred to by our 
Lord (Rev. 15:3,4), long after that nation had been 
blinded and given up as respects the high calling of 
this Gospel age. This is the song of Moses and the 
Lamb, which the overcomers are to sing, those who, 
with Christ, shall be members of the body of the 



great Prophet who shall bless, not only the literal 
seed of Abraham, but all the true Israel of God; all 
who shall become Israelites according to the faith 
and obedience of Abraham. This song, after telling 
of trying experiences, ends with rejoicing, saying, 
"Rejoice, all ye nations with his people!" The poem 
of blessing, which applied most particularly to the 
tribes of Israel, tho doubtless also typical of the elect 
144,000 ends with rejoicing, saying, "Happy art thou, 
O Israel! Who is like unto thee, O people saved by 
the Lord?"-Deut. 32 and 33. 

The scribe who wrote the Book of Deuteronomy 
at Moses' dictation finished its account as a historian, 
describing the death and burial of Israel's great leader, 
and declaring the great honor in which he was esteemed, 
recounting his mighty works, and ascribing 
these as did Moses himself, not to Moses personally, 
but to the Lord, who sent him to do them. 

JOSHUA THE NEW LEADER. 

Joshua was now eighty years of age, and was accepted 
by the Israelites as Moses' successor without 
murmur. They had, doubtless, learned some valuable 
lessons in their wilderness discipline. Joshua, 

R3078 : page 284 

it will be remembered, was Moses' companion when 
he went up into the mountain, Sinai, and there received 
the Law, and indeed throughout the wilderness 
journey he seems to have been the one above all 
others upon whom Moses could thoroughly rely. He 
and Caleb were the two spies who brought the favorable 
report, declaring that by the help of the Lord 
Israel might go up and assuredly take possession. 
In the change of leadership Israel learned another 
great lesson; viz., that their confidence and trust must 
not be in man; that so long as they recognized the 
Lord as their Leader they might feel safe and confident; 
because, altho others might pass away, the 
Lord would abide faithful and could raise them up at 
any time just such leaders as he saw best. 

There is a lesson in this matter for spiritual Israelites 
as well. We are not to put our trust in leaders, 
but in the Lord. This does not signify that we 
are not to trust leaders, and not to acknowledge 
leaders, for all the history of the Lord's dealings with 
his people, the typical as well as the antitypical, shows 
us that he is pleased to use human agencies as his 
representatives in the teaching and leading of his 
people from grace to grace, from knowledge to 
knowledge. The lesson to be learned is that the 
Lord is thoroughly competent to manage his own 
work, and that while we may look for his leading 
through human agencies our trust is not in them, their 



wisdom, their strength, but in the Lord's wisdom and 
strength, guiding them and us through them. 

Another lesson here set forth is found in the 
words, "Israel hearkened unto him [Joshua] and did 
as the Lord commanded Moses." Joshua was to be 
followed only as the people could realize that he was 
following God's instructions, given through Moses- 
through the Law. In the antitype the great Deliverer 
Jesus, will be the commander of the people, will 
bless the people during the Millennial age, and they 
must hear him and must obey him, but all that he will 
speak and all that he will order will be in full accord 
with the divine law, as represented by Moses. The 
Christ, during the Millennial Kingdom, will attempt 
nothing on behalf of mankind in violation of the 
laws of righteousness, the laws of God. But everything 
in the way of lifting mankind up, will be by 
magnifying the Law of God, and making it honorable, 
and assisting all to conform their lives thereto, 
but not by that Law Covenant which is forever dead. 



R3079 : page 284 

"BE STRONG AND OF GOOD COURAGE." 

-JOSHUA 1:1-11. -OCTOBER 5.- 

JOSHUA, the newly appointed leader of Israel, 
had been Moses' "minister" or servant, 
not in a menial sense, but in that higher 
sense in which we speak of "ministers of the Lord", 
Ministers of State, Prime Ministers, etc. He was 
eighty years of age at this time, and hence must have 
been forty when Israel left Egypt. He was of the 
tribe of Ephraim, of one of its leading families, his 
grandfather, Elishama, having been a captain of the 
army of the Ephraimites, 40,500 in number, at the 
organization of the Israelites soon after the exodus. 
We find Joshua with Moses as his special companion, 
in Mt. Sinai; we find him again as the representative 
of Moses, the general of all Israel in the 
first battle fought with the Amalekites; we find him 
again one of the leading men of all the tribes, sent 
to spy out the land of promise, and on this occasion 
he and Caleb were the only two whose faith in the 
Lord enabled them to return a favorable report, and, 
as we have already seen, in the giving of this report 
these men hazarded their lives;— so great was the 
chagrin and disappointment of the Israelites, and so 
fully were they in sympathy with the report of the 
majority. 

All these events seem to indicate that Joshua 
was a man of large faith and large courage; moreover, 
we remember that notwithstanding his high 



position as Moses' chosen minister, he seems to have 
been entirely void of that ambition which led to the 
overthrow of Korah, Dathan and Abiram and many 
of the princes of Israel, and which previously had 
affected Miriam and Aaron. Although he is not 
mentioned as being so meek as Moses, we may from 
all these considerations, judge that the one whom the 
Lord chose for Moses' successor was indeed a meek 
man, and that his courage, exemplified in every feature 
of his history, was the result of his faith in the 
Lord and not the result of self-confidence. The lesson 
to be drawn from this by spiritual Israel is the 
one mentioned by our Lord; namely, "Whosoever exalteth 
himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted." (Luke 14:11.) In this 
Joshua was a type of our Lord Jesus who, in turn, is 
the pattern which must be followed by all those who 
would be finally acceptable in the Lord. The Apostle's 
argument along this line, to all the spiritual Israelites, 
is, "Humble yourselves therefore under the 
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due 
time. "--I Pet. 5:6. 

Israel unquestioningly accepted the Lord's 
choice of a leader. As a people they were evidently 
learning something by their experience in the wilderness 
training school. At the beginning of their sojourn 
they were scarcely willing to recognize even 
Moses; but now they had come along so far as to be 
able to see that the Lord was their real Leader, and 
that even though Moses had died without bringing 
them into the promised land, God who had made the 
promise of Canaan to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and 
themselves, was abundantly able to accomplish his 
promise, and hence they were willing to accept whatever 
leadership the Lord should indicate. Spiritual 
Israelites, too, are to learn the same lesson; human 
leaders are important in their way— in so far as they 
are the divine choice— so far as we can see fulfilled 
in them the Lord's promised guidance of his people. 
But we are never to think of human leaders as indispensable; 
and God is likely to do again as in this 
case of Moses; namely, to remove a trusted leader 
and to appoint another in his stead, to the intent that 

R3079 : page 285 

his people may learn that he is their real Leader, that 
with him as their Guide they will surely have success, 
and that without him all earthly leadership would be 
in vain. 

As we have seen, Moses prefigured the Law, the 
school-master which was to bring God's people to the 
promised land, to the promised blessing, restitution, 
etc. We have seen that as Israel was unready to enter 
in and to possess the land because of lack of faith 
in the beginning and, therefore, had its wilderness 



journey extended to forty years, so on account 

of lack of faith at our Lord's first advent they were 

prevented from joining with him in the restitution 

work and were made to wander to gain further experiences 

and leadings during the past nineteen centuries; 

and now at the close of these experiences, 

they, as well as spiritual Israel, are again on the borders 

of the land of promise— the Millennial Kingdom. 

This time Joshua will take command, the Jordan will 

be crossed and the gracious promises begin to have 

their fulfilment. Meantime, the Joshua class, the 

Church, has been in process of development, and after 

the great time of trouble which is near at hand, 

the world in general will be ready to follow the leadership 

of Jesus as it is written of that time, "Many 

nations shall come and say, Come, and let us go up 

to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the 

God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and 

we will walk in his paths."— Micah 4:2. 

As, meantime, Joshua needed encouragement, so 
now the Lord's consecrated ones, the members of the 
body of Christ, need encouragement, need to have 
pointed out to them the sureness of the divine promise, 
its lengths and breadths and depths, just as the 
Lord pointed out to Joshua the land of promise, from 
the wilderness to Mt. Lebanon, and eastward to the 
river Euphrates and westward to the Mediterranean 
Sea. Does faith waver and are we inclined to wonder 
how it will be possible for the new dispensation 
to accomplish such wonderful things as are necessary 
to be accomplished for the blessing and uplifting 
of the world of mankind? If so let us look backward 
and see how the divine power was exercised 
in a miraculous manner, not only through Moses at 
the crossing of the Red Sea and in the giving of the 
manna, in the victory of the Amalekites and in the 
water from the rock, but let us also notice how the 
Lord's providences were miraculously with Israel in 
various ways during the period of their favor, and 
let us remember that this same power of God in still 
larger measure is to be with the antitype of Moses, 
with the new Leader of the world, the great Messiah 
—Christ the Head and the Church, his body, in 
the work of blessing and restitution on behalf of all 
those who shall, under that full enlightenment, desire 
to be the people of God. As it was God with Moses 
and God with Joshua that brought the victories, etc., 
so it will be the power of God with the Church that 
will bring the coming victories. "The Lord at thy 
right hand shall strike through kings in the day of 
his wrath." (Psa. 110:5.) "I shall give thee the 
heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts 
of the earth for thy possession." (Psa. 2:8.) Again 
the Apostle declares that the Millennial victory of 
Christ shall be by and through the Father's power. 
(I Cor. 15:27.) As none were able to stand before 



Joshua as the Lord's representative, so none of the 

great forces of evil and the obstructions now in the 

pathway of the fulfilment of God's promises shall 

stand; all must fall before the antitypical Joshua. "As 

I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, 

and every tongue shall confess to God." (Rom. 14:11.) 

Satan himself shall be amongst these great enemies 

to be overthrown and utterly destroyed, and all 

of his works of evil— death itself being finally completely 

blotted out as an opponent of those in harmony 

with God and approved by him,— all others 

having been destroyed in the Second Death, which 

is not an enemy either to God or to those who are 

in accord with him or to any principle of righteousness 

or truth or goodness. 

The land of promise is here mentioned as being 
the "land of the Hittites". Higher Critics were once 
inclined to think this reference to the Hittites an 
egregious error because they could find no record of 
such a people, and because from their standpoint the 
Bible is to be considered on a lower plane than are 
the secular histories of the world. However, all this 
has been changed because in the last few years excavations 
made in Assyria have disclosed ancient 
tablets whose testimony fully corroborates the statement 
that the Hittites were at this time a mighty 
people. Those who discount the Bible statements 
are at a disadvantage, while those who accept them 
are sure to be on the right side and, sooner or later, 
to have confidence and faith justified by evidences. 

Three times in this lesson is Joshua encouraged 
by the Lord, "Be strong and of a good courage," "Be 

R3080 : page 285 

thou strong and very courageous," etc. (vs. 6,7,9.) 

There are different kinds of courage; one sort is begotten 

of egotism and self-reliance, another kind is 

begotten of a recklessness which fails to take into account 

the difficulties of the situation, but the courage 

which the Lord inculcates and which all the spiritual 

Israelites are to seek to possess is the one which, 

while coolly and calmly discerning the trials and difficulties 

of the way and while humbly realizing its 

insufficiency for the occasion, is supported by a faith 

in the Lord— a trust in the divine promises which enables 

them to be strong in the Lord and in the power 

of his might. This was to be Joshua's courage and 

it is to be ours in respect to all the things of the present 

life, as well as in respect to all the things of the 

Kingdom, confidence in the Lord whose servants we 

are, and whose work he has commissioned us to perform. 

The expression, "Turn not from it (the Law) 

to the right hand or to the left" does not signify a 

turning aside completely, but rather, according to 

the original, it means, Require neither more nor less 



than the divine standard; seek to keep as nearly as 

possible in absolute alignment with the divine Word. 

We find some Christian people disposed to add to the 

Law of God in great complacency, feeling that in 

thus getting in advance of the divine requirement 

they are showing the Lord a special zeal for righteousness. 

Some of the Pharisees of the Lord's day 

R3080 : page 286 

were thus disposed to add to the Word of God and 
to lay heavy burdens upon the people beyond what 
the Lord had required of them in the Law. The 
Lord's faithful ones are not to do this any more than 
to subtract from the divine requirements. Truth is 
truth; God's Word is God's Word; we are not authorized 
to take from it or to add to it. Many today 
have come to realize that the Bible does not 
teach an eternity of torment, and yet feeling that this 
doctrine may possibly help through fear to drive 
some into church membership, or to deter some from 
grosser forms of sin, they are rather inclined to favor 
the doctrine even though they admit it to be a blasphemy 
against the divine character, and in total violation 
of all principles of righteousness. Those who 
would be of the Joshua class are to learn that it is 
not their right or privilege to make laws or to ignore 
those already made, but so far as lies within their 
power to observe the divine principles of righteousness 
laid down in the divine Word, and to teach the 
same to others, leaving the consequences with the 
Lord. 



R3080 : page 286 

QUARTERLY REVIEW.--SEPTEMBER 28. 

Thou shalt remember the Lord thy God.— Deut. 8:18. 

A very profitable review of this quarter's lessons 
may be found in Deuteronomy, 8th chapter. There 
Moses, himself, summarizes the experiences of Israel's 
humiliations, and bases upon them great and 
important lessons respecting their future. He shows 
that the lessons properly learned and applied, will 
bring lasting blessings, riches and divine favor; and 
these to be rightly enjoyed and really profitable, must 
continually draw their hearts to God in thankfulness 
and in acknowledgment of his providential care and 
guidance. Any neglect of such recognition of divine 
favor would be sure to lead to pride, and thus more 
and more toward sin and farther and farther away 
from the Lord, and ultimately to the cutting off of 
the supply of blessings because of separation from 



their fountain. 

All of this lesson may well be applied to spiritual 
Israel. As the poet has expressed it, 

"My highest place is lying low 

At my Redeemer's feet." 
The more we come into possession of the spiritual 
blessings which the Lord has promised us, and which 
we have accepted by faith, the more need we will have 
of humility; and our humility will be proportionate to 
our appreciation of divine goodness and our thankfulness 
therefor. The grateful, thankful heart may 
go on from grace to grace, from strength to strength, 
from knowledge to knowledge, from attainment to attainment; 
but if gratitude begins to wane and our 
advantages are accepted either as matters of our own 
attainment or of good luck, in that same proportion 
we will find ourselves growing cold spiritually, and 
with unthankfulness will come unholiness, spiritual 
self-conceit and pride, and all of this will lead to spiritual 
dearth, and if persisted in to spiritual death. 

"Give me a thankful heart, from every murmur free, 

A heart which always feels thy blood, so freely shed for 
me." 
Although the entire Pentateuch— the five books 
of Moses— was designated the law of Moses, the 
Book of Deuteronomy was in Joshua's day particularly 
the book of the Law, it being rather a summary 
of the teachings of the other four books. However, 
we are not to confine the thought of the Lord's words 
simply to the Pentateuch, but are rather to remember 
that "every word that proceedeth out of the mouth 
of God" is a part of the divine law which we, as the 
antitypical Joshua are to reverence, to study and, to 
the extent that we are able, obey. We have already 
seen that the divine law in this sense speaks more 
than simply forms and ceremonies and justice, to us, 
spiritual Israelites; we see that speaking through Jesus 
Christ, our Lord, God has in our later times 
spoken mercy and peace and reconciliation and love 
and adoption into his family. As the antitype of 
Joshua, our Lord Jesus declares, as represented 
through the Prophet, "I delight to do thy will, O my 
God; yea, thy law is within my heart," and thus it 
must be with all those who shall be ultimately acceptable 
as members of Christ's body, the glorified 
Church, the Royal Priesthood; they, each and all to 
be of that company, must be in this respect copies of 
God's dear Son— they must all have the divine law 
in their hearts, in their wills, in their intentions, and 
so far as possible each must see to it that this divine 
law is obeyed in all the affairs of life. As Jesus was 
to have his success in proportion to his obedience to 
the divine law, so we will make our calling and election 
sure in proportion as we shall strive to come into 
conformity with the regulations of the divine law 
which has come to us, the sum and substance of 



which, as our Master declared, is that we love the 
Lord our God with all our mind, being and strength; 
and love our neighbor as ourselves. In proportion 
as we do these things, we shall have "good success". 
Not good success as respects earthly prosperity perhaps, 
earthly fame and name, but good success as respects 
our real object in life, the attainment of the 
prize of the high-calling set before us in the gospel, 
the attainment of joint-heirship with our Master in 
the Kingdom. And nothing can more thoroughly 
stimulate us and encourage us in this direction than 
absolute faith, confidence in the Lord. To battle with 
the world, the flesh and devil requires more strength 
than we possess; we need the courage coming to us 
from the divine assurance given to Joshua, "Be strong 
and of a good courage, be not afraid, neither be thou 
dismayed; for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever 
thou goest." 

The time had come for entering the promised 
land and Joshua, full of the proper courage, gave the 
necessary instructions— that the people should prepare 
victuals for three days during which they would 
be marshalled as an army and be in process of crossing 
over Jordan into the promised land. When we 
remember that our Lord Jesus declared that his 
flesh which he would give for the life of the world is 

R3080 : page 287 

the bread which comes down from heaven, and when 

we remember that the preparation of this bread 

meant the death of our Lord Jesus, and not only so 

but his resurrection as a spirit being, and when we 

remember further that he was in this state of death 

or preparation, for parts of three days and that he 

arose on the third day, it gives us the suggestion that 

quite probably the Lord meant a lesson for us spiritual 

Israelites in connection with those three days of 

preparing of victuals as mentioned in our lesson. Our 

Lord seems to have referred to three larger days also 

on several occasions; as, for instance, when he said, 

"I do cures today and tomorrow, and the third day 

I shall be perfected," we understand him to have included 

with himself his Church, and that he spoke 

respecting large, or thousand year days. He was living 

in the beginning of the fifth thousand; this would 

be the first of the three days, then followed the sixth 

thousand year day, the second, and the third would 

be the seventh thousand. During the first two of 

these days the Lord and his Church have done cures, 

cures of sin, binding up the broken hearted and assisting 

whoever was willing to a measure of newness 

of life, and in general doing good to all men as opportunity 

has been afforded, and on the third day, that 

is in the seventh great day, or the Millennium, early 

in the Millennial morning, he shall be perfected, the 



entire body of Christ complete, and then the great 
work of restitution will begin. Again the same three 
days are referred to, and the temple is mentioned as 
a figure or illustration; our Lord's words were, "Destroy 
this temple and in three days I will raise it up"; 
the writer adds, "But he spake of the temple of his 
body." (John 2:19-21.) The Apostle assures us that 

R3081 : page 287 

the Church is the temple of God, and that it is the 
body of Christ under Jesus its Head. Various agencies 
have been in antagonism with the Church, Head 
and body for the two days mentioned, the fifth thousand 
year period and the sixth thousand year period, 
and it still continues while we are in the beginning 
of the seventh period; but the Lord's promise is that 
now shortly the temple, the Church, his body, shall be 
complete and he will raise it up, raise it from ruin, 
raise it to the perfection and glory of the Millennial 
Kingdom. It is in harmony with this that we may 
recognize the Church with her Lord as being a part 
of the bread which God is preparing. Our Lord 
Jesus was the bread which came down from heaven, 
and we have partaken of him, of his merit, and have 
been thereby transformed; and we, as the Apostle 
declares, have become part of the one loaf, the one 
bread, and we also, as part of the one bread, are being 
broken with our Lord, and thus indirectly this 
preparation of the Church and her association with 
her Lord are represented in the three days victualling 
which is provided for the world of mankind, and 
necessary to them before they can pass over Jordan 
and enter into the Millennial Canaan. 



R3078 : page 287 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
TOTTEN'S ONE YEAR MINISTRY. 



Question.— Please state in what respect Prof. C. 
A. L. Totten is in error concerning the length of our 
Lord's earthly ministry? 

Answer.— One of the points made by Mr. Totten 
is that the lamb must be of the first year; and on this 
he builds his conviction that our Lord was in his first 
year at the time of his death; at the same time you 
(and so far as we know he also) reckon that our Lord 
did not die in his first year, but in his second year; that 
is to say, that his ministry, beginning in the fall, lasted 
at least for one and a half years. We, with many others, 



claim three and a half years, on the evidences. In any 
case it was not the first year, except in the way in which 
we regard the matter; viz., That our Lord's sacrifice 
was made when he was exactly thirty years of age: this 
was his first year, and the very beginning of it. According 
to our understanding that was where the sacrifice 
was made and completed. There the human nature, 
typified by the bullock, was slain in the sense of consecration, 
by the new creature, typified by the priest. 
The subsequent work in the three and a half years of 
ministry was in the types represented by the taking of 
the blood into the "Holy," the offering of the incense 
there, while the fat was being burned in the "Court," 
and the offal outside the Camp, and all this sacrificing 
ceased when our Lord died at Calvary. But the point is 
that his death was reckoned to him from the very moment 
of consecration, just as it is the case with us: 
"Reckon ye yourselves dead indeed." This is the only 
sense that we know of in which our Lord can be shown 
to have been the Lamb of the first year. 

SATAN'S POWER OVER INSECT LIFE. 



Question.— In an old WATCH TOWER the suggestion 
is made that Satan possesses some special power 
relating to insect life, etc. Are we to infer from this 
that your thought is that he has power to create life? 
and if so, by what authority? 

Answer.— We had no thought that anyone would 
understand us to mean that Satan would have life-giving 
power, or power to create something out of nothing. 
The thought which we wished to convey is that just as 
a mule is hybrid, or a cross between the horse and a 
donkey, so various mixtures and conglomerations are 
possible, especially in the lower forms of life— insects, 

R3079 : page 287 

etc. Satan is probably much better informed on many 
of these than is mankind, and yet mankind has learned 
how to develop life in varied forms, and this is one of 
the studies amongst doctors, scientists, etc. They find 
various kinds of bacilli, for instance, and learn now that 
they can propagate these various species, and to some 
extent modify and alter them under various conditions. 
For instance, it is claimed by the best scientific men of 
the schools, that nearly all the diseases to which humanity 
is exposed are the result of evil species of animalculae. 
Similarly diseases in plant-life are caused frequently 
by little creatures, so small as to be only discernible 
with high-power microscopes. 

We suggested that many of the insects of modern 
times, the pests which so greatly annoy farmers and 
gardeners, are probably developments of these infinitesimal 



or microscopic animals— developed into larger 
kinds and species, along lines which our adversary 
thoroughly understands. 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. OCTOBER 1, 1902. No. 19. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 291 

Blindness Gradually Turning 
From Fleshly Israel 291 

A Minister encourages his Flock 291 

Jewish Hopes respecting Palestine 292 

The Outcome of This Age 292 

"Are there Few that be Saved?" 294 

Crossing Jordan into Canaan 296 

Poem-Judge Not 299 

Grace Sufficient; only Believe 302 

Fidelity to Earthly and Heavenly 

Bridegrooms 303 

"The Great Company" 303 

page 290 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 



than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the DAWNS at 25 cents each, 
cannot be for money-making: that it is merely another way of 
preaching the truth. No other religious books are sold at any 
such price. Indeed few subscription books sell for less than two 
to three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are invited 
to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 



OUR NEW BIBLES. 

The three dollar grade is gone, except a few which we have 
agreed to hold until the end of the year. We still have a hundred 
or two of the two dollar grade, but they will not last long. 

We have a few of both grades without pictures, to permit 
their being sent by mail to foreign countries. We will hold 
these for the foreign friends until November 15th: after that 
they will be open to all, for same prices, $2 and $3 postpaid. 



"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES" is out of 

stock temporarily (both English and German), but we 
hope to have plenty very soon. 



WE REGRET inability to supply charts promptly— except 
the 25c wall chart with metal hangers. Will fill orders for others 
as quickly as possible. Painters as well as printers in this 
vicinity are extremely busy at present. 



R3081 : page 291 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



BLINDNESS GRADUALLY COMING OVER NOMINAL 
CHRISTENDOM AND GRADUALLY TURNING 
AWAY FROM FLESHLY ISRAEL. 



Is it not remarkable that as nominal Spiritual Israel 
begins to stumble into unbelief over "the stone of 
stumbling"— rejecting the ransom-sacrifice of Christ 
—the Jews, Israel after the flesh, begin to get glimpses 
of Jesus such as they have never before had? Note 
the following eulogistic expressions respecting our 
Lord, from the lips of eminent Jews of our day:— 

"I regard Jesus of Nazareth as a Jew of the Jews, one 
whom all Jewish people are learning to love."— Isadore 
Singer, Editor of Jewish Encyclopedia. 

"Jesus was the gentlest and noblest rabbi of them all. 



In Jesus there is the very flowering of Judaism."— Henry 
Berkowitz, Rabbi of Rodeph Shalam Congregation, 
Pennsylvania. 

"Jesus is soul of our soul, as He is flesh of our flesh. 
Who, then, could think of excluding him from the people of 
Israel?"— Max Nordau, M.D., Paris, France. 

"Even the most conscientious Jew may, without hesitation, 
recognize in view of the immense effect and success 
of His life, that Jesus has become a figure of the highest 
order in the history of religion. The fact that Jesus was 
a Jew should, I think in our eyes, rather help than hinder 
the acknowledgment of His high significance."— N. Porges, 
Ph.D., Rabbi, Leipsig, Germany. 

"We Jews honor and revere Jesus as we do our own 
prophets who preceded him."— Jacob H. Schiff, New York 
City. 

"I am of the opinion that we should endeavor with all 
possible zeal to obtain an exact understanding of the great 
personality of Jesus, and to reclaim him for Judaism."— M. 
Lazarus, Ph.D., Professor of Philas University of Berlin. 

"If he (Jesus) has added to their spiritual bequests new 
jewels of religion, truth and spoken words, which are words 
of life, because they touch the deepest springs of the human 
heart, why should not Jews glory in him?"— Gustav Gottheil, 
Ph.D., Rabbi Emeritus of Temple Emanuel, New 
York. 

"We want our children to know that in Jesus of Nazareth, 
Judaism produced one of the most beautiful types of 
humanity, one of the world's greatest teachers."— Dr. K. 
Kohler, New York. 

A MINISTER ENCOURAGES HIS FLOCK. 



Rev. Dr. Reid, of Watertown, thus explains to 
his people the present status of the doctrine of hell, 
and meantime gives us a suggestion of how impious 
he considers his congregation of "saints" to really be 
at heart. He evidently knows "his sheep" to be downright 
hypocrites. He says, as reported, evidently by 
himself, in the public press:— 

"The age of religious barbarism is past. Science, the accentuation 
of the Fatherhood of God, man's moral nature 
and spiritual experience make the hypothesis of a material 
hell incredible. The world would cast out the preacher who 
would dare to repeat today the message of Jonathan Edwards, 
that the view of the miseries of the damned would 
double the ardor of the love and gratitude of the saints in 
heaven. 

"Yet there is a hell. Yet there are lost souls. Yet the 
guilty do go into everlasting punishment. 

"You are in hell when you cannot look your fellow creature 
in the face because of the wrong you have done him; 
in hell when you would like to wring your own neck; in 
hell when you do not have a word to say for yourself, but 



are struck dumb by the consciousness of your own meanness 
and arrogance and baseness. You are in hell when envy, 
hatred and malice hold carnival in your heart; in hell when 
you know that you are not telling the whole truth; in hell 
with all your lies, losses and perversions and distortions 
of the truth. Perhaps there is a chapter in your lives that 
you keep closed or sealed because of its iniquity or infamy. 

R3081 : page 292 

Then you are in hell now; in the hell where men skulk and 
start and fail; in the hell where the limbs tremble and the 
heart thumps and the flesh creeps and the teeth chatter and 
the blood runs cold and the hair stands on end, the heart 
stops and the cold sweat overpours the face." 

JEWISH HOPES RESPECTING PALESTINE. 



The Jewish Exponent furnishes the following information: 
The failure to secure satisfactory terms 
from the Sultan of Turkey, as noted recently in these 
columns, is felt keenly but has not discouraged the 
leaders. 

"Dr. Herzl set forth the standpoint of the Zionists, and 
formulated the conditions of Jewish settlement in a self-contained 
part of Palestine and in other parts of Asia Minor, 
on the basis of a Charter. 

"These proposals were carefully considered from the 
Turkish side. Through his representatives the Sultan declared 
his fullest sympathy for the Jewish people; but the 
concessions which His Majesty expressed himself ready to 
make for a Jewish settlement could not be considered adequate 
according to our Zionist program. The negotiations 
have thus, this time also, remained without result. Nevertheless, 
the Sultan caused Dr. Herzl to be assured of his esteem 
and sympathy. The relations have in no way been 
broken off. On the contrary, we may hope that the advantages 
which a regular and legally guaranteed settlement of 
Jews present according to our program, will be recognized 
by the Turkish Government to their full extent. 

"For that moment the Zionist organizations must be prepared; 
the agitation must be carried on incessantly, and the 
material means must be collected. The more efficient our 
movement becomes, the more speedily and surely will it 
reach its goal. 

"It is rumored that the Actions Comite of the Zionist 
movement in Vienna is now seriously considering the proposition 
to hold the next Zionist Congress in New York. 
The question will probably be decided upon at the October 
meeting of the comite. 

"Lord Salisbury is credited with having said on the 
Zionist solution: It is a question of sixty per cent; if sixty 
per cent of the Jews desire Palestine, they will get it.' It 
is, however, rumored that Lord Rothschild, impressed by 



the Alien Immigration Commission— which, when it again 
meets, will sit in Soho, the French quarter of the metropolis 
—and his conversations with Dr. Herzl will lead in a 
movement for the settlement of a large number of Russian 
Jews in lands, as Disraeli put it, 'in propinquity' to Palestine, 
and at present under the British flag. When his lordship 
will move, or whether at all, a short few months should 
tell, but from excellent sources I know that he has some such 
scheme in mind, and that the details are being investigated 
on his behalf. 

"Lord Rothschild has heretofore held outwardly a most 
impartial attitude on all solutions, and whilst steering clear 
of Zionism has let it be known that he does not view attacks 
upon the movement with favor. Hence the idea he is 
studying may prove one that will unite all parties, and with 
his name at the back of it there would be no financial 
difficulties." 

STARTLING STATEMENT IN NEW YORK PULPIT. 



New York, Sept. 7. -The Rev. Dr. R. S. MacArthur, at 
the 100th meeting in the Evangel tent today, assailed the 
doctrine of baptism. He declared that the dropping of water 
on an infant at birth was heathenism and that the idea that 
God would forever condemn an innocent but unbaptized babe 
makes Him a tyrant. 

That utterance, coming from Dr. MacArthur, had a wonderful 
effect on his hearers. They rose to their feet and 
applauded wildly. The scene was striking. 

R3082 : page 292 

"Baptism," he declared, "never saved a human soul. 
The doctrine of baptismal regeneration is both unreasonable 
and unscriptural. The superstitions that have gathered 
about infant baptism form one of the saddest chapters in 
church history. Thousands through all the ages have believed 
that a child dying without being baptized was eternally 
lost. This dark and dreary superstition has cast a 
gloom over the history of the church for centuries. 

"This doctrine is heathenism, pure and simple. The idea 
that God would forever condemn an innocent babe because 
some one had not put a few drops of water on its head and 
face makes God a tyrant. Rather than believe in such a God 
I would be an avowed infidel. 

"This doctrine of baptismal regeneration makes the 
minister of religion a worker of magic, a fakir, a performer 
of ecclesiastical miracles. Such teaching is a violation of 
all sound reason and true scriptural teaching." 

Very good! Excellent! But while this eminent 
Baptist D.D. is plucking beams out of the eyes of 
others, let him not overlook the Baptist beam in his 
own; viz., that immersion in water is the door into the 
Church of Christ. If that were true it would mean 



that all not so immersed are out of the Church of 
Christ. And according to the misunderstanding of 
Baptists and others this would mean outside of divine 
mercy; for do not Christians generally claim that 
mercy ends with this age and that this age is merely 
for the gathering of God's elect Church?— And that 
the prospect of all others is eternal torment? We 
trust that Bro. MacArthur and other Baptists will 
not stop their investigation, but proceeding learn what 
the real baptism is, and the distinction between it and 
its water-symbol; and what the true Church is and 
the distinction between it and the sects of Christendom. 
We shall be glad to help all the sincere ones in 
the solution of these problems, on receipt of postal 
card requests. 

THE OUTCOME OF THIS AGE. 



W. G. MOREHEAD, D.D., 

Professor in United Presbyterian Theological Seminary. 



There are principles at work in modern society, 
which, if left unchecked, will soon make the advent of 
the Antichrist not only possible, but certain. THE 
LAWLESS DRIFT IS ALREADY ON US, precursor of 
worse to come. Who does not perceive that the forces are already 
loose which tend to the disintegration of the whole 
social fabric! Who does not perceive that the axe is already 
aimed at the chief hoops which bind together the staves of 

R3082 : page 293 

the civil polity! The restlessness under restraint, the revolt 
against authority and law, the spread of Socialism, the 
growth of agnosticism, the prevalence of materialism, fostered, 
as it largely is, by both the science and the politics of 
our time, the enormous greed of those who have and who 
want still more, the deep, ominous growl of those who have 
not, and who want and will have all this, and much more 
than this, betokens the breaking down of the barriers, the 
overthrow of the restraining influences, and the speedy advent 
of the great adversary. The Frenchman spoke well, 
perhaps better than he knew, who lately said, "I think I hear 
the galloping of the man on horseback!" 

We have only to suppose the portentous movements of 
the times to grow and gather head until the hindrance is 
gone, the breakwater is down— and then— yes, what then? 
Then cometh "the Man of Sin," the world deceiver, whom 
the Lord shall slay with the breath of His mouth, and shall 
bring to nought by the appearing of His Coming. Then the 
kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdom of our 
Lord and of His Christ and He shall reign forever and ever. 



The above clipping is from the pen that attacks 
"Millennial Dawn" as being "the product of insanity." 
It is surely a poor blind pen, or, at least, a 
somnambulistic one, when it cannot see that the 
"Man of Sin" of prophecy flourished for over a thousand 
years as Papacy: and that since the Reformation 
movement he has been slain with the sword of the 
Spirit, the Word of God. True the wound has to 
some extent been healed; but yet a little while and 
the bright-shining of the presence (parousia) of the 
Lord shall utterly destroy him, and all other kindred 
systems of error which now counterfeit, with varying 
degrees of accuracy, the true Christ— Head and 
"body. "-2 Thess. 2:8; Rev. 13:3,12. -M. Dawn, Vol. 
II., Chapter 9. 

LOOKING FOR THE WRONG ADVENT. 

Prof. Moorehead and others of his school of 
thought tell the world generally that they set no 
time for Christ's second coming. They give the impression, 
surely, that they are in daily, yea, hourly 
expectation of seeing our Lord reappear in flesh on 
a cloud in the sky. But in the above the Professor 
tells the truth plainly; viz., that he and those who 
share his expectations are not at all looking momentarily 
for the Lord. Instead they are looking 
for "the speedy advent of the great adversary," i.e., 
"Then cometh the 'Man of Sin'." 

How is that? Why such an expectation of the 
advent of Antichrist instead of the advent of the 
true Christ? 

It is because these dear brethren are sadly blinded 
by a literal interpretation of the symbolical Book 
of Revelation, and an expectation of Christ's Kingdom 
in the flesh; whereas the Word declares: "Flesh 
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God."— 
I Cor. 15:50; John 3:3,5. 

The result is a blindness much more dense than 
that of the world on a subject of which they profess 
to be past-masters. Worldly people "can discern the 
signs of the times" far better than to suppose, as 
these self-blinded brethren do, that the trend of the 
world is toward greater veneration for fellow-mortals. 
The world well sees that the trend is in the reverse 
direction,— toward a denial of all authority and power, 
—divine as well as human. 

How strange it seems that sane minds can imagine 
that "the galloping man on horseback," a general, 
or emperor, or who not, would ever deceive the 
world— "the whole world" into thinking him greater 
than God, and doing him homage accordingly! In 
our judgment, this is just as improbable as that "the 
cow will jump over the moon." 

This man— Anti-Christ, is expected to convert 
the world and build the Jews a temple at Jerusalem,— 



all in three and a half years after he makes a start; 
and he has not yet made a start, and only "portentous 
movements of the times" are in evidence. Christ's 
advent is to be just three and a half years after the 
advent of this preposterous man. And yet these 
brethren deceive themselves into thinking that they 
are not time setters, and that they are looking for 
Christ's advent. We are sorry for them! 

In conclusion: We kindly suggest to the Professor 
that the Common Version rendering of 2 Thes. 2:8, 
"the brightness of his coming" poor as it is, is 
better than his substitution; viz., "the appearing of 
his coming." If he will look at these words in his 
Greek New Testament he will find that "coming" is 
not the proper word at all: that the Greek word here 
rendered "coming" is parousia, and that all scholars 
agree that in English it means presence (as of one who 
has already come). We suggest as a literal translation 
of the words,— "The bright-shining of the present 
one,"— the revealing or manifestation of one previously 
present, but unseen, unrevealed. 

Our position is that Anti-Christ has already fulfilled 
his part, and a wonderful and awful part it was; 
—that now according to promise the true Christ has 
come a second time, in glory, and not in flesh, to 
reign, and not to sacrifice;— that his first work is the 
sifting of his church— the separation of the tares, etc., 
and the gathering of the true "wheat" into the Kingdom 
garner— beyond the vail, as spirit beings like 
their Lord: the sleeping ones awakened to First 
Resurrection glory, honor and immortality, and 
those who are alive and remain "changed" in the 
moment of dying to the same glory conditions. Soon, 
perhaps before all the "wheat" has been garnered, 
the fire of tribulation and anarchy will break out in 
the world— "a time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation"— a time when faith in God and 
man and a disbelief of the Bible will be rampant 
throughout "Christendom" nominal. In that trouble 
and its overthrow of all law and order, government 
and religion, the world will learn an everlasting lesson, 
and be prepared for the reign of righteousness. 
—The rulers of the Kingdom of Light will, however, 
be as unseen to mortal eyes as are the present rulers 
of the darkness of this world— Satan and his coadjutors; 
—the earthly representatives of the Kingdom 
being men— perfect men— the ancient worthies, approved 
of God before the call to "change" of nature 
was given.— Heb. 11:39,40. 



R3083 : page 294 

"ARE THERE FEW THAT BE SAVED?" 



EMERGING from that blackness of error called 
Calvinism (with its heaven of blessing for 
the "little flock" and its eternal torment for 
all others, as taught by good but sadly deceived men 
—John Calvin, Jonathan Edwards, Charles H. Spurgeon 
and others—) into the glorious light of the goodness 
of God, shining in the face of Jesus Christ our 
Lord and revealed in the divine Plan of the Ages, the 
writer was subjected to the same attacks of Satan (the 
great Enemy of God and man) to which all others 
seem to be exposed. Coming as an angel of light, he 
seemed to welcome us into the light out of the gross 
darkness which he himself had brought upon the 
world. And while our heart trembled with joy, and 
yet with fear also, lest after all we should find some 
evidence that God would do some terrible and unjust 
thing, to some of his creatures, at least, the suggestion 
came, God will not permit any to be lost. 

At this time the word lost still had associated with 
it that unscriptural, wicked and awful meaning of 
eternal torment; for, although we had gotten rid of 
that misbelief, and saw that lost means dead, destroyed, 
the influence of that old error still gave a false coloring 
to the words formerly supposed to teach it. 
Hence the greater force in the suggestion that God 
would not permit any to be lost;— for surely no enlightened 
mind can candidly imagine the eternal misery 
of a solitary individual in all of God's universe. 

Reason and judgment swayed for a time, first 
to one side and then to the other, according to circumstances 
and moods, until we learned that our reasoning 
powers are not to be relied upon to settle such 
questions; that they are imperfect as well as liable to 
be prejudiced; and that for this cause God had given 
us his inspired Word to guide our reasoning faculties 
into proper channels. Then, appealing to the Scriptures, 
we found abundant proof that unless God therein 
trifles with his children's confidence (and as men 
would say "bluffs" them, with suggestions and threats 
which he knows he will never execute) there surely 
will be some lost as well as some saved. 

Among these Scriptures are not only those similes 
which speak of the salt which lost its value, and 
was thenceforth good for naught, but to be trodden 
under foot, and of the destruction of those servants 
which would "not have this man to rule over" them 
(Matt. 5:13; Luke 19:14,27), etc., but the following 
plain statements:— 

Some "wrest. .the Scriptures even to their 
own destruction."— 2 Pet. 3:16. 

"Pride goeth before destruction."— Prov. 16:18. 

"The Lord preserveth [saves] the souls of his 
saints. "-Psa. 97:10. 

"The Lord preserveth all them that love him, 
but all the wicked [not the ignorant] will he destroy." 
-Psa. 145:20. 



"False teachers... bring in damnable heresies, 
...and bring upon themselves swift destruction."— 
2 Pet. 2:1. 

Some are "vessels of wrath fitted to destruction." 
-Rom. 9:22. 

"Them that walk after the flesh. ..shall utterly 
perish in their own corruption."— 2 Pet. 2:10-12. 

"The destruction of the transgressors and of the 
[wilful] sinners shall be together, and they that forsake 
the Lord shall be consumed."— Isa. 1:28. 

"The Lord will "destroy them that corrupt the 
earth. "-Rev. 11:18. 

"The way of the Lord is strength to the upright: 
but destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity."— 
Prov. 10:29,30; 21:15. 

Some fall into "many foolish and hurtful lusts 
[desires], which drown men in destruction."— 
I Tim. 6:9. 

"For many walk,. ..the enemies of the cross 
of Christ, whose end is destruction."— Phil. 3:18,19. 

"Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction." 
-2Thess. 1:9. 

"If any man defile the temple of God, him will 
God destroy."— I Cor. 3:17. 

"The judgment of God [is] that they who do such 
things are worthy of death."— Rom. 1:32. 

"Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left 
us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem 
to come short of it."— Heb. 4:1. 

"For it is impossible for those who were once 
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and 
were made partakers of the holy Spirit,. ..if they 
shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; 
seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God 
afresh and put him to an open shame."— Heb. 6:4-6. 

"See that ye refuse not him that speaketh; for if 
they escape not who refused him that spake on earth 
[Moses, the typical teacher], much more shall not we 
escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from 
heaven." 

"Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the grace 
of God."-Heb. 12:25,15. 

"The soul that will not hear that prophet shall be 
destroyed from among his people."— Acts 3:23. 

"By one offering he [Christ] hath perfected forever 
them that are sanctified.... Let us [therefore] 
draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith. 
...Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without 
wavering,... exhorting one another, and so 
much the more as ye see the [Millennial] Day drawing 
on. For if we sin wilfully, after that we have received 
the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no 
more [part for us in the] sacrifice for sins, but a certain 
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, 
which shall consume the adversaries."— 
Heb. 10:14,22-27. 



If "he who [in the typical nation] despised the 
law of Moses [the typical lawgiver] died without 
mercy, of how much sorer [more serious] punishment 
shall he be thought worthy who hath trodden under 
foot [disgraced] the Son of God, and hath counted 
the blood of the [New] Covenant, wherewith he was 
sanctified, an unholy [ordinary] thing, and hath done 
despite unto the spirit of grace?" Surely the wages 
of such conduct would be everlasting, while that in 
the type was not, but was covered by the great sacrifice 
for sins once for all. "It is a fearful thing to fall 
into the hands of the living God."-Heb. 10:28,29,31. 

"He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting 
life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see 

R3083 : page 295 

life; but the wrath of God abideth on him."— John 3:36; 
I John 5: 12. 

"His servants ye are to whom ye render service; 
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto 
righteousness."— Rom. 6:16. 

"The end of those things is death."— Rom. 6:21. 

"To be carnally minded is [to reap the penalty] 
death; but to be spiritually minded is [to reap the 
reward] life and peace."— Rom. 8:6. 

"Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death."— 
Jas. 1:15. 

"There is a [kind of] sin unto death;. ..and 
there is a [kind of] sin not unto death."— 
I John 5:16,17. 

"Fear not them which kill the body, but are not 
able to kill [destroy] the soul [being]: but rather fear 
him which is able to destroy both soul and body in 
Gehenna [the second death]. "-Matt. 10:28. 

"The wages of sin is death."— Rom. 6:23. 

"As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure 
in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked 
turn from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from 
your evil ways; for why will ye die?"— Ezek. 18:32; 
33:11. 

"All the wicked will God destroy."— Psa. 145:20; 
147:6. 

What could be more explicit than this testimony 
of God's Word? And how reasonable it all is! Torment 
might properly be objected to as unjust as well 
as unmerciful; but taking away life from those who 
will not conform their lives to the just and holy and 
kind regulations of the New Covenant which God has 
opened to our race, through Christ's great atoning 
sacrifice, is reasonable, just and merciful. 

It is reasonable: why should God continue his blessings, 
of which life is the chief, to those who after 
knowing and being enabled to conform to his just requirements, 
will not do so? 

It is just: because God is under no obligation to 



man. Man is already his debtor ten thousand times; 
and if he will not render loving respect to his Creator's 
wise and good commands, Justice would demand that 
those blessings be stopped. 

It is merciful on God's part to destroy the incorrigibly 
wicked— those who, after full knowledge and 
opportunity have been enjoyed, refuse to be conformed 
to the lines of the law of God's Kingdom— 
the law of love. (1) Because all who will live ungodly 
—out of harmony with God's law of love— will 
always be like the restless sea, more or less discontented 
and unhappy. (2) Because such characters, 
be they ever so few, would mar the enjoyment of 
those who do love peace and righteousness. And to 
these God has promised that the time shall come when 
sin and its results, weeping and pain and dying, shall 
cease (Rev. 21:4), when he will destroy out of the 
earth those who corrupt it. (Rev. 11:18.) (3) Because 
God has promised that there shall yet be a clean 
world (Isa. 11:9; Rev. 21:5), in which the unholy and 
abominable and all who love and make lies shall have 
no place. (Rev. 21:8.) "Thou shalt diligently consider 
his place and it shall not be."— Psa. 37:10. 

Only such as have preferred their own wisdom to 
that of the Bible can read the foregoing words of God, 
and yet believe that all men will be everlastingly saved. 

R3084 : page 295 

Only such as are puffed up with a sense of their 
own benevolence can hold that God never would be 
satisfied or happy if one of the race perished. God 
has gotten along very well without the sinners thus 
far, and could do so forever. It was not for selfish 
reasons that he redeemed all, and is about to restore 
all who will accept his favor in Christ. 

But some attempt to evade the foregoing statements 
of Scripture with the claim that they refer to 
wickedness, and not to wicked people; that they mean 
that all wicked people will be destroyed by their conversion 
—by having their wickedness destroyed. We 
ask those who so think to read over these words of 
God again, carefully, and see that they could not, reasonably, 
be so construed. Notice that even though 
the Word mentioned nothing about the destruction of 
wicked doers, but merely mentioned the destruction 
of wickedness and wicked things, this would nevertheless 
include wicked doers; because, of all wicked 
things, intelligent, wilful evil-doers are the worst. But 
the Word does specify wicked persons; and all who 
are familiar with rules of grammar covering the 
question know that when the person is specified the 
destruction of his wickedness merely could not be 
meant. 

"The wicked shall be [re] turned [back] into 
hell [sheol] and all nations [Gentiles, people] that forget 



God." (Psa. 9:16.) "The lake of fire, which is the 
second death" (Rev. 20:14), is "prepared for the devil 
and his angels [messengers or servants]." (Matt. 25:41.) 
And all who, with Satan, serve sin are his 
servants or messengers. (Rom. 6:16.) For such, 
yes, for all such, and for such only, God has prepared 
the penalty of everlasting destruction from the presence 
of the Lord and from the glory of his power." And 
from Satan their chief down to the least one of his 
children who, notwithstanding knowledge and opportunity 
to the contrary, cling to evil and choose 
it rather than righteousness, this tribe will be blotted 
out to the praise of God's justice, to the joy and welfare 
of the holy and to their own real advantage. 

It will not do to judge others by ourselves, in 
all respects. The fact that God's saints do not feel 
opposition to God's will, and cannot understand how 
others can entertain such sentiments, sometimes leads 
to the false conclusion that if all others enjoyed a 
similar knowledge of God they too would delight in 
his service. That such a conclusion is false is evident, 
from the fact that Satan, who knew God thoroughly, 
"abode not in the truth," but became "the 
father of lies" and "a murderer." And, after six thousand 
years' witness of sin and its results, he is still the 
Adversary of righteousness. After nearly two thousand 
years' knowledge of the love and mercy of God 
manifested in Christ's sacrifice for sin, he is still as 
unmoved by that love as he is unmoved by pity for 
human woe. And more than this: God, who knows 
the future as well as the past, shows us, unquestionably, 
that after being restrained (bound) for a thousand 

R3084 : page 296 

years by the power of Christ's Kingdom, and 

during that time witnessing the blessings of righteousness, 

he will, when granted liberty at the close 

of the Millennium, still manifest a preference for the 

way of sin and opposition to God's arrangements. 

Surely this proves that intelligent beings, and perfect 

beings, too, can know God and yet choose a way of 

disobedience,— whether or not our minds can grasp 

the philosophy of their course. 

But the philosophy of the matter is this: A perfect 
being, angel or man, is a blank page upon which 
character must be engraved. Knowledge and a free 
will are the engravers. Pride, Selfishness and Ambition 
may be engraved, or Love, Humility and Meekness. 
The latter is the blessed or God-like character, 
the former is the sinful or devilish character. According 
to which are engraved will be the character. 
If the will decide for sin and cultivate the wicked character, 
the result will be a wicked being. If the will 
decide for righteousness and God-likeness, the result 
will be a holy being. 



The same principles in a general way apply also 
to fallen men. No matter how fallen and weak they 
may be, they have free-wills. They can will aright, 
even when they cannot do aright. And under the 
New Covenant God accepts, through Christ, the imperfect 
deeds where the wills are perfect. 

For some who are now evil doers and lovers of 
sin, our hope is, that they are such because of blinding 
of the devil (2 Cor. 4:4), which leads them to 
make a choice they would not make if they had a full, 
clear knowledge. God's guarantee to all, through 
Christ, is that all shall come to an accurate knowledge 
of the truth, and thus to a full opportunity to choose 
between righteousness and sin. We have no hope for 
any who, after coming to a clear knowledge, choose 
sin, wilfully: neither in this age nor in the next is there 
hope for such, according to God's Word. 



R3084 : page 296 

CROSSING JORDAN INTO CANAAN. 

--JOSHUA 3:9- 17. -OCTOBER 12.- 

"When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and 
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee." — Isa. 43:2. 

FOUR HUNDRED and seventy years had 
elapsed from the time God gave Canaan to 
Abraham, by promise, before his descendants 
actually crossed Jordan and began to inherit the 
land. The promise had been long of fulfilment, and 
doubtless had severely taxed the faith of the people 
to whom it belonged; yet even in this respect the 
delay was a blessing to them, as serving to stimulate 
and develop faith. Nor are we to forget that the 
original promise has not yet been fulfilled; because 
the land was promised, not only to Abraham's seed, 
but also to himself, and the noble patriarch still rests 
and waits in the sleep of death for the accomplishment 
of the divine promise, which will be fulfilled on 
a far larger scale when the people of God shall have 
passed the antitypical Jordan into the antitypical Canaan 
—the Millennial Kingdom condition. We are 
not left in doubt upon this matter. We have the 
Apostle's words in Heb. 11:13,39,40, that Abraham 
and other faithful servants of the Lord still wait 
for the fulfilment of the promise made to them, until 
first the still higher, spiritual, heavenly promises, 
made to the Gospel Church, the Christ, shall have 
been accomplished, "God having provided some better 
thing for us, that they without us should not be 
made perfect." Stephen assures us along this same 
line, saying that Abraham received not so much of 



the land as to set his foot upon, and his argument, 
based upon this fact, is Abraham's resurrection in the 
future, and the fulfilment to him personally of his 
share in the divine promise.— Acts 7:25. 

If in all this there was a lesson of patient waiting 
on the Lord and confident trust in his promise, to 
Abraham and his natural seed, there is a still larger 
and fuller lesson in it to Spiritual Israel, the spiritual 
Seed, along the same lines of faithful, patient waiting 
on the Lord for the fulfilment of the exceeding great 
and precious things he has promised us. 

Some have been inclined to question the justice 
of God's giving to Israel the land of Canaan, already 
inhabited by others;— the justice of not only permitting 
but commanding them to destroy the inhabitants 
of that land, and to take possession of it as their own. 
This transaction is held up as an illustration of the 
"land-grabbing" disposition of natural man, which 
seems to increase century by century, notwithstanding 
the increase of civilization and the general appreciation 
of justice. We are not of those who would 
defend the course of nations of modern times along 
these lines. As Christians, guided by our Master's 
example and instruction, we should seek to do good 
unto all men as we have opportunity, and to leave 
them in peaceable possession of their homes, property 
and liberties. We are to recognize a difference, 
however, between the divine law of love, placed upon 
and accepted by the Lord's consecrated people, and 
the law of selfishness, under which the mass of mankind 
—including the vast majority of nominal Christendom 
—still operates, and will continue to operate 
until the new dispensation and its new laws shall be 
ushered in by divine power. Nevertheless, seeing that 
the Church is separate from the world, in the Lord's 
plan and in his dealings, we can look with comparative 
equanimity upon the overriding of justice and 
equity by the kingdoms of this world, and may realize 
that in many instances the Lord may take advantage 
of their natural disposition toward warfare and 
conquest and empire-building, and may allow the 
wrath of man thus to work out certain features that 
will be ultimately favorable to the accomplishment 
of the divine purposes. 

Not being able to see behind the vail all the gracious 
purposes of our Heavenly Father, and not being 
wise enough to know how they can best be carried 
out, the Lord's people occupy largely the position 
of spectators in respect to the course of this 

R3085 : page 297 

world,— its politics, conquests, etc. Were we to take 
a hand in the world's affairs on either side of such 
questions we might, for aught we know, be working 
contrary to the divine will and program. While, 



therefore, we seek to be separate from the world and 
its affairs, and to give our thought and attention, 
sympathy and interest, to the affairs of the heavenly 
Kingdom, and while our voices, if ever raised at all on 
such questions, should be raised on behalf of justice, 
mercy and peace, nevertheless, we can view with great 
composure whatever changes may take place in the 
world, knowing that our heavenly Father has all 
power to overrule these matters differently if he 
chooses. 

We say to ourselves, "All the good purposes 
which he hath purposed in himself shall be accomplished;" 
and he knoweth how to accomplish these 
in the manner that will be most to his praise and 
most for the good of his cause, as it shall ultimately 
be developed, and we remember the Master's words, 
"Ye are not of this world, even as I am not of this 
world. I have chosen you out of the world, that ye 
should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit 
should remain"— fruit unto eternal life. Our work is 
the work of him that sent us; we are ambassadors 
for God; and present work is the calling, upbuilding, 
instructing and general preparation of the Church to 
be the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, and our mission is to 
co-operate in her call and to make ready. Later on 
will come our share in the ruling and judging of the 
world, as kings and priests of the divine order, in the 
divine time, and backed by the divine power to success 
and the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

"The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof." 
He, therefore, had the right to give Canaan to the 
descendants of Abraham without giving a reason why 
to any creature. He had a right to give it when and 
how and to whom he pleased. He does, however, 
condescend to inform us that in blotting out these 
many little nations of Palestine, descendants of Noah's 
grandson Canaan, he did so not along arbitrary lines, 
but along lines of justice. These Canaanites (also 
known as Hittites, and by various other tribal names, 
Hivites, Perizzites, Girgashites, Jebusites and Amorites) 
were not ignorant savages, but quite civilized 
peoples who, after the manner of the Sodomites, had 
gone into great excesses of licentious idolatry. In 
Abraham's time God foresaw where their course 
would lead them, but he delayed to bring the promised 
seed of Abraham into their land for a time, because 
as we read, "the iniquity of the Amorites was 
not yet come to the full."— Gen. 15:16. 

These people were to be destroyed by the Israelites 
for two reasons; first, to have permitted them to 
live and to become incorporated with the Israelites 
in the land, by intermarriage, etc., would have been 
injurious to the seed of Abraham which God intended 
to develop, and of which he designed to make types 
of spiritual Israel. Furthermore, in the type which 
the Lord was making on a large scale, these Canaanites 



or Amorites represented the weaknesses and imperfections 

of the fallen nature. They symbolized 

sin; and their destruction by the Israelites prefigured 

the destruction of sin, the blotting out of the blemishes 

of sin, and the gradual uplifting of God's people 

in the antitype of Canaan— in the Millennial Kingdom. 

The chief difficulty in most minds, in connection 
with this slaughtering of the inhabitants of Canaan 
lies in the unscriptural thought, brought into Christian 
creeds during the dark ages, that the apparent 
death of an individual is really his entrance into more 
abundant life, either under pleasurable or tormenting 
conditions. And since these Canaanites were declared 
to be disapproved of God, the general thought 
respecting them is that while the Israelites killed 
them and took possession of their property, they, 
without further opportunity, were thrown at once under 
the control of devils and into an eternity of flaming 
torture. There is nothing of this kind connected 
with the Bible narrative. It is all the addition of 
human imagination, built upon numerous fantastic 
speculations of the dark ages. According to the 
Scriptures, death is really death, and these Canaanites, 
when slain by the sword of Israel, became unconscious, 
and will remain so until the Lord's time 
shall come for their awakening from the sleep of 
death. They shall come forth in the Millennial morning, 
as our Lord's word indicates— "All that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, 
and shall come forth."— John 5:28,29. 

They will not come forth as saints to the resurrection 
of life, the First Resurrection; but as members 
of the world in general, redeemed by the precious 
blood of Christ, they will come forth to the judgment-resurrection; 
that is, to the gradual raising up that 
will be instituted during the Millennial age, a raising 
up of all who will be obedient to the judgments, the 
disciplines, the corrections in righteousness, which 
will be then brought to bear upon the whole world 
of mankind by the great Judge, our Lord Jesus, and 
by the Royal Priesthood, the Church, his assistant 
judges, of whom the Apostle says, "Know ye not that 
the saints shall judge the world?"— I Cor. 6:2,3. 

In view of this, then, we can readily see that no 
injustice was done to the Canaanites by the Lord's 
decree, and that so far as they were concerned they 
suffered no more than, if as much as if some pestilence 
or famine or other common disaster had come upon 
them. They suffered the death-penalty, as all the 
human family suffer it, and our confident hope respecting 
them and all mankind is built upon the fact 
that God so loved the world that he gave his only 
begotten Son to redeem all from the curse or sentence 
of death which came upon all through father 
Adam's disobedience;— and that he who redeemed 
the world is shortly to bless all the families of the 



earth with a gracious opportunity to come back into 
harmony with God, back to human perfection. And 
when we realize that the call of the church in the present 
time is for association in this work, it gives a 
meaning to the trials and difficulties which constitute 
part of our instructions in that great work; and it 
also gives the Royal Priesthood a hope toward God 
which overbalances all the trials of the present time. 

R3085 : page 298 

The Land of Promise, Canaan, is frequently described 
in the Scriptures as a goodly land, "a land 
flowing with milk and honey," a figurative expression 
representing its general prosperity and productiveness. 
That the inhabitants were wealthy is attested 
by recently unearthed Egyptian histories of about 
that time. Geike says:— 

"The records of Rameses II show the condition of Palestine 
and adjacent countries, in the age of Moses itself 
[prior to the exodus of Israel]. The Egyptian king brought 
back from them, he tells us, gold, glass, gum, cattle, slaves, 
ivory, ebony, boats, horses, chariots inwrought with gold and 
silver or painted, iron, steel, dates, oil, wine, asses, cedar, 
suits of armor, fragrant wood, war galleys, incense, gold 
dishes with handles, ornaments of lapis lazuli, silver dishes, 
precious stones, honey, lead, spears of brass, colors— the 
plunder, in fact, of a rich and civilized country. The meadows 
of Palestine, its fortresses, its groves and its orchards, 
are mentioned showing that prosperity of every kind 
abounded." 

The Israelites needed to be encouraged for so 
great an undertaking, and hence the various tribes of 
Canaanites were mentioned by Joshua, that they 
might know that they were all included in the Lord's 
bequest; and that they might know that he had taken 
cognizance of the whole situation. It was much to 
Israel's advantage that these various tribes of Canaanites 
were distinctly separate, and did not cooperate 
to any particular degree. Moreover, they 
evidently felt secure in that the River Jordan separated 
between the hosts of Israel and their land, and 
being quite a swift river, it would be very difficult 
for a multitude to cross without boats or bridges, and 
many of them. The crossing took place when the 
Jordan was overflowing its banks, and was therefore 
much wider than usual; and we may presume that the 
Canaanites would feel so much the more secure, and 
less vigilant in any attempt to repel an invasion, supposing 
the river to be specially impassable at this particular 
season. Had the crossing been undertaken 
when the river was low, the Canaanites would have, 
undoubtedly, disputed the way; and Israel would have 
had a severe battle with poor weapons against a probably 



well equipped enemy. Besides, the miracle God 
intended to work would have seemed much less forcible 
at any other season of the year. Israel needed 
this further miracle and evidence of divine power and 
intervention on their behalf to give them courage for 
the work before them. 

A man from each of the twelve tribes was selected; 
each one was to carry a stone from the midst 
of the Jordan to the shore, and these twelve large 
stones were to be set up as a memorial, a reminder 
to Israelites for coming generations of how the Lord 
had brought them over Jordan. (Josh. 4:2,9.) The 
priests bearing the ark were separated from the remainder 
of the Israelites by about three-quarters of 
a mile (two thousand cubits). They went upstream 
this distance, and were thus prominent before the 
eyes of Israel in what they did. As soon as the feet 
of the priests before the ark touched the waters of 
Jordan the waters began to subside, and as the waters 
subsided they took another step and another and 
another until they were able to walk on firm ground 
to the center of the river-bed, where they stood 
firmly until all the hosts of Israel— in all about two 
millions— had passed over. Still in no haste, they 
waited until twelve stones were placed where they had stood, 
and then the priests with the ark of the Lord passed over. 

We are not to question the power of God in respect 
to this miracle, in whatever manner it was accomplished; 
but in looking for the manner we are to 
presume, as far as possible, that the Lord used some 
natural means in connection with it. If we were to 
suppose that the river rose up like a wall at the right 
hand of the priests, as tho it had been cut by a knife, 
it would seem unreasonable, and the downflowing 
waters would rise higher and higher, until it would 
overflow the banks on either side more and more, 

R3086 : page 298 

and the water of even a small river, at this flood time, 
would amount to a considerable quantity and flood 
a considerable space. It is preferable, therefore, that 
we understand the words of the record, as implied in 
the Revised Version, to mean that the banking up of 
the waters was "a great way off, at Adam, the city 
that is beside Zeretan." In other words, we are not 
to understand that the dammed up wall of waters was 
close by the priests, but about twenty miles further 
up the river, near the town of Adam, where the river 
passes through a comparatively narrow gorge. How 
they were banked up there we are not informed by 
the record; no matter in what manner, it was a miracle 
—no less a miracle if we understood the method 
pursued by the Lord in its accomplishment. It may 
have been that an earthquake temporarily elevated 
the channel at this narrow place, and thus gorged 



the water for a time; and it is said that there are evidences 
at that point that some such physical disturbances 
did once occur. Or a slip in a hillside might 
have carried a large body of soil into the valley, and 
thus have choked the stream, which even down at 
Jericho is normally only ninety feet wide and thirteen 
feet deep. As an illustration of how this may have 
occurred we quote the following from Canon Tristram:-- 

M. Ganneau has drawn attention to the fact, mentioned 
in the history of Sultan Buybars, that in A.D. 1267, whilst 
the bridge at Gier Damich (or Adam) was being repaired a 
landslip some miles above dammed up the Jordan for several 
hours and the bed of the river below was left dry, the 
water being drained off to the Dead Sea. What occurred 650 
years ago, by what we call natural causes, may well have occurred 
3,000 years before, timed by divine interposition." 

In our previous studies we noticed that these 
things were written aforetime for our admonition— 
that they were examples or types of matters respecting 
God's dealings in the future: now the question 
arises, What did this passing of Jordan by the typical 
people symbolize? and, especially, what did the 
bearing of the ark by the priests have to do with it? 
We have already indicated that for various reasons 
we cannot accept the view of Jordan and of Canaan 
so long held by many Christians, which represents Jordan 
as being death and Canaan as being heaven, as 
expressed by the familiar lines of the poet: 

R3086 : page 299 

"On Jordan's stormy banks I stand, 

And cast a wishful eye 
To Canaan's fair and happy land, 

Where my possessions lie. 
No chilling winds nor boisterous breath 

Can reach that healthful shore; 
Sickness and sorrow, pain and death, 

Are felt and feared no more." 

The very fact that the Israelites did have trials 
and pains and sorrows and battles, after they entered 
into Canaan, seems to contradict the thought that it 
represented heaven itself. As we have already intimated, 
our understanding is that Canaan typified the 
new earth condition, under the administration of the 
Millennial Kingdom. What, then, does the River 
Jordan signify? We answer, that it would seem to 
stand for, represent, the divine condemnation, the 
curse, the sentence against our race which has for 
six thousand years hindered mankind from entering 
into the blessed Kingdom conditions and opportunities 
and blessings which shall ultimately prevail for 
all. In this sense of the word death, Jordan, would 



stand for it well— the death sentence. This seems 
rather to be implied in the name of the river, which 
is derived from the names of the two main springs 
by which it is formed; viz., jor, signifying "down," 
and dan, which signifies "judge." The word Jordan 
would thus have the significance of "judged down," 
that is, condemned, and as a type it would stand for 
the divine condemnation which hindered even those 
who desired to be the servants of God from entering 
into peace and rest and blessing and favor with God. 

In this view of the matter, we see how appropriate 
it was that the Ark of God's covenant, representing 
the Lord himself, his grace, his goodness, his 
promises, should stand in the midst of Jordan— effecting 
a cancellation of the sentence of death— in order 
that the Millennial blessings might be attained by all 
under the lead of Joshua's antitype. That the Ark 
of God was borne by the high-priest and the under-priests, 
and that these first passed into Jordan, is also 
significant: it represented how our great High-Priest 
and the Royal Priesthood, his Church, must first pass 
into Jordan before any of the people could pass over. 
And the fact that the high-priest and the under-priests 
stood in the midst of Jordan while the people all 
crossed over, illustrates how the passing over, free 
from divine condemnation, will be effected by the 
work of the great High-Priest, and his associated 
"brethren." He gave himself for our sins; he became 
a curse for us; he, as the man Christ Jesus, stopped 
in the midst of Jordan, that the world might pass over; 
the Royal Priesthood are following him in this sacrifice, 
and they too are stopping in the midst of Jordan; 
they also, as joint-heirs with their Lord, lay down 
their lives on behalf of the brethren,— to the intent 
that the whole world of mankind, or as many as will, 
may enter into the glorious Kingdom privileges, according 
to the divine arrangement. 

It was not necessary that the priests should remain 
in Jordan, and die there, on behalf of the delivered 
Israelites, in order to complete the type, for instead, 
by the Lord's direction, twelve stones were 
placed where they stood, representing the twelve 
tribes of Israel— representing the 144,000 out of all 
the twelve tribes (Rev. 7:1-8) who constitute the Royal 
Priesthood, and who become dead with Christ, according 
to the flesh, that they may live with him as 
new creatures, partakers of the divine nature, and participators 
with him in the great work of blessing all 
the families of the earth. 

JUDGE NOT BY OUTWARD APPEARANCE 

Judge not; the workings of the brain 

And of the heart thou can'st not see; 
What looks to thy dim eye a stain, 

In God's pure light may only be 



A scar, brought from some well-won field, 
Where thou would'st only faint and yield. 

The look, the air, that frets thy sight, 

May be a token that below 
The soul had closed in deadly fight 

With some internal, fiery foe, 
Whose glance would scorch thy smiling grace, 
And cast thee, shuddering, on thy face. 

The fall thou darest to despise: 

May be the angel's slackened hand 

Has suffered it that he may rise 
And take a firmer, surer stand; 

Or, trusting less to earthly things, 

May henceforth learn to use his wings. 

And judge none lost; but wait and see, 

With hopeful pity, not disdain; 
The depth of the abyss may be 

The measure of the height of pain 
And love and glory that may raise 
This soul to God in after days.— Selected. 



R3086 : page 299 

GRACE SUFFICIENT; ONLY BELIEVE. 

-JOSHUA 6:12-20.-OCTOBER 19.- 

"By faith the walls of Jericho fell down."— Heb. 11:30. 

AFTER ENTERING Canaan the covenant of 
circumcision was renewed by the Israelites. 
Evidently their long journeying in the wilderness, 
because of unreadiness to enter into Canaan 
at the first, was to be understood by the Israelites as 
a period of partial disfavor with the Lord; hence both 
the circumcision of their children and the annual commemoration 
of the passover ceased during that period. 
The renewal of both when they had entered Canaan 
marked the return of divine favor and evidenced their 
more acceptable condition of faith toward God. Another 
change occurred: the manna, the bread from 
heaven on which they had fed for thirty-nine years, 
ceased after they had gotten into Canaan and had 
eaten their first passover there. 
They were now ready to take possession of the 

R3086 : page 300 

land which God had given them, and were encamped 
near the city of Jericho, which occupies a sort of key 
position to Canaan from the direction of their approach. 



Joshua, the new leader, evidently had in 
mind the necessity of prompt action against Jericho, 
and was, no doubt, considering the fact that his army 
had no implements suitable for attacking such a 
walled city defended by well armed men, even though 
the latter were comparatively few in number. It was 
while on this reconnoitering expedition that he met 
an angel of the Lord with drawn sword in hand, who, 
in answer to his question, informed him that he was 
the Captain of the Lord's hosts. Joshua, after doing 
reverence to him, received instructions how he should 
proceed for the capture of Jericho, and our lesson details 
the manner in which those instructions were followed 
out, and the great victory resulting.— Joshua 6. 

We have already seen that the land of Canaan 
prefigures the Millennial Kingdom with its rich blessings 
which may be secured by all who, under the command 
of the greater Joshua— Jesus and his glorified 
Royal Priesthood, desire to be the Lord's people. 
The renewal of circumcision on entering the land, 
would thus signify that one of the first institutions of 
the Millennial Age will be a consecration to the Lord 
—to put away sin, to live separate from sin as the 
Lord's assisting grace will enable. The renewal of the 
passover would symbolize that in the Millennial dispensation 
the important work of redemption by the 
precious blood will again be brought prominently to 
the attention of all who desire to be God's people, 
and that they can only be his people by a full recognition 

R3087 : page 300 

of the Lamb that was slain, and by an eating of 

his flesh— partaking of the mercies and blessings flowing 

from his sacrifice. The ceasing of the manna, 

and the eating, instead, of the fruits and grains of Canaan, 

may be understood to signify that the new dispensation 

will have spiritual food and sustenance of 

its own, and that in great variety and abundance; and 

that mankind will no longer be dependent upon the 

divine revelation contained in the Scriptures— upon 

the Word of God through ancient prophets and apostles. 

Good and necessary as these are under present 

conditions, they cannot be to the world all that the 

more direct teachings and blessings and instructions 

and guidance of the Millennial Kingdom will be, and will, 

therefore, not be needed under the new conditions. 

Now, the Word of God is a lamp for the feet of his 

saints, and some of its light shines beyond his saints 

to others in this night time; but by and by, when the 

Sun of righteousness shall arise and the whole earth 

be flooded with the glorious light of truth and knowledge, 

the lamp which at present we cannot prize too 

highly, will cease to occupy its present exalted and 

indispensable position, although it will always be appreciated 

and reverenced. 



Another thought respecting Canaan: we have already 
noted that the Royal Priesthood may in some 
sense of the word be said to be already in the land of 
Canaan throughout this Gospel age— by faith— already 
in the place or condition which Israel after the 
flesh and the mass of mankind "entered not into because 
of unbelief." (Heb. 4:3,6,10.) To this class, 
Jordan would fitly represent consecration unto death; 
and Canaan would represent our present newness of 
life while still in the flesh. To these, the circumcision 
represents, as the Apostle explains, circumcision of 
the heart and putting away of sin from the wills; to 
these the passover signifies not only the acceptance 
of the merit of Christ's atonement on our behalf, but 
also a communion and participation with him in his 
sacrifice. These, as justified persons, having been fed 
with the manna from heaven, have been strengthened 
and brought across Jordan; and now as new creatures 
they live "by every word that proceedeth out of 
the mouth of God"— they live upon the divine promises 
—"Thy words were found and I did eat them." 
(Jer. 15:16.) To these the capture of Jericho and all 
the battlings with the Canaanites represent victories 
of the "new creature" over the flesh; not accomplished 
by their own strength, but accomplished for them by 
the Lord in recognition of their faith and trust in him. 

The capture of Jericho was accomplished in a 
peculiar manner; the methods which, by the Lord's 
command, Joshua adopted, would certainly appear 
foolish. For six days the armed men of Israel were to 
pass around the city, one time each day, followed by 
priests bearing the ark of the covenant and by other 
priests tooting with rams' horns, keeping time as they 
marched. The program on the seventh day was the 
same except that the armed men and the priests bearing 
the ark and others with the trumpets passed 
around the city seven times, and that when they had 
passed around it the last time the priests with the 
rams' horns ceased their tooting and gave a long 
blast upon the horns which was the signal for all the 
people of Israel to give a shout as they had previously 
been directed by Joshua according to the Lord's instructions. 
It required faith on the part of Joshua to 
issue such instructions; it required faith on the part of 
the armed men of Israel and of the priests to carry 
out their part of the program which seemed so senseless, 
so little likely to effect anything against the city 
which was to be captured; it required faith on the 
part of all the people to expect that when these procedures 
had been accomplished and the final long 
blast on the trumpet had come (v. 5), that the walls 
of Jericho would fall down flat. No doubt it was part 
of the divine program thus to develop and test and 
strengthen the faith of Israel, and to teach them that 
the victories they were about to gain would not be 
in their own strength or might, but by the Lord's 



power. 

Just how this would apply during the Millennial 
age we may not yet clearly discern; but we are sure 
that in some manner the lesson will be given to all 
who then desire to come into harmony with God, that 
the power of sin, its fortresses and entrenchments in 
the fallen race, cannot be overcome without divine assistance, 
and that reliance upon God and obedience 
to the great Captain of the Lord's hosts will be essential 
to every victory. The royal priesthood who 
have already entered, by faith, into the favors or privileges 
of the Millennial Kingdom (forgiveness of sins 
and harmony with the Father and blessings as new 
creatures), already realize the lesson, that sin is so 

R3087 : page 301 

thoroughly entrenched in their fallen human nature 

that it can be overcome only by divine power. All 

through the present time the royal priesthood sound 

the trumpets of warning against sin, and declare 

themselves as "new creatures" opposed to it, and announce 

that ultimately it must completely fall; and 

during the Millennial age this same priestly class, 

glorified, will still sound the trumpet note of obedience 

to God and opposition to sin, and in harmony 

with their instructions they shall finally sound a great 

blast, and all who are on the Lord's side will join in, 

and by the Lord's grace the power of sin will be utterly 

overthrown, its walls will fall down flat, and no 

longer constitute opposition, and every one who is on 

the Lord's side will be energetic in the complete destruction 

of sin not only as relates to his own person, 

but as respects the utter extermination of sin in every 

form and in every phase. 

The people were told in advance that the entire 
city was condemned of God; that he had taken the 
matter in charge and that they were merely to execute 
the divine decree against that city in its utter destruction 
and the extermination of every living thing 
therein, all of which combinedly symbolized evil. The 
only things that were not to be destroyed either with 
fire or sword, were the metals, such as gold, silver, 
etc.; and these were not to be appropriated by the Israelites, 
but were to be considered the Lord's. Special 
caution was given, and the warning that any violation 
of these terms would bring a corresponding curse upon 
the person or persons offending and upon the 
whole camp of the Israelites wherever the condemned 
things should be found. 

Thus during the Millennial age the general lesson 
will be that sin must be exterminated utterly, and 
whoever shall seek to hold on to any portion of it will 
thereby bring a corresponding curse upon himself as 
did Achan in this instance for securing to himself a 
"wedge of gold", and "a goodly Babylonish garment." 



The lesson to the royal priesthood now, as well 
as to the world in the Millennial age, is that the Lord 
requires not merely an outward conformity to his 
Word, but a heart loyalty to him, which will enter 
fully into sympathy with righteousness and into hatred 
of iniquity— otherwise the penalty will be the 
Second Death, as symbolized in the destruction of Achan. 

In respect to the slaughter of the people of Jericho, 
we must remind our readers of the points in our 
previous lesson in which we showed that the people 
thus put to death were not cast into an eternity of 
torture, but that they merely died with probably as 
little, or less, pain than if they had been smitten with 
some lingering disease; and that they have a share 
in the divine mercy and a provision in the great 
atonement which the Lord Jesus, our great High 
Priest, is accomplishing for the sins of the whole 
world, and which will shortly be finished and permit 
the blessing of all the families of the earth through 
their Redeemer. 

Just a word respecting the miracle of the overthrow 
of the walls of Jericho. It was a miracle, however 
it was to be accounted for, as is demonstrated by 
the connecting facts, the order of the procedure and 
the particular time, shout, etc. Doubtless God, in 
the accomplishing of this miracle, used some natural 
means as in other instances. Possibly an earthquake 
may have been caused at that particular spot, so as 
to affect the walls without affecting or alarming the 
people of Israel but a short distance outside of the 
city. Another suggestion offered is that there is a dynamic 
force in certain chords of sound which as yet 
is but slightly understood, and that it is possible that 
the Lord operated along the line of this law but little 
understood by us, for the accomplishment of the overthrow 
of this wall, using the sound-chord of the long 
blast, and of the voices of the people, in conjunction 
with the marching. This does not seem to us a very 
reasonable view of the matter, nevertheless we give 
some curious incidents cited, as rather confirmatory, 
by those who favor such a view. These illustrations follow:— 

"All structures, large or small, simple or complex, have 
a definite rate of vibration, depending on their material, 
size and shape, as fixed as the fundamental note of a musical 
chord. When the bridge at Colebrooke Dale (the first iron 
bridge in the world) was building, a fiddler came along and 
said he could fiddle it down. The workmen laughed in 
scorn, and told him to fiddle away to his heart's content. He 
played until he struck the keynote of the bridge, and it 
swayed so violently that the astonished workmen commanded 
him to stop. At one time considerable annoyance 
was experienced in one of the mills in Lowell. Some days 
the building was so shaken that a pail of water would be 
nearly emptied, while on other days all was quiet. Experiment 
proved it was only when the machinery was running at 



a certain rate that the building was disturbed. The simple 
remedy was in running it slower or faster so as to put 
it out of time with the building. We have here the reason 
of the rule observed by marching armies when they 

R3088 : page 301 

cross a bridge, viz., Stop the music, break step, and open 
column, lest the measured cadence of a condensed mass of 
men should urge the bridge to vibrate beyond its sphere of 
cohesion. Neglect of this has led to fearful accidents. The 
celebrated engineer, Stephenson, has said that there is not 
so much danger to a bridge when crowded with men and 
cattle, as when men go in marching order. The Broughton 
bridge near Manchester, gave way beneath the tread of only 
sixty men. A terrible disaster befell a battalion of French 
infantry while crossing the suspension bridge at Angiers, in 
France. Repeated orders were given the troops to break 
into sections, but in the hurry of the moment and in the 
rain they disregarded the order, and the bridge fell.'— Professor 
Lovering, of Cambridge. Tyndall tells us that 'while 
away up amid the Alpine solitudes of Switzerland a few 
years ago, I noticed the muleteers tie up the bells of their 
mules, and was told that the protracted combined tinkling 
would start an avalanche.'"— Harper's Young People. 

The sum and essence of our lesson is expressed in 
the words of the Apostle, "I can do all things through 
Christ which strengtheneth me." (Phil. 4:13.) Faith 
is an essential; but we must have crossed the Jordan; 
we must have been justified; must have partaken 
of the antitypical passover; must have been sanctified 
before we could have of the Lord either a promise 
of victory over our Jericho, or before we could exercise 

R3088 : page 302 

such a faith as would result in that victory. If 
in the type faith could bring the fall of the strong 
walls of a city, how great must be the value of faith 
in the antitype! "This is the victory which overcometh 
the world, even your faith," but only so long as 
we trust in the Lord and seek to do those things 
pleasing to him, can we exercise this overcoming 
faith. 



R3088 : page 302 

"YE WERE BOUGHT WITH A PRICE." 

Question.— In considering the subject of the ransom 
in the light of a commercial transaction, as expressed 
by the Apostle in the words, "Ye are not your 
own; ye are bought with a price" (I Cor. 7:23), will 



you kindly state in as few words as possible what was 
the price paid? by whom was the purchase made? 
when was it bought? to whom was the price paid? 
when will that which was purchased be delivered? 

Answer.— The Scriptures most distinctly declare 
that the whole human family was "sold under sin," 
by the first Adam. The price paid him was the fruits 
of disobedience to God, which eventually proved to be 
very bitter rewards. The race thus sold under sin 
became subject to sin's wages; viz., death, by divine 
sentence. This sentence was irrevocable, and, hence, 
would have meant everlasting death, everlasting destruction, 
had not the Almighty graciously provided 
for us a ransom. The word "ransom" (Greek, antilutron), 
signifying corresponding price (Matt. 20:28; 
I Tim. 2:6), indicates to us the method by which God 
proposed to assist our race without compromising 
his own justice and its sentence of death. In order to 
be our ransom price it was necessary that our Lord 
Jesus should become "the man Christ Jesus," yet 
without sin, without taint, without blemish. This condition 
was attained through his miraculous birth,— 
and this purity and freedom from the death sentence 
upon the rest of mankind was maintained, to the end 
of his life, in that "he was holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate" from the sinner-race. In this condition he 
was ready, prepared thus to become our ransom-price, 
and this he did become by sacrificing himself, laying 
down his life on our behalf. 

As the condemnation upon the entire race came 
through one man's disobedience, so the voluntary 
sacrifice of the man Christ Jesus who was without 
sin, was a complete offset to the crime and condemnation 
of the first man, Adam; and as the race of Adam 
partook of his penalty, so also his race partakes in 
his redemption; and thus, as by one man's disobedience 
the many became sinners, so by the obedience 
of one the many were justified to life— freed from the 
condemnation of death. 

Here we see Adam and his race lost under the 
sentence of death, needing to be purchased or redeemed. 
Here we see the man Christ Jesus, the Redeemer, 
and perceive that he gave the corresponding 
price for all. Here we see God, the Judge, who sentenced 
Adam, accepting the man Christ Jesus in his 
stead, as his substitute, a ransom, or corresponding 
price. We have additionally the words of the Apostle, 
assuring us that Christ "through the eternal spirit 
offered himself without spot to God"— a sacrifice well -pleasing. 
(Heb. 9:14). We have besides, his testimony 
that our Lord Jesus took upon himself our human 
nature, that "he by the grace of God should taste 
death for every man." We have, also, the testimony 
that this plan was such an arrangement as to preserve 
the honor and dignity of divine justice, and yet 
to bring mercy and forgiveness to the human culprit, 



in the words, "That he might be just, and the justifier 

of him that believeth in Jesus." Without the 

payment of Adam's penalty for him, God could not 

have justly released the sinner from his sentence;— 

to have done so would have been an injustice— a violation 

of justice— as surely as the original sentence 

was a just one. 

As already indicated, the payment of this penalty 
began when our Lord reached perfect manhood and 
made his consecration to death at Jordan, symbolizing 
it in baptism. It was finished on Calvary. As 
the ransom, the man Christ Jesus must stay dead; 
but in harmony with the previous proposition of the 
Father he was granted life on a higher plane, as a 
partaker of the divine nature, in reward for his obedience 
unto death, even the death of the cross. When 
he ascended up on high and appeared in the presence 
of God, he presented before him the sacrifice which 
he had made in the flesh, appropriating a part of it at 
once to those who had already believed on him— the 
apostles and other faithful ones of that time— and to 
all those who would believe on him through their 
word throughout this Gospel age. In evidence that 
this was accepted of the Father and accounted sufficient 
to cancel our sins, note the fact that the Redeemer 
was at once granted the privilege of pouring 
out at Pentecost upon his faithful disciples the holy 
spirit of adoption, as evidencing to them the full forgiveness 
of their sins; and thus indirectly testifying 
not only that Jesus had arisen from the dead and 
ascended up on high, but, also, that his sacrifice for 
sins was full, sufficient and acceptable to justice. 

As to when the thing purchased will be delivered, 
we reply, that in the case of the Church there is a 
reckoned deliverance granted at once, when we believe. 
We are counted free from sin— justified by 
faith, justified by his blood, by the grace of God; and 
this justification becomes to believers the ground or 
foundation of their consecration to the Father, as 
joint-sacrificers with Christ in the sufferings of this 
present time, and the foundation of their hope of being 
joint-participators with him in the glories to follow. 
In the case of the world in general, practically no 
benefit from the death of Christ comes in the present 
time. The world must wait until the Church of 
Christ, admitted by divine grace to a share in his 
sufferings, shall have filled up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ (Col. 1:2,4), and shall have 
been glorified with him. Then these, as the glorified 
sons of God, shall shine forth in Millennial grandeur, 

R3088 : page 303 

for the blessing of the world, by the rolling away of 
the clouds of ignorance, superstition, prejudice, etc., 
and by lifting up so many as will, out of present slavery 



to sin and death into the liberty of the sons of 

God. That Millennial day, then, will be the great day 

of delivering that which Christ purchased with his 

precious blood— delivering mankind in general (so 

many as shall heartily accept divine favor on the original 

terms proffered to Adam; viz., thorough 

obedience). 



R3088 : page 303 

FIDELITY TO EARTHLY AND HEAVENLY BRIDEGROOMS. 

Dear Mr. Russell: 

Since appreciating the light of present truth and endeavoring 
to walk in it I have been much restrained in my 
reading, and have several times been forbidden to attend 
any meetings held, or to hold any communications with 
any of the dear brethren. 

For a while I quietly submitted and never had any reading 
matter around, except the Bible, when my husband came 
home. Then I grew bolder, and began to leave a tract about 
again. But each attack was worse, and finally my husband 
said: "If I see any more of those books or tracts about 
I'll burn them." My son has a Leeser, a Diaglott, etc.; they 
as well as the "Dawns," were all taken care of by my oldest 
son who is not in the truth. 

I find I must read the "Dawns"; they are more to me 
than my daily food, yet when I surreptitiously get one and 
am reading, I tremble and hide it if I hear a footfall. I am 
not happy, especially since it was shown to me that we 
should obey God, rather than man. Ought I to obey my husband 

R3089 : page 303 

in this, seeing that Christ is my Head? I feel like a 
coward in this. 

OUR REPLY. 

Dear Sister: 

Your favor of the 22nd is before me. I am glad that 
you have expressed yourself freely, and am glad to note that 
you have the spirit of a sound mind on this important subject. 
Your husband, probably a strong-minded man, has 
not fully recognized to what extent his attitude toward you 
on this subject is unreasonable and tyrannical. We are 
fully in sympathy with the Scriptural injunction that wives 
should obey their husbands; but this does not, as you have 
perceived, imply that the wife should obey her husband in 
matters contrary to the admonitions of the heavenly 
Bridegroom. No reasonable earthly husband will make 
such requirements, and we will trust that yours will consider 
the matter differently ere long. He will be helped, however, 
in seeing the right way by your kind and loving treatment of 



him, and your earnest endeavor to please him in all legitimate 
and proper ways, but by your positiveness, your firm 
decision and resolute conduct in the matters which appertain 
to your proper liberties of conscience. I would readily 
agree to keep my books and papers out of sight during my 
husband's presence in the home; but I would neither agree 
not to think nor to read, nor would I agree to absent myself 
from the meetings of those of like precious faith. 

I would tell my husband plainly that it is our duty to 
obey the heavenly Bridegroom first, and that when he says 
"Forget not the assembling of yourselves together," I considered 
it duty to follow that admonition at any cost; that I 
hoped this would appeal to him as a reasonable and correct 
course; that I had no thought of neglecting legitimate, 
proper, home obligations and duties toward him, and the 
other members of my family, but would be as faithful or 
more faithful, than if under the influence of any other than 
my present convictions. I would tell him that this much 
liberty at least was thoroughly understood by me when 
entering the marriage relationship; that if in his marriage 
vows he did not intend to accord liberties of conscience he 
had misled and deceived me, and that in any event I would 
not submit to that kind of bondage, and that the quicker 
the matter was decided the better; that under no circumstances 
or conditions would I move one iota from this position, 
so long as I considered that my position was according 
to the will of the Lord; that if this led to any breach between 
us the fault and the change were certainly on his 
side, as I had never given away my liberty of conscience and 
never intended to do so, and would not ask him to violate 
his; that I believed that my view of this would not only 
stand the test of the Scriptures but also of all men and women 
possessed of sound common sense. 

In harmony with this I would assure my husband that 
the truth, so far from making me less careful of his interests 
and my obligations as a wife, should make me more careful; 
and that I believed that if he took a right view and stand 
upon the subject, as I was determined to do, it would mean 
an increase of blessing to us both and to the household. 

If after a reasonable season of patient, loving remonstrance 
against such attempts to fetter my conscience there 
was no change for the better, I would consider that I had 
been deserted by my husband;— that he had ceased to be a 
husband and become an oppressor and was not treating me 
as even a slave might hope to be treated in respect to his 
or her conscientious convictions. Taking the matter to the 
Lord I should look for relief— for the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free. Not liberty to remarry, however; indeed 
even aside from the divine law making marriage perpetual 
(except upon one condition— Matt. 19:9) such an experience 
should be sufficient for anybody. 

I will remember you at the throne of grace, that the 
Lord will guide in your affairs. 

"THE GREAT COMPANY." 



Question.— When and how did the class that fails 
to keep its consecration get "before the throne"? I 
understand that this class is to pass through the tribulation 
and "wash its robes and make them white in 
the blood of the lamb." 

Answer.— This class seems to be located most 
particularly at the present time— altho there may have 
been some throughout this age, who, because of failure 
voluntarily to suffer, have been forced to suffer either 
with Christ in tribulation experiences, or to deny him 
and thus be condemned to the Second Death. In the 
tribulation time which will follow the Church's glorification 
we anticipate crucial tests upon all the Lord's 
true people, and faithfulness then will mean "great 
tribulation" ending in death, which to these will signify 
change to spiritual conditions. On the other hand 
failure to meet the trials devotedly will mean full, intelligent 
rejection of Christ, and will bring the full 
penalty of such a course; viz., Second Death. 



page 305 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. OCTOBER 15, 1902. No. 20. 



CONTENTS. 

"Though Ye Be Established" 307 

"He Wholly Followed the Lord" 309 

Fleeing for Refuge 31 1 

"Choose Ye this Day 

Whom Ye Shall Serve" 313 

We are not Ignorant of his Devices 315 

Poem— The Morn is Coming 317 

"A Vessel Unto Honor, Sanctified" 318 

Letters of Interest 319 

Special Items 306 

page 306 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 



FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



OUR LINEAR, WIDE-MARGIN, DAWN-REFERENCE BIBLES. 

The three dollar grade is gone, except a few which we have 
agreed to hold until the end of the year. We still have a hundred 
or two of the two dollar grade, but they will not last long. 

We have a few of both grades without pictures, to permit 
their being sent by mail to foreign countries. We will hold 
these for the foreign friends until November 15th: after that 
they will be open to all, for same prices, $2 and $3 postpaid. 



WE REGRET inability to supply charts promptly— except 
the 25c wall chart with metal hangers. Will fill orders for others 
as quickly as possible. Painters as well as printers in this 
vicinity are extremely busy at present. 



FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 
than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the DAWNS at 25 cents each, 
cannot be for money -making: that it is merely another way of 
preaching the truth. No other religious books are sold at any 
such price. Indeed few subscription books sell for less than two 
to three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are invited 
to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 



R3089 : page 307 

THOUGH YE BE ESTABLISHED. 

"I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance 
of these things, though you know them, 



and be established in the present truth."— 2 Peter 1:12. 

WHAT things are here referred to? Assuredly 

the necessity of giving all diligence to add 

to our faith virtue [fortitude]; and to virtue, 

knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance [self-control]; 

and to temperance, patience; and to patience, 

godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; 

and to brotherly kindness, charity [love]:... 

For if ye do these things ye shall never fall; for so 

an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 

into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour 

Jesus Christ.— Verses 5-11. 

To be established in the truth signifies that we 
have carefully studied and thoroughly proved it by 
"the law and the testimony" (Isa. 8:20), and that as 
a consequence we are convinced of its verity, so that 
our faith is steadfast and immovable: we know whom 
we have believed; we have tasted and seen that the 
Lord is good; we have partaken of the sweets of fellowship 
with him; we have partaken of his spirit of 
meekness, faith and godliness to such an extent as 
to be led into a joyful realization of the fulness of his 
grace as manifested in the wonderful divine plan of the 
ages; and we have been permitted to see, not only the 
various features of that plan, but also the necessity 
and reasonableness of all its various measures in 
order to the full accomplishment of its glorious outcome 
in the fulness of the appointed times. This is 
what it is to be "established in the present truth." 
It is indeed a most blessed condition, bringing with 
it such peace and joy as the world can neither give 
nor take away. 

But though we be thus established in the present 
truth, we need to bear in mind that our election 
to the high position to which we are called is not yet 
made sure. The race for the prize of our high calling 
is still before us, and we are yet in the enemy's country, 
surrounded by many subtle and powerful foes, 
so that if we would be successful we must "fight the 
good fight of faith," remembering, too, that "the 
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but [God's 
Truth is] mighty to the pulling down of the strongholds" 
of error and superstition and of inbred sin; 
and remembering, also, that "we wrestle not with 
flesh and blood, but against principalities, against 
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this 
world, against spiritual wickedness in high places."— 
2 Cor. 10:4; Eph. 6:12. 

It is in view of these facts— of the warfare before 
us, of the subtlety of our temptations and of the 
weakness of the flesh— that the faithful Apostle Peter 
urges all diligence in the cultivation of the Christian 
graces and a continual calling to remembrance of the 
precious truths we have learned, that we may be 
strengthened thereby to make our calling and election 



sure. Faith is a good thing; but faith without 

virtuous works is dead; and to hold the truth in unrighteousness 

is worse than never to have received it. 

The truth is given to us for its sanctifying effect upon 

our hearts and lives. Therefore let it have free 

course and be glorified. Let its precious fruits appear 

more and more from day to day. Add to your 

faith virtue— true excellence of character, such excellence 

of character as will mark you as separate 

from the world and its spirit. In all such the world 

will see those moral qualities which they must approve, 

however they may oppose our faith. Add sterling 

honesty, truth and fair dealing in all business 

relations; moral integrity, in all social relations; manifestly 

clean hands and a pure heart, and a bridled 

tongue that works no ill to a neighbor. All of these 

the world has a right to expect from those who call 

themselves Christians; and all of these are indispensable 

features of that virtuous character which 

must be added to our faith. The clean hands will 

not dabble in anything that is not virtuous: they will 

have nothing to do with unrighteous schemes or 

R3090 : page 308 

projects in business. The pure heart will not devise 
evil things, or harbor evil thoughts, or plot mischief. 
And the bridled tongue will not be given to evil 
speaking, but will hold its peace when it cannot speak 
well and wisely. But the promptings of virtue go 
further than merely these negative features which 
refuse to do anything which would work ill to a neighbor; 
they incite not only to passive, but also to active, 
goodness— in benevolent charity which seeks to alleviate 
suffering, to sympathize with sorrow, to comfort 
those in distress and to elevate and bless others 
—to assist "all men as we have opportunity." 

To such a virtuous character we are counseled 
to add knowledge— the knowledge of God's character, 
that we may the more thoroughly imitate it, 
and of his truth, that we may more fully conform to 
its teachings: and to knowledge, temperance— moderation, 
self-restraint, in all things. "Let your moderation 
be known unto all men." We are not to be 
hasty and hot-tempered, or rash and thoughtless. But 
we should strive to be evenly balanced, thoughtful 
and considerate: our whole manner should be characterized 
by that carefulness which would indicate 
that we are ever mindful of the Lord's pleasure, of 
our responsibility to him as his representatives, and 
of our influence upon our fellow-men, to see that it 
always is for good, never for evil. 

"And to temperance, patience." "Let patience 
have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and 
entire, wanting nothing." Yes, this grace smooths 
the way for every other, because all must be acquired 



under the process of patient and continuous self-discipline. 

Not a step of progress can be gained without 

the exercise of this grace of patience; and not 

one of the graces more beautifully adorns the Christian 

character, or wins the approval of the world's 

conscience, or glorifies the God of all grace whose 

truth inspires it. It is long-suffering meekness earnestly 

striving to stem the tide of human imperfection 

and weakness, and endeavoring with pains-taking 

care to regain the divine likeness. It is slow to 

wrath and plenteous in mercy; it is quick to perceive 

the paths of truth and righteousness, and prompt to 

walk in them: it is mindful of its own imperfections 

and sympathetic with the imperfections and shortcomings 

of others. 

"And to patience, godliness"— a careful study 
and imitation of the divine character as presented in 
the divine Word. 

"And to godliness, brotherly kindness"— an exercise 
and manifestation of the principles of the divine 
character toward our fellow-men. 

"And to brotherly kindness, charity"— love. 
Kindness may be manifested where but little love 
exists toward the subject of such kindness; but we 
cannot long persevere in such acts of kindness before 
a sympathetic interest is awakened; and by and by 
that interest, continually exercised, deepens into love. 
And even though the subject may be unlovely in character, 
the love of sympathy for the fallen and degraded 
grows, until it becomes tender and solicitous 
and akin to that of a parent for an erring son. 

Peter indeed describes a most amiable character, 
but who can consider it without feeling that to attain 
it will be a life-work. It cannot be accomplished in 
a day, nor a year, but the whole life must be devoted 
to it; and day by day, if we are faithful, we should 
realize a measure of growth in grace and of development 
of Christian character. It is not proper that 
we know the truth, and are contented to hold it in 
unrighteousness. We must see to it that the truth is 
having its legitimate and designed effect upon the 
character. And if the truth is thus received into good 
and honest hearts, we have the assurance of the Apostle 
that we shall never fall, and that in due time we 
shall be received into the Kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior, Jesus Christ. 

Hence we see the necessity of ever keeping the 
instructions and precepts of the Lord fresh in our 
minds, and of drinking deep into its inspiring spirit, 
although we are already established in the faith. To 
be established in the faith is one thing, but to be established 
in Christian character and in all the graces 
of the spirit is quite another. 

A PRACTICAL SUGGESTION. 



Feeling as we do the necessity of a deeper work 
of grace, both in our own hearts and in the hearts of 
all of the dear household of faith, the thought has occurred 
to us that more special effort in this particular 
direction on the part of us all would probably be of 
great benefit. We do not know through what discipline 
of faith and patience we may yet be called to 
pass in the approaching dark night of which we are 
forewarned, but "sufficient unto the day is the evil 
thereof," and also, thank God, sufficient unto the day 
is the grace thereof, if we earnestly lay hold of it and 
patiently continue in it. As each day brings its trials, 
so, if we have been rightly exercised by the trials, 
each day should bring its victories— thus leaving us 
strengthened and more firmly established in character, 
as well as in faith. 

With the end in view of specially promoting the 
growth of Christian character, our suggestion, which 
has already been made and adopted by the congregation 
in Allegheny and many other places, is that 
wherever a few of the consecrated can arrange to 
meet together, it would be well to appoint a midweek 
meeting for this special purpose. Such a meeting 
should be devoted to worship, prayer and praise, 
and to brotherly exhortation, conference and counsel, 
but not to Bible study or controversy. All discussions 
of doctrinal matters should be eliminated 
from such a meeting, and such subjects as would 
elicit controversy avoided, leaving such matters for 
another meeting, at an appropriate hour on the 
Lord's day, when all meet together; the object being, 
not to ignore doctrine, nor to discourage Bible-study; 
but, while meeting this necessity at the one 
meeting (on the Lord's day), to devote the other (the 
mid-week meeting) to the other equal necessity, without 
distraction. 

Our arrangement here in Allegheny and Pittsburgh 
is as follows: As our congregation is much scattered, 
we have them parceled into as many neighborhood 
gatherings as is necessary for the accommodation 
of all desiring to attend; and a leader is appointed 

R3090 : page 309 

for each meeting, discretion being observed 

as to capability. They should be brethren established 

in the faith— sound in doctrine, faithful and pious. 

These meetings are held on Wednesday evenings at 

the residence of some member of each little group. 

The meeting is opened with a hymn and prayer, the 

reading, by the leader, of Sunday afternoon's text; 

then each one is asked to give his or her personal experience 

as to progress in the narrow way— as to how 

he or she is growing in grace and striving to overcome 

the world, the flesh and the devil. Here they may 

humbly tell of their victories, or speak of their trials, 



or ask for Christian counsel and sympathy in hard 
places, speaking more freely in such little gatherings 
than would be possible or proper in larger assemblies. 
Here they can hear each other's petitions for 
each other, and Christian love and sympathy flow the 
more freely from heart to heart. 

The object kept in mind at these meetings is a 
fresh, living, weekly and daily experience with the 
Lord and in his service, and not merely a stale experience 
of the remote past. A clear past experience 
is good, but a clear present experience is better;— 
much more vitally important. Doctrine is ignored 
at these meetings except as the word doctrine applies 
to all Scripture teachings, including hope, trust, 
obedience, godliness, prayer, etc. Too many, we find, 
have been contenting themselves with knowing the 
truth, without making special efforts to live it, daily 
and hourly. As honesty of heart and faith in the Redeemer's 
finished work and consecration to his service 
are necessary to a full entrance into the "holy," 
where the deeper features of the divine plan can be 
discerned and fully appreciated, so these qualities 
must remain, must abide, or the light will become 
darkness— you will be cast out of the light into the 
outer darkness in which the world and the nominal 
church grope after the phosphorescent glimmerings 
of error— Spiritism, Christian Science, Theosophy 
and Universalism. 

The leader of such a meeting should study to 
adapt his counsel, correction or encouragement to 
the special needs of each of the little group over which 
he is placed, and his reverent piety and personal interest 
in each should inspire the confidence of all. 
We believe that such mid-week meetings prove steppingstones 
to higher attainments in the divine life, 
and that thus all may be greatly blessed and profited; 
and the whole body will be able the more effectually 
to minister to one another in spiritual things. On 
the middle Wednesday evening of each month the 
prayer feature is given more attention and an opportunity 
granted for all to address the throne of grace 
two or three in immediate succession. At a quarterly 
Sunday evening general meeting of the same character, 
we hear of the spiritual progress of the various 
little groups both from the leaders and the various attendants, 
and quarterly the leaders are transferred to 
other groups. 

May the blessing of the Lord go with the suggestion, 
and may the outcome be a strengthening 
of the bond of Christian love and mutual sympathy 
and fellowship everywhere. 



R3091 : page 309 



"HE WHOLLY FOLLOWED THE LORD." 

--JOSHUA 14:5-15.-OCTOBER 26.- 

WHAT A GRAND, what a wonderful testimony 

this is respecting any man;— he wholly 

followed the Lord. And the words have special 

force and weight in Caleb's case, because by nature 

he was not of the children of Israel, but only by 

adoption into the tribe of Judah. He was of the seed 

of Abraham, but through the rejected son Esau. The 

lesson of his faithfulness and reward is, therefore, of 

special force and weight to us who by nature are children 

of wrath, members of the worldly class of humanity, 

whose natural disposition was typified in 

Esau whose little faith in the promises of God, and 

greater appreciation of the good things of this world, 

led him to sell his birthright for a mess of pottage. 

Many of us who now rejoice that we are counted in 

as Israelites indeed, justified by faith, sanctified by the 

truth,— of the people of God, sharers in the great inheritance, 

—realize that many of us once loved the 

things of this present life more than the things of the 

life to come, and were disposed to grasp the tangible 

things of the present rather than to sacrifice these 

in the interest of the future glories and blessings of 

the divine promise. 

After the fall of Jericho Israel passed through 
various experiences in taking possession of the land 
of promise. First, there was the sin of Achan, his 
covetousness which led him to disobedience of the divine 
command respecting the possessions of the people 
of Jericho. His love for the condemned things 
not only cost him his life, but brought considerable injury 
to the cause, just as with us one whose consecration 
is defective and who loves the present evil 
world, and contrary to the divine command secretly 
encourages evil in his own life, may bring considerable 
disaster to the Lord's cause before the secret sin 
is made manifest, and eventually brings upon the 
wrong doer the weighty penalty implied in the Apostle's 
words, "If we live after the flesh, we shall die." 
Achan's course also represented the rule of the Millennial 
age, when all who even secretly love evil will 
be made manifest and will be destroyed from amongst 
the people. -Acts 3:23; Rev. 20:9. 

Later on the Lord brought the people to the valley 
between Mt. Ebal and Mt. Gerizim. In the wonderful 
natural amphitheater between the two mountains the 
people were gathered while from the one mountain 
was read the blessings of the Law and its keeping, 
and from the other the curses which would come upon 
those who would fail to keep the Law; thus did the 
Lord reimpress upon the people their continued obligation 
to him and the fact that their prosperity would 
depend upon their faithfulness to his law. So it is 



R3091 : page 310 

also with the royal priesthood who by faith have reckonedly 
entered the land of promise; from the time of 
their consecration the Lord speaks to them through 
his Word and through his providence, instructing them 
that although free from the Law covenant which was 
upon Israel they have come under the still higher 
statement of the divine law, briefly comprehended in 
the word, Love; and that on the one hand spiritual 
blessing, refreshment and growth will come to them 
in the line of obedience to this law of love, and on 
the other hand weakness, inability to overcome the 
world, the flesh and the adversary, and general spiritual 
disaster will be their portion if they neglect this 
divine law of the New Covenant, Love. So in the Millennial 
age after the antitypical Joshua shall have 
brought the world under the new conditions of the 
Millennial Kingdom, the law of God will be distinctly 
set before all as the standard of conduct, it will be the 
law of love, the highest expression of the divine law 
with its many illustrations and explanations and assistance 
as may be necessary to bring the matter to 
the comprehension of every creature. "The law shall 
go forth out of Zion, and the word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem." (Micah 4:2) Those who will obey the 
leadings of the glorious Joshua, the Deliverer, the 
Christ, will by his help and encouragement and guidance 
be brought off victors in the end; and those who 
will not obey that Law-giver and the law expressed 
through him, shall be chastened, judged, and if these 
corrections in righteousness do not serve to bring 
their hearts into accord with the Lord, there will be 
but one end possible; the wages of sin (no longer 
Adam's sin) will call for their death— Second Death— from 
which there will be no redemption, no recovery, no release. 

Later on came the great battle between the Israelites 
under Joshua and the confederated kings of that 
region, resulting in the defeat and destruction of the 
latter and their armies on what is generally known 
as Joshua's long day. Then followed sundry other 
defeats of Israel's enemies until a sufficient portion 
of the land had been conquered to permit of its distribution 
between the tribes. 

It was at this time when the enemies had been reduced 
in a general way and a considerable portion 
of the land of Canaan was in possession of the Israelites, 
that a division of the land was made between the 
tribes, each tribe still having considerable to do in 
the way of conquering its own province and destroying 
the inhabitants remaining therein to dispute 
their possession. Joshua occupied the place of judge, 
formerly held by Moses, and the various tribes were 
assigned their portion by him; Judah evidently was 
one of the last to make application for an allotment, 



and Caleb was one of the representative men in the 

tribe of which he was an adopted member. The representative 

elders of Judah came also with him as implying 

their indorsement of his request for Hebron, 

promised him by Moses, and because they also considered 

that to be one of the most desirable localities 

of Palestine. 

Caleb rehearsed to Joshua the story of the spying 
out of Canaan and reminded him that Moses promised 
that the particular part of Canaan he trod upon 
in spying should be his portion. He showed how 
this promise had fully entered into his heart; that not 
only had he the faith which enabled him to make the 
good report as to the possibility of Israel, under the 
Lord's favor, taking possession of the land of promise 
at once, but the same faith was with him afterward; he 
believed the Word of the Lord through Moses respecting 
his ultimate inheritance in it. The same promise 
and faith had been with him and actuated him during 
the wars of Israel in taking possession of the land, 
and now he still had full confidence that God would 
accomplish all the promises of Moses through the 
new leader Joshua. He was not unmindful of the 
fact that Hebron, which was the portion promised him 
by Moses, was not yet conquered; that it was in 
possession of the Anakim, giants, and that there 
would be serious battles to be fought before he could 
take full possession. His confidence was, however, 
that the same God who had made him the promise 
in the beginning, who had kept him thus far and who 
had fulfilled the promise up to this time, would be 
with him still and give him victory over the entrenched 
and fortressed enemies in Hebron. How 
well this illustrates the progress of the spiritual Israelites 
who in the present time, by faith, are living 
the new life in the land of promise, battling with the 
enemies and overcoming them in the name and by 
the power of the Lord! They look back to the beginning 
of their experiences and rejoice that the Lord 
has kept them and blessed them in all spiritual things 
up to the present, and in proportion as they realize 
this they have faith to look forward into the future 
and to see the final outcome,— see themselves victors 
in their contests even with the strongest and most 
entrenched enemies of the flesh,— its giant passions, 
customs, etc. Amongst these enemies of spiritual 
Israelites, living high up in the mountain fastnesses, 
giant in form and thoroughly fortified, are religious 
customs, traditions of men, nominalism, sectarian 
pride and ambition and love of show. But the same 
grace of God which was sufficient to enable us to gain 
the victory over the common sins, in the valley, is 
able still to give us the victory over all these enemies 
of the new mind, the new creature, and to bring us 
off conquerors and "more than conquerors through 
him that loved us" and bought us with his precious 



blood. But as faith was necessary at every step of 

the journey— to spy out the land, to enter in, to fight 

the battles, so the same faith increasing as it has progressed, 

is necessary now for our final victory and our 

entrance into the full promised inheritance. Doubtless, 

the same condition in some respect will be true 

during the Millennial age to the world also: at first 

the requirement of the Kingdom will be obedience 

in outward form; but ultimately the requirement will 

be the full submission of the heart to the will of God 

ere the restitution class will reach full perfection and 

enter upon the inheritance of everlasting life at the 

close of the Millennial age. 

It is pleasant in passing to note the generous language 
of Caleb in respect to the ten other spies who 
were with Joshua and himself, and who brought back 
the evil report. Here would have been a fine opportunity 
for an ignoble man to have spoken evil of those 
associates and to have endeavored to glorify his own 

R3091 : page 311 

faithfulness and that of Joshua in contrast with the 
unfaithfulness of the ten. But no; generously he 
passes over their wrong conduct in as mild language 
as possible, and so far from denouncing them or reviling 
them, he speaks of them as "my brethren." The 
spiritual Israelite must have this same disposition, 
only with us it should be still more pronounced than 
with Caleb, because we, having been anointed with 
the holy spirit and through this anointing having been 
taught many of the "deep things of God," may well 
judge ourselves by a standard much higher than any 
with which Caleb was acquainted; surely spiritual 
Israelites have much advantage every way over natural 
Israelites. Whenever, therefore, we hear those 
professing the new life and large attainments of grace 
speaking evil of their brethren, we are to remember 

R3092: page 311 

the word of the Lord, that revilers shall have no part 
in the Kingdom of God; we are to remember that it 
is written of our Lord that "when he was reviled he 
reviled not again"; we are to remember that evil 
speaking is classed by the Apostle as amongst the 
works of the flesh and of the devil, and the conduct 
of Michael, the archangel, is held up before us as a 
shining example of propriety, in that he did not bring 
a railing accusation against Satan, but merely said, 
"The Lord rebuke thee"; we are to remember too 
the Apostle's specific declaration, that evil speaking 
against others is a part of the filth of the flesh from 
which we, as the Lord's people, must be cleansed 
if we would be acceptable to him through Jesus Christ 
our Lord; and that revilers "shall not inherit the 



Kingdom of God."— I Cor. 6:10. 

Let us not be misunderstood; the Scriptures nowhere 
teach that all men are brethren in the spiritual 
sense; on the contrary, they teach that the unjustified 
are not God's children, but "children of wrath," and 
some of them are so thoroughly evil that from God's 
standpoint they are of "their father the devil"; we are 
to recognize as brethren in Christ only the household 
of faith, and to draw a sharp line of demarcation in 
our minds and in our salutations as between these 
and the children of this world. This does not imply 
either that the children of this world are to be treated 
unkindly by us or insulted or offended; rather they 
are to have our sympathy, our love, to whatever extent 
possible, our assistance as the Apostle suggests. 
We are to "do good unto all men as we have opportunity," 
especially unto the household of faith,— the 
brethren. Brethren are still to be recognized even 
though they fall into difficulty, dangerous snares of 
the adversary; and if it be necessary that our fellowship 
be withdrawn for a time, it is merely with the 
view to assist them back to their proper relationship 
to the Lord and back to our love and sympathy in 
fullest measure; as the Apostle says even such are to 
be treated, not as enemies, but, as misguided brethren 
for whose recovery we are to be willing to lay down 
even our lives— an hour here, another hour there, an 
effort for this one and an effort for another one because 
they are the Lord's. It is only after such brethren 
have turned back from the Lord's service like a 
"sow to her wallowing in the mire" or after they have 
discarded the redemptive work of Christ like the man 
in the parable who took off the wedding garment- 
only then are we to esteem them as enemies, adversaries, 
and even then we are not to bring against them 
a railing accusation, but to leave the matter for the 
Lord's judgment.— 2 Thess. 3:15. 

The essence of this lesson to the spiritual Israelite 
is that in order to inherit the good promises of God, 
we, like Caleb, must have faith in God and a corresponding 
obedience, that of us, as of him, the Lord 
will write, "He wholly followed the Lord." 



R3092: page 311 

FLEEING FOR REFUGE. 

-JOSHUA 20:l-9.-NOVEMBER 2.- 

"God is our refuge and strength, a very 
present help in trouble."— Psa. 46:1 

VERY WISE INDEED was the divine arrangement 
of cities of refuge for the Israelites. Six 



of these were designated, so scattered 

throughout the length and breadth of Palestine that 

they were convenient for the whole people. They 

were of divine appointment and had already been referred 

to through Moses (Num. 35:9-34; Deut. 4:41-43; 

19:1-9), and by him their purpose had been fully 

set forth. Now that Israel had entered the land 

of promise and taken possession of it, the time had 

come for the putting of this measure into effect. The 

six cities chosen as refuges were all of them cities of 

the Levites which would all the more insure their being 

free from all tribal bias or prejudice. The tribe 

of Levi stood separate and distinct from all the other 

tribes and was specially interested in all; as the religious 

representatives of the nation it was fitting, 

therefore, that these refuges from justice should be 

of the Levites wards— under their protection. 

From earliest times and in almost all countries the 
taking of life has been a capital offense calling for the 
death of the slayer. In almost all countries, too, particularly 
in the East, it is considered the bounden duty 
of the person next of kin to the one slain, to avenge 
his death; with some it is permissible to take money 
as a compensation for the loss of life, but with the 
Jews it was not so; the law "an eye for an eye and a 
tooth for a tooth" held with special rigidity in respect 
to a life for a life. We can see the wisdom of 
this general law recognized by the whole human family 
—that human life must be considered sacred and 
that he who would slay another must be shown no 
pity. Life was originally a divine gift, although forfeited 
through sin, and whatever remnant of it is transmitted 
from parent to child is still to be esteemed 
as so much of the original divine gift, and no one is 
at liberty to treat it lightly. 

The cities of refuge were a step in advance along 
the line of tempering justice with mercy; they were 
established, not for the protection of wilful murderers 

R3092: page 312 

but, for those who unintentionally, through error or 
accident took the life of another; any one who even 
thus committed man-slaughter was really worthy of 
death under the decree, "He that sheddeth man's 
blood, by man shall his blood be shed,"— regardless 
of any excuse which he might be able to offer, either 
of aggravation or passion or self-defense or accident. 
The arrangement was that anyone believing himself 
to be free from malice, wilful, intentional murder, 
might flee to one of these cities of refuge and there 
be protected from the full demands of the law against 
his life— he might thus have a measure of mercy extended 
to him without the condoning of his offense. 
It was a further regulation that the routes leading 
to these cities of refuge should be built and kept in 



thorough order, free from stumbling stones, with 

bridges over water-courses, etc., so as to afford the 

guilty ones full opportunity for a rapid flight to secure 

safety. Moreover at frequent intervals sign 

boards were erected pointing in the direction of the city 

of refuge and bearing the word, "Refuge." It was 

also a custom among Jews that two scribes should accompany 

the refugee with the special object of persuading 

the avenger should he overtake the culprit, 

to permit him to reach the city of refuge and there 

have a proper trial of his cause to hear what could 

be said on his behalf. This was a recognition of the 

justice of vengeance, but it was also an inculcation 

of mercy. Apparently the whole people felt a sympathy 

for every person fleeing from an avenger to 

a city of refuge, as each one realized his own liability 

at some time to commit a similar offense and thus 

likewise need to seek refuge and mercy. 

Arrived at the city of refuge, the culprit was not 
free, but was obliged to stand for trial before the elders 
of the city representing the congregation of Israel. 
He was received into the city and protected until such 
time as the trial could take place. His cause was 
carefully investigated;— Prof. Beecher remarks respecting 
these trials: "Much stress is laid upon the 
previous conduct of the slayer, and the relations between 
him and his victim, whether he lay in wait for 
the slain man (Deut. 19:11), whether he 'hunted' for 
him or not (Ex. 21:13; Num. 35:20,22), whether he 
smote him 'in secret.' (Deut. 27:24). Was it presumptuous, 
—that is to say, malicious? (Ex. 21:14). 
Was it with guile? (Ex. 21:14). Especially, was there 
enmity previously between the two men? (Num. 35:21,22). 
Was there hatred of the slain on the part 
of the slayer? (Num. 35:21,23; Deut. 19:4,6,11; 
Josh. 20:5)." 

The fact that so many particulars were enumerated 
shows that the trial contemplated was to be a careful 
one; it was not therefore the intention of these cities of 
refuge to defeat the ends of justice, but that while 
serving the ends of justice, mercy might be extended 
to those who were proper subjects for it. If the man 
were found guilty of deliberate murder, intentional, 
premeditated, the city of refuge did not save him from 
the death penalty; and if he were acquitted of any 
malice, he, nevertheless, was obliged to remain in the 
city of refuge or within its suburbs of 1,000 cubits beyond 
the walls (Num. 35:26,28), for the remainder of 
his life, or until the death of the high priest. This 
was putting a heavy penalty upon carelessness, 
passion, etc., a penalty of separation from family, a restriction 
of liberty which, undoubtedly, would be beneficial, 
not only to the individual under restriction 
but, in its influence beneficial upon the whole people. 
The careless man is culpable, and when his carelessness 
results in serious injury to another it is but right 



that the matter should result in his own inconvenience 
—that it should cost him something. 

The high priest was in some respects the most 
prominent individual in the nation, and his death, 
therefore, would be such a notable event as to be 
known throughout all the tribes, and on that occasion 
all refugees in all cities of refuge would be at liberty 
to return to their homes free from danger from the 
avenger, the avenger's opportunity expiring with the 
death of the high priest; and were he to avenge after 
that, he would be the murderer and be obliged to flee 
to a city of refuge. This unique arrangement, it will 
be observed, is the very reverse of our present-day 
arrangements of jails, penitentiaries, etc., and in some 
respects, at least, it presents advantages. The culprit 

R3093 : page 312 

himself was the one who sought the prison and who 
desired to stay therein for his own protection during 
the appointed time. This certainly avoided the necessity 
of building massive, walled, iron-barred jails from 
which prisoners continually seek to escape. And instead 
of inciting the people to the pursuit of the offender 
under the presumption of his guilt even before 
his trial, it rather conduced to a reverse condition of 
sentiment— the supposition of the culprit's innocence 
and the desire and sympathy on the part of the 
people to assist him to safety and protection and 
mercy. 

Our Golden Text draws to our attention an antitypical 
significance of these cities of refuge: "God is 
our refuge and strength, a very present help in 
time of trouble." From the time we become acquainted 
with the real facts of our case, we realize that a 
death sentence has been issued which involves each 
one of us. We realize, too, that justice has a full right 
to pursue us unto death because we have "all sinned 
and come short of the glory of God"; and because the 
"wages of sin is death." The Apostle Paul points out 
this matter distinctly (Rom. 5:12), saying "By one 
man['s disobedience] sin entered into the world and 
death by sin; and so [thus] death passed upon all 
men, for that all have sinned." From the moment, 
therefore, that we recognize that we are sinners— that 
we could not stand approved in the divine presence,— 
from that moment we realize that the avenger, Justice, 
is upon our trail, and that it is only a question 
of time when we will be overtaken and destroyed unless 
we reach some place of refuge. As we flee we see 
finger-posts which God has set for our instruction 
pointing us to Christ as the only place of refuge, and 
to him we have to flee. 

We are abiding now within the hallowed precincts 
of this salvation, deliverance, refuge, which God himself 
has provided for us; even as it is written, "It is 



God that justifieth; who is he that condemneth?" And 
yet it is with us even as it is shown in the type, a place 
of refuge not from wilful and intentional violation of 
the divine Law, but a refuge to cover our weaknesses 

R3093 : page 313 

and ignorance— the results of the fall. As a thorough 
investigation was made in the type, so we may be sure 
that in our cases a thorough investigation of motives, 
intention, etc., will be instituted. 

Fortunately for us, this refuge in Christ is specially 
intended for those who are "new creatures in Christ 
Jesus," whose sinful course prior to coming to a 
knowledge of the Lord is accounted, not as intentional 
or wilful, but, as of ignorance. Our responsibilities 
for wilful sin may, therefore, be said to begin 
with and keep pace with our knowledge of the divine 
Law. Although acquitted as respects wilful sin whose 
penalty would be the Second Death, it is necessary 
that we continue to "abide in him"— that we do not 
put off the robe of Christ's righteousness. If we leave 
the city of refuge,— if we abandon our trust in the 
precious blood which cleanseth us from all sin, we become 
liable again to the demands of Justice and that 
without mercy. Divine justice is represented in the 
avenger, as divine mercy is represented in the city of 
refuge, and he who would leave the city of refuge necessarily 
falls into the hands of Justice; as again the 
Apostle explains, "It is a fearful thing to fall into the 
hands of the living God"— to depart from Christ, to 
abandon the mercy and forgiveness which the Father 
has extended toward us, as culprits,— through the 
Beloved One. 

How long must we abide thus in the mercy of 
Christ and have no standing or liberty outside of his 
robe of righteousness, no safety outside his provision of 
refuge? We answer that we must thus abide "until 
the death of the high priest." This is already in a 
large measure accomplished— the Head of the antitypical 
high priest, our Lord and Master, already has 
finished the work that the Father gave him to do, and 
the members of the body of the high priest, his 
Church in the flesh, are filling up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ, and soon the entire high 
priest, its every member, will have died. Then the 
new dispensation will be ushered in and no longer 
will we be obliged to own our own imperfection and the 
need of a covering before justice; from thenceforth 
having been made perfect by a share in the First Resurrection, 
having been made like our Lord and Master, 
we shall be presented before the Father blameless, 
unreprovable, without spot or wrinkle or any such 
thing, without any vengeance against us on the part 
of divine justice. 

The entire arrangement is of God— Justice is the 



avenger of sin, and Christ is the refuge and deliverance; 

therefore, while acknowledging the Lord Jesus 

and appreciating very highly his work for us, the redemption 

accomplished through his sacrifice and all 

the blessings which come from the Father through 

him, and thus honoring the Son as we honor the 

Father also, it is nevertheless appropriate that we 

should remember that all these blessings are of the 

Father through the Son. "God is our refuge 

and strength, a very present help in time of trouble." 



R3093 : page 313 

"CHOOSE YOU THIS DAY WHOM YE SHALL SERVE." 

--JOSHUA 24:41-25. -NOVEMBER 9.- 

DECISION, one of the most important elements 

of Christian character, is the essence of this 

lesson. When Joshua was about 1 10 years 

old, realizing that his course was about run, he called 

a general assembly of the Israelites, presumably the 

heads of every tribe and family, and reviewed before 

them the Lord's mercies from the time of the call of 

Abraham. It was now about thirty years since Joshua 

had succeeded Moses as the leader and law-giver, the 

judge of the nation. Under his able administration 

Canaan had been divided amongst the tribes, and a 

quarter of a century of prosperity in the new land had 

followed, not, however, without its conflicts and difficulties. 

In leaving the people Joshua sought to impress 

upon them not only the blessings and favors that 

they had received of the Lord, but also the obligations 

which they had assumed in becoming his people prospectively; 

heirs of the Abrahamic covenant, and blessers 

of all the nations of the earth. He shows how 

Abraham's fore-fathers had been idolaters "on the 

other side of the flood," that is, on the other side of 

the great river Euphrates; and that God's favor had 

been markedly with Abraham and his posterity up to 

the time of which he spoke. In order to impress upon 

their minds what they might expect of the Lord 

in the future, he calls pointedly to their attention his 

dealings with them in the past, the lessons in Egypt, 

the deliverances, the crossing of the Red Sea, the experiences 

of the wilderness, their crossing of Jordan 

into the land of promise, their conquest of the land 

against the various inhabitants. He would have them 

remember that these victories were not of their own 

strength or ability or wisdom, but that the Lord was 

on their side; calling attention also to one of the 

great battles in which their enemies were discomfitted 

by great swarms of hornets, and then he comes 

to the exhortation which constitutes this lesson. 



It is profitable, too, that the spiritual Israelite frequently 
take such a review of God's providences. He 
may look back not only to God's manifestations of 
favor and power during the Jewish age to natural 
Israel, but he may see also divine favor of another 
time granted to spiritual Israel during this gospel age. 
Noting the differences of dispensations, he can see 
that God's blessings were of a temporal kind during 
the Jewish age; that those who were faithful to 
the Lord were blessed in their flocks and herds and 
earthly advantages and health, while during this Gospel 
age those who reverently obey the Lord and seek 
to walk in his ways are blessed in spiritual things; 
he opens the eyes of their understanding, feeds their 
hearts; grants them refreshment of the water of life, 
and light of the knowledge of the goodness of God 
which shines in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord, 
and makes known to his faithful the lengths and 
breadths and depths and heights of divine love, wisdom, 

R3093 : page 314 

and power. They now realize a protection from 

the world, the flesh and the adversary, and the peace 

of God which passeth all understanding rules in their 

hearts, even though the same divine providence may 

permit them to have various trials and difficulties, 

persecutions and disappointments and reverses, physical, 

financial and social. The spiritual Israelite's evidence 

of divine favor on his behalf is in the healing 

of his soul from the sicknesses of sin, and in the invigoration 

of the new life, and in the victories over 

the weaknesses of the flesh and the oppositions of the 

Adversary— these are potent arguments with the spiritual 

Israelite respecting the goodness and faithfulness 

of our God, as the temporal victories recited by 

Joshua were evidences of them to the natural 

Israelite. 

As Moses before he died had called upon Israel to 
renew their covenant with the Lord, so Joshua desired 
at the close of his days to make an appeal to his 
brethren on behalf of faithfulness to the Lord, that 
would long be remembered by them. He recognized 
the fact that God seeketh such to worship him as 
worship him in spirit and in truth— not of fear, not 
of compulsion but of a willing mind, and his argument 
accordingly was along this line— Brethren, let 
us make a firm resolve that in view of God's goodness 
to us we will ever be faithful to him; let us fear him 
in the sense of reverencing his commands, in the 
sense of fearing to displease one who has been so 
gracious to us; let us remember, too, that notwithstanding 

R3094: page 314 

his graciousness, he is dealing with us along 



the line of principle, and that if we depart from the 
principles he approves his blessing and favor will depart 
from us. Let us put away, therefore, the gods 
which your fathers served, and serve Jehovah only. 
It may have been that there was still a lurking of 
idolatry amongst the people, or it may have been 
that Joshua was merely guarding them against the 
idolatrous tendencies which more or less assail all 
mankind— a tendency to forget more or less the invisible 
God and to set upon earthly objects— idols— 
the affections and reverence which properly belong to 
him. Joshua would incite the people to a good 
resolution. 

Just so, too, we see that spiritual Israelites need 
frequently to incite one another to faithfulness to God, 
to an appreciation of what he has done for us and 
what he rightly expects of us, and to caution one 
another against what we recognize to be the tendencies 
of the world— the drawing away of our hearts 
and affections toward earthly things. 

The Israelites had come into a land whose people 
practiced idolatry accompanied by a lascivious form 
of worship, and there the laws of God upon them 
would necessarily mean restraint against which their 
fallen natures would more or less rebel, and Joshua 
wished them to have these matters well before their 
minds and to decide the question of loyalty to God 
in full view of the facts as they already realized them, 
or would subsequently appreciate them; on the one 
hand were the license and attractions of the sensuous 
forms of idolatry and the pleasures of sin such as 
they are, for a season, with divine disfavor; on the 
other hand were the restraints of the divine law accompanied 
by divine favor, protection and care, relating 
not only to the present life, but to that also which 
is to come. He inquired whether it seemed evil— 
that is undesirable— to them to be Israelites, to be 
God's people, to be under the restraints of his laws 
in order to have his favor and blessing. They would 
as a people now be tested along this line individually 
and nationally, and he desired to anticipate the coming 
tests and trials of their faith and obedience by fortifying 
their minds and leading them to make a decision 
one way or another. Then as a leader he took 
his own position most positively on the side of the 
Lord, saying, "As for me and my house (my family) 
we will serve the Lord." 

Many would be inclined to doubt the wisdom of 
setting before the people such a choice; they would 
be inclined, on the contrary, to leave no choice about 
it, but to insist and demand that the Lord be recognized 
and obeyed at all hazards. But really Joshua was 
merely emphasizing the choice which God puts before 
people continually; he leaves them open to 
choose good or evil,— to serve him, or to serve self 
or sin or wealth or other idols. As a matter of fact 



we have no right to attempt compulsion, because the 
Lord leaves the matter open for choice, as Joshua 
did; he is seeking those who desire to be his servants, 
his royal priesthood, his holy nation, his peculiar people; 
those who do not so desire he does not desire, 
and he is not calling them and drawing them now. 
Our Master emphasized this lesson in his preaching, 
saying to the Jews, "If any man will come after me 
(as a disciple), let him take up his cross and follow 
me"; he exhorts them furthermore to sit down and 
count the cost of discipleship before undertaking to 
make a choice, just as Joshua in this lesson drew before 
the minds of his hearers something of the two 
sides of the question which he exhorts them to decide 
properly on the Lord's side,— on the side of life 
and peace and blessing and the promises of God. 

Although this matter of choosing was left open 
to the people during the Jewish age, and under the 
still higher call during this Gospel age, yet it will 
not be so left open during the Millennial Age; men 
will not then be invited to choose whom they will 
serve and worship; on the contrary, when the Kingdom 
has been established, the law shall go forth, and 
without asking for the preferences of any for good or 
for evil, obedience will be enforced and the evilly disposed 
will be forcibly restrained. Such a reign of 
law and order will be maintained and those who will 
not conform thereto will be chastened as well as instructed, 
and all who shall not come into accord with 
that Kingdom and its law of righteousness outwardly, 
and ultimately conform to it heartily, will be cut 
off in the Second Death.— Acts 3:23. 

The people responded nobly, that they appreciated 
God's care and blessings and that they would be 
faithful and loyal to him; but realizing that promises 
are easily made and need to be deeply impressed, 
Joshua repeated the injunction the second time (verse 19) 
saying in substance: Ye can not serve the Lord 
easily,— you must not imagine that the promises you 
are making can be kept without considerable effort, 

R3094: page 315 

neither must you imagine that a partial perfunctory 

observance of the divine law will please the Lord or 

have his blessing,— he is a jealous God. As a husband 

or wife having entered into the marriage relationship 

would properly be jealous of any intrusion 

or indifference or coldness, so the Lord having accepted 

Israel as his peculiar people would watch over 

them with a jealous care, would not be indifferent if 

they divided their affections or worship as between 

him and others. And God is the same today and forever, 

and wishes his Spiritual Israel to understand 

that to abide in his love means obedience to his regulations, 

all of which are reasonable services. He 



would have us understand, clearly, that while he has 
favored us by lifting our feet from the horrible pit 
and miry clay of sin, condemnation and death, and 
has reckonedly justified us, placing our feet upon the 
rock, Christ Jesus,— although he has adopted us into 
his family as sons robed in Christ's righteousness, 
accepted in the Beloved one, nevertheless, having 
done these favors for us he would disown us and cast 
us off as unworthy of further favor if we deliberately 
prove unfaithful to him. 

As the Israelites re-affirmed their decision to be 
faithful to the Lord so let us Spiritual Israelites engrave 
deeply upon our hearts our consecration, and 
let us frequently revive and review that consecration 
that the cares of life do not obliterate it to any degree. 

But these two exhortations and two responses were 
still not enough for Joshua, for a third time, as still 
further and more deeply impressing the lesson, he exhorted 
them not only to put away all thought of idolatry, 
but, on the other hand, to incline their hearts 
to the Lord. It is after we have become God's people 
through justifying faith, after he has called us no 
longer servants, but sons, that he speaks to us, saying, 
"My son give me thine heart." To give the heart 
to the Lord means a full consecration of the will and 
hence of every hope, ambition and interest; and this 
is really the only way in which we can assure ourselves 
that no form of worldly idolatry will have any 
place in our lives. If we merely attempt to serve 
the Lord in an outward way ceremoniously and nominally, 
it will be but a little while until insidiously 
the world, the flesh and the Adversary will draw our 
attention and energies away from the Lord to various 
things, entangling them in various earthly alliances 
and worships that will mean spiritual poverty 
and luke-warmness, if not absolute coldness of heart 
towards the Lord. Let us, therefore, like those addressed 
by Joshua, reach a positive decision once for 
all; and whatever it may cost and however seductive 
and beautiful the service and worship of self or Mammon 
may appear to us, let us, in view of the experiences 
of the past and the promises which reach into 
the future, decide that we will serve the Lord; not 
waiting for him to raise his hands in judgments and 
denunciations, but listening for his voice that we may 
know his will and do it. 

There were three witnesses to this contract or covenant. 
The first was the people themselves who would 
now long remember this covenant thrice repeated. 
The second was Joshua's declaration, in connection 
probably with the tables of the Law, that Israel's 
covenant was renewed by statute and ordinance— that 
the original covenant of Sinai had been ratified, reaffirmed. 
The third witness was a monumental stone 
which he "erected under an oak" [or oak grove] that 
was about [near] the sanctuary of the Lord. This 



also would be a witness to them of what they had done 
—of their pledge to the Lord in the presence of 
Joshua. So it is well for the Lord's spiritual people 
to do more than merely make a covenant or agreement 
with the Lord in their hearts and minds. That 
decision of the mind is important first; but it needs 
besides helps, such for instance, as a confession of it 
before the fellow members of the body of Christ, the 
Church; and it needs some memorial of it, as for instance 
in the baptismal memorial of consecration unto 
death. 

Because of our weaknesses through the fall, and 
because of the seductions of the Adversary and the 
world, we need to hedge about the new creature and 
its good resolutions so that we may be strong in the 
Lord and in the power of his might. Let every true 
Israelite adopt the words of Joshua "As for me and 
my house, we will serve the Lord," and as this would 
mean no light matter for himself so, also, it should 
be no meaningless phrase as respects his household; 
it should mean that his children shall be trained in 
the nurture and admonition of the Lord; it should 
mean that minor children shall not be allowed to rule 
the house nor to discredit parents outside the home, 
but that the parental influence exercised in kindness, 
in love and in firmness, shall seek to bring the children 
of each family so far as possible into covenant 
relationship to the Lord, instructing them in the way 
of the Lord, both by precept and example. 



R3095 : page 315 

WE ARE NOT IGNORANT OF HIS DEVICES. 

THE FOLLOWING extracts from a letter in 

which one dear Sister in Christ relates to 

another her temptation of the Adversary 

along Christian Science lines will be interesting, and 

we trust profitable, to many of our readers. She 

writes: 

"My dear mother seemed always to 'hunger and 
thirst after righteousness.' She was so glad to know 
and understand every word of truth as it was brought 
to her, and rested in it. She used to say, It is all 
perfect peace now.' That was after you were gone. She 
had never read any of the Dawns except the first volume 
and part of the fifth. I read part of the second to 
her, but it was only just the beginning. I cannot be 
glad enough that it was given her to know so much 
of the blessed truth in the short time that she had 
left; yet I have thought that if she had never known 
she might have been living even now in that same 
tired, almost hopeless way. Indeed the doctor blames 
the truth entirely, and has been very bitter against it 



R3095 : page 316 

and all our people ever since. When mamma was 
taken down sick she was not nearly so bad as usual, 
but she did not seem to change much, either for better 
or worse for a long time. One day the doctor 
called me into the parlor and said: 'I do not know 
what to make of your mother's case; unless she can 
be aroused to exert herself and try to throw off the 
disease she will run down very fast, and nothing can 
then be done for her. She seems bright and cheerful, 
but she has no power of resistance in herself, or 
else she is not trying to live. I am doing all I can; 
if you know any way to arouse her you can do more 
for her than any of us.' 

"After he went away I told mother just what he 
had said. She replied: 'That is not so: I am trying 
to get well; but it must be just as the Lord wills, he 
knows best.' The doctor had told me that had it 
not been for her strong will she could not have lived 
through several previous bad attacks (she said she 
must get well for the sake of her children), and it was 
now so different! This time when I reminded her 
that the children needed her more than ever, she said: 
'The Lord knows best what they need, and I will be 
with them as long as he pleases.' 

"Years before I had heard some people— and intelligent 
ones, too— argue that any strong willed person 
could not only keep another alive for years, but 
could even raise the dead by sheer force of will. Isn't 
that a crazy idea? Well, just then I would have believed 
anything; I became simply possessed with the 
thought that since the Lord would not help her I could 
and would, if only my strength would hold out until 
spring. 

"For months I never left her room except for a 
few minutes at a time, not even going down stairs to 
meals for days in succession; I just took a cup of 
coffee in the hall, and sometimes I would not leave 
even for that. Of course, I used every means in my 
power; giving her medicine regularly until the doctor 
told me to leave them off as her stomach was too weak 
for them to have any beneficial effect. I spent a great 
deal of time rubbing her until she became so sensitive 
that she could not bear that; but when those terrible 
cramps or sharp pains came in different parts of 
the body, they were stopped almost instantly if I laid 
my hand on her. I could put her to sleep in less than 
two minutes by putting my hand on her head, or by 
taking hold of her hand, and she slept just as long 
as I sat beside her even if I removed my hand; but 
if I left the room she was awake instantly. One day 
she told me it made her nervous for me to look at 
her, so I went over on the other side of the room to 
sit. In a few minutes she called me to come back because 



she felt so strange if she could not see me all 

the time. I was almost afraid to think of other things 

for fear of forgetting my purpose even for a moment. 

"After a while she began to think that something 
was not just right, and said so; but for a time 
she was puzzled not knowing what to make of it. 
One day she said, I could die so easy if you would 
only let me!' Another time she said, 'The Lord is 
going to take me anyway, but if you would only let 
me go it would be so much easier. I did the same 
thing with your father and kept him alive and suffering 
for weeks, knowing that it was resisting the 
Lord's will; but he took him at last in spite of all I 
could do, and it will be the same with you.' Of 
course, I pretended not to understand her, but I was 
never so frightened in all my life, nor so determined 
to have my own way whatever came of it. So I did 
not lie down day nor night for three weeks, for fear 
of getting sleepy; and I did not dare to feel tired during 
all this time. The doctor came regularly every 
day, but he gave no medicine; he would inquire how 
she had passed the night and all about her; once he 
told a funny story to make her laugh, and said to me, 
'Keep right on as you are doing, she is getting along 
splendidly.' And she really seemed to be doing so, 
and she grew strong enough to sit up and talk and 
read, and even walked a few steps one day. At last 
the doctor said: If you could hold out two weeks 

R3096 : page 316 

longer we shall have her out of doors, and she will 
soon be as strong as ever, once she gets out into the 
air, and you can have a long rest' I said I was not 
tired— did not believe in resting, etc. He wanted to 
know if I was not a Christian Scientist; I said, 'No; 
of all silly things Christian Science is the worst; every 
one of those people must have softening of the brain.' 
'Well,' said he, 'you are the queerest person I ever 
saw; what do you believe?' I answered, 'I am too 
busy to think about beliefs.' 

"About that time came your letter in which you 
spoke of the high calling, and of consecration as the 
giving up of your own wills entirely to the Lord. 
You seemed to think it a duty as well as a privilege 
for those who saw it,— but it seemed to me that I 
had never so much need of my own will as just then; 
—for two weeks longer to get mother out. I thought 
if your letter had only come two weeks later, when 
she would be strong enough to get along without 
me it would have been all right; for as she gained 
strength I let her help herself, only watching her all 
the time so as to be ready to help her whenever she 
needed me. I never forgot that she was my mother, 
and that I had no right to have any influence over her 
actions, only while it was necessary to help her during 



her great weakness. That was the way I looked 
at it; besides, I had begun to be tired as the strain 
grew less. I was so excited over that letter of yours 
that mamma noticed it and asked about it; so I read 
her that part of it where you spoke of angry parents 
being 'imitators of God as dear children' by torturing 
their children with red-hot pokers, etc. ! How 
we both laughed over that! But for the rest— What 
if the Lord wanted to show that his way was different 
from mine, and should undo all of my work (for I 
certainly thought that it was all my own doing) ! On 
the other hand, he might take his own way anyhow. 
He was stronger than I, and could do it, that I knew. 
I studied then as I had never done before— mostly 
the Bible— to see if there was not some promise or 
something else which gave us the right to demand 
certain things in return for service. You know, how 
discouraging such a search as that would be! The 

R3096 : page 317 

verse 'Like as a father pitieth his children' reminded 
me so much of my own dear father, with whom I 
should have been glad to leave everything;— and 
the matter was decided. 

"Mamma knew the difference from the first, 
though I never told her in words, and she was so glad 
and so satisfied. Our dear Father and his precious 
promises— our blessed hope— she could not talk 
enough of these things; but she grew so much weaker 
that she could not bear to have anything read to 
her, so I used to read and tell her just a few words 
at a time; even talking made her head ache and I 
could do nothing for her after that time. Yet she was 
so patient and contented (though she suffered all the 
time); still we thought it was the bad, rainy weather, 
and I never thought that the Lord's will was so different 
from mine until it was too late to change. 
Then I was sure that I had done wrong in order to 
selfishly secure what I had thought would be peace 
with God,— that in abandoning my self-will I had deliberately 
sacrificed a human life, which was a blessing 
to and needed by others, and which could not be recalled! 
Has not Satan the strangest way of helping 
us to reason backwards, and twisting things out of 
place until one can not tell right from wrong? During 
the day all was confusion, but at night the house 
was quiet, and there was time for study and prayer. 
The dear Lord showed me so plainly that all these 
things were in his hands, not mine, and you know 
how close he will come when we are anxious only to 
know and to do his will. Romans 8 made so clear that 
which was partly explained in the very letter that had 
seemed to cause so much trouble in the beginning. 
Since then I can truly say, 

"This is my heart's sincere desire (to be) 



Nearer my God to Thee." 
I am so glad to leave everything in his care. Perhaps 
one reason is that I have had no great temptation 
to do otherwise since; but I am not looking 
ahead for temptations, only trusting for today. When 
I think of all the dear Lord has done and has promised 
it seems almost too much!" 

R3095 : page 317 

THE MORN IS COMING. 

Our age's sphere of light, 
Though widening still, is walled around by night; 
With slow, reluctant eye, the Church has read, 
Skeptic at heart, the lesson of its Head.— Whittier. 



Despite the light that cheers the world today, 
Shadows surround us, on our heavenward way, 
And Error darkens Truth's celestial ray. 

Not yet the beams, whose radiant splendors dart 
From the fair realms of Science and of Art, 
With equal glory shine from soul and heart: 

Men worship golden calves and serpents still; 
Like cringing slaves bow to their masters' will- 
Obey the letter, but the spirit kill; 

Still tremble at the Priest's uplifted rod, 
For fear that he may doom them, by a nod, 
To endless hell-fire in the name of God. 

False prophets still the wrath of Heaven provoke; 
And hypocrite, and Pharisee, and rogue, 
Sit in high places in the synagogue. 

As sheep disguised, wolves still make sheep their prey; 
The blind still lead the blind the downward way; 
And sneaking Judases their Lord betray. 

Still is assailed the free soul that aspires; 
Still persecution feeds her smoldering fires; 
And still, to murder Truth, are leagued the Liars. 

Still everywhere a selfish spirit rules- 
Men herd themselves in squabbling sects and schools, 
And deem dissenting brethren knaves or fools; 

Still hack their heads with dull, polemic swords, 
Fan the fierce flames of hate with windy words, 
And take the Devil's plaudits for the Lord's. 

The world, which God gave to his children all, 



They parcel into sections, large or small, 

And round each petty church "patch" build a wall; 

Shout their strange shibboleths and battle cries, 
Assert pre-emption title to the skies, 
And curse him as a heathen who denies. 

Thus bigotry and sect intolerance 
Sharpen the infidel's else harmless lance, 
And cause the Devil's imps for joy to dance! 

Thank God! Religion is a plant that grows: 

Its perfect flower perennially blows, 

More fragrant and more fair than Sharon's rose. 

It yet shall rise from out the sloughs and swamps, 
Shed from its shining leaves the dungeon damps, 
Break every bond that yet its free growth cramps! 

Methinks I see it rising and expand! 
Its mighty branches arching every land, 
From Zembla's snows to India's sunny strand. 

Upward, forever up, I see it rise, 
Flashing resplendent glory on our eyes, 
Until its crown is lost within the skies. 

And there, beneath this everlasting tree, 
This Tree of Life and Human Destiny, 
I see the nations gather, bond and free, 

Gentile and Jew, of every clime and race- 
God's children all— and standing face to face, 
Own but one God, their Father, and embrace! 

Then, only then, will men indeed be free, 
Then will the Golden Age we dream of be, 
And Jesus Christ reign universally. 

—Charles W. Hubner. 



R3096 : page 318 

"A VESSEL UNTO HONOR, SANCTIFIED." 

"If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel 
unto honor, sanctified and made meet for the Master's use, 
and prepared unto every good work."— 2 Tim. 2:21. 

IT IS IMPORTANT to notice that this instruction 

is given, not to the world, but to the 

Church— to those who are believers in 

Christ and who are consecrated to him and desirous 

of being used in his service. If the counsel were 

given to worldly people, no such incentive would be 



held out; for such have no ambition to be in the 

Lord's service. The world can better appreciate such 

maxims as, "Honesty is the best policy," etc.; for 

temporal good is all they seek. Yet it is indeed a good 

thing for worldly men to purge themselves of evil dispositions 

and practices. Moral reforms are always 

commendable as steps in the right direction, and we 

are always glad to see worldly men trying to 

break away from the bondage of bad habits— from the 

drink habit and from lying, profanity and other vices. 

But such purging from the filth of the flesh can 
never render such vessels fit for the Master's use. 
With all their efforts at cleansing they are still unclean; 
and the Lord desires clean vessels for his 
use. It is only when, by faith, we are plunged in the 
cleansing blood of our Redeemer that we are clean 
and acceptable to God. 

"There is a fountain filled with blood 

Drawn from Immanuel's veins; 
And sinners plunged beneath that flood, 
Lose all their guilty stains." 

But having been thus reckonedly cleansed from sin, 
and clothed in the pure robe of Christ's righteousness, 
it is all-important that we strive to make this 
reckoned righteousness an actual thing to the extent 
of our ability; for only so can we prove ourselves 
worthy of the imputed righteousness. It is purely of 
divine grace that we are reckoned of God as righteous, 
before we have actually become so. Seeing in us the 
desire to be righteous and the effort to be so in his 
appointed way, God, accepting the will for the deed, 
reckons us righteous now, and treats us as sons, since 
we have been redeemed from the curse and have accepted 
this gracious provision for reconciliation. 

If, however, after being thus reconciled to God and 
reckoned righteous, our course of conduct proves 
that we no longer love righteousness; if we do not 
endeavor to make the reckoned righteousness an actual 
thing by a constant endeavor to purge out the old 
leaven of sin; if we are content to let it remain and to 
work in us, and if we neglect to strive against it, then 
we are proving by such a course that our love of 
righteousness is growing weaker, and we are proving 
our unworthiness of the Lord's gracious reckoning 
in our favor. But if, on the contrary, we are striving 
daily to purge out the old leaven of sin, if we are not 
merely working it down occasionally and allowing 
it again and again to ferment and disturb the whole 
spiritual being, endangering its complete souring and 
spoiling (but purging it out by constantly resisting 
it) cleansing our thoughts, words and deeds with the 
truth, and cultivating the blessed fruits of the spirit 
of love, joy and peace,— then, indeed, as the Apostle 
affirms, we shall be vessels meet for the Master's use. 

And not only so, but the Lord can honor such vessels 
because they honor him; they fairly represent 



him and his cause. If they are meek and humble-minded, 
not inclined to think of themselves more 
highly than they ought to think, but to think soberly, 
the Lord can exalt them to positions of trust and 
honor without injury either to themselves or to the 
cause; and thus they are more and more sanctified 
and prepared for every good work. 

Let as many, therefore, as would be honored and 
used of the Master now and hereafter— as many as 
have this hope in them— seek to purify themselves, 
to purge out the old leaven of sin. In the language of 
another forceful illustration, let us endeavor to war 
a good warfare against the world, the flesh and the 
devil. And be assured that in these duties we have 
the work of a lifetime; and even at its close we will 
still find the necessity for the robe of Christ's righteousness 
to cover the remaining deformities of our 
character. 

While the purging here spoken of refers to the 
general cleansing from all sin and uncleanness, the 
Apostle had special reference on that occasion to 
purging from a disposition to hearken to the false 
doctrines of those who would subvert the faith of the 
Church. His counsel is to avoid foolish questions and 
strife about words to no profit; to shun profane and 
vain babblings which increase only unto more ungodliness, 
which savor more of bombast and self-exaltation 
than of truth and godliness, and, on the contrary, 
to study to show ourselves approved unto God, workmen 

R3097 : page 318 

that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the 
Word of truth.-2 Tim. 2:15. 

There is much significance in that word "study"; 
and only the studious find the narrow way to the divine 
approval and acceptance. Study to show thyself 
approved— study the doctrine; study your course of 
conduct, to keep it in harmony with the doctrine. 
Study how to promote the peace and prosperity of 
Zion, and how to shield yourself and others from the 
missiles of error and from the poison of an evil, 
worldly spirit. Study to perform the duties of a faithful 
soldier of the cross— the seemingly insignificant, 
as well as the bravest and noblest deeds. A soldier 
has many seemingly trivial duties to perform, and he 
is as really doing his duty as a soldier when 
he is polishing his armor, foraging, cooking his meal, 
cleaning camp, clearing the way or building bridges 
for the army to pass as when he is fighting the enemy. 
All such necessary incidental work is entirely compatible 
with his commission as a soldier, and is not to 
be considered "entanglements" or hindrances. And 
these things cannot be avoided or carelessly done 
without a measure of unfaithfulness. 

So with the Christian soldier. The routine of life, 



house-work, daily toil, any and everything incidental 

to a proper and honest provision of "things needful" 

for ourselves and those dependent on us for support, 

as well as provision for the prosecution and care of 

the Lord's work,— all this is a proper part of our engagement 

as soldiers of the Lord. The Apostle Peter 

was as truly serving the Lord when catching the fish 

from whose mouth he got the coin wherewith to pay 

the Lord's taxes and his own, as when proclaiming, 

The Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. The 

R3097 : page 319 

Apostle Paul was as truly a soldier of the cross and 
doing his proper work as such when making tents 
(rather than be chargeable to any) as when, at Mars 
hill, he preached Jesus and the resurrection. Whatever 
is done with a view to the glory of our Lord, the Captain 
of our salvation, or for the benefit of any of our 
fellow-soldiers, or for our own preparation for this 
warfare, or in the discharge of obligations which our 
Captain has recognized and approved,— this is proper 
work for us as soldiers, and not entanglement in the 
affairs of this life. 

But the Christian soldier must study to perform 
even the commonest duties in a manner creditable to 
his calling. Nor must he permit himself to become 
entangled with other things which do not relate to his 
duties as a soldier, and thus to be side-tracked. For 
instance, if a soldier knowing how to repair watches 
were to divert his attention from his regular duties, 
neglect his camp and battle duties, and the commands 
of his Captain and the proper work of a soldier to 
acquire some extra compensation by this means, he 
would be an unfaithful soldier. And so the Christian 
who turns aside to seek some personal, temporal advantage, 
to the detriment of his duties as a soldier, 
is likewise, to some extent, an unfaithful soldier and 
likely to be drawn out of the ranks entirely. 

Study to show thyself approved. Study the Word. 
Study yourself that you may become well acquainted 
with yourself— that you may know your talents for 
service and in what directions they lie, and your weak 
points and how they may be guarded against; that 
you may know both your abilities and your shortcomings. 
Then study to avoid error and to shun all foolish 
questions and profane and vain babblings. Remember 
that only the foundation of God standeth 
sure, and that all other foundations are worthless 
and all other theories must come to naught. But 
"The foundation of God standeth sure, having this 
seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And let 
every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from 
iniquity."— 2 Tim. 2:19. 

And if any man desire honor from God, let him 
not fail to seek it in God's appointed way— along the 



pathway of humility; for the Lord giveth his favors 
to the humble. If you would be a vessel fit for the 
Master's use and a vessel of honor, humble yourself 
under the mighty hand of God and he will exalt you 
in due time. Do not be in a hurry about it either; 
but whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy 
might, beginning and ever continuing to cleanse your 
earthen vessel, that it may be fit for the Master's use. 



R3097 : page 319 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Dear Brother: 

I drop you a line to inform you that Pilgrim Brother 
Hay has been here and has done us all good. We held two 
meetings, one a Bible study and the other a sermon on the 
resurrection, both of which were instructive and edifying. 
The meetings were held in the house I occupy. I presume 
Brother Hay has written you telling you of our 
meeting. 

At present and for the last couple of weeks two Colporteurs 
are in Belfast canvassing for the Dawns. They report 
having made satisfactory progress thus far. I do hope 
they will be successful in finding quite a number of hearing 
ears. We meet at my home on Sundays, and spend our 
time in praise, prayer and searching of the Scriptures, thus 
confirming our faith in the good things of the Kingdom. 

I am hoping and trusting that before long others will 
come into the light of the truth and rejoice with us. 

I have received the New Bible cuts or pictures for which 
I thank you, I did not expect any such addition. The Bible 
is proving very helpful and I prize it more every day. The 
friends in the Truth here all desire to be remembered to 
you in warmest regards. 

I am still rejoicing in the love of God and trying day by 
day to keep in the race toward the mark for the prize of the 
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. 

Your Brother in Christ, 

JAMES BRIGHT,-Ireland. 

Dear Brother Russell: 

I have just returned from a two weeks' trip to Dublin, 
Belfast, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Middlesboro and Leeds, and 
last Sunday, London. In every place I met with the same 
loving feelings of gratitude to God for present truth, and 
of appreciation of your loving service to the Church. Every 
church sends you loving greetings, and the assurance that 
they hope the Lord's providences will permit your visiting 
this side some day. As I told you once before, so I repeat 
it that I believe nobody on earth has so many people who 
love them as yourself, and I voice the expression of all the 



churches here in my own feelings of gratitude to yourself 
for your labors for us all. God bless you Brother Russell, 
and may you to its complete fulness realize the meaning 
of those words, "For as much as ye have done it to the least 
of one of these my brethren ye have done it unto me." 

I never met with such a reception in my life as the Glasgow 
Church gave me— 15 of them at the station to greet me, 
and in every hand a "Watch Tower." It is very hard to 
leave the churches here. My meetings ranged in size from 3 
at Middlesboro to 200 at Glasgow. It seems to me that there 
is a wonderful work going on here. The "wheat" seems 
coming out far faster than on the American side. I 
could have found many more little groups to visit had I 
had the time. 

With loving regards to yourself and all the Allegheny 
household, 

Your Brother in Christ, 

W. HOPE HAY,-England. 

page 319 

Dear Brother Russell: 

Greetings! Jesus Christ the same, yesterday, today and 
forever. It is with a sense of deep gratitude of heart that 
I pen these few lines; the privilege that is imparted to us of 
constantly feeding upon the meat that is being given us in 
due season, is so great that we can only say, "What shall we 
render unto the Lord for all his goodness unto us?" Only 
do as Paul tells us: "Present your bodies a living sacrifice 
unto the Lord." The joy of knowing that our eyes have 
been opened and our ears unstopped; that we should see this 
wondrous plan of God, is past expressing in words. It is 
needless to tell you how I appreciate the colporteur work, 
although somewhat frail in health; it is the heart that God 
will look at. When I look back upon my past life I see that 
the paths in which God has led me were, although not always 
pleasant, good for the forming of the character that is 
so necessary, for the reaching of the mark for the High Calling 
O joy unspeakable when we think upon these things 
that are so pure and holy and beautiful! What are we that 
the Lord should be so mindful of us? The only way will be 
for us to know as much as we can and to be able to give a 
reasonable answer for the hope that is within us. Once again 
thanking you and also praising the Lord that through you 
and your fellow workers we are constantly receiving such 
splendid instruction, I remain, with Christian love, 
Yours in the one hope, 
A. FOSTER, -England. 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. NOVEMBER 1, 1902. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

Insanity of the Doukhobors 323 

"Away from Rome" Movement 

in England 325 

Jewish Woes in Roumania 325 

Our General Conventions 326 

The Blight of Sin and Its Only 

Cure 327 

He Gave Them Judges 330 

Who Is Worthy? 331 

They Also Have Erred Through 

Wine 333 

Interesting Questions Answered 334 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



VOLUNTEER MATTER SENT PREPAID. 

It is our intention that the Volunteer matter shall always 
go to destination prepaid, and this is our contract 
with the printer who is shipping them for us. Should you 
at any time be charged for the transportation you will now 
know that it is a mistake, and will please advise us at once 



that we may have the error corrected. 

PRICES OF DAWNS UNIFORM. 

The special prices on Dawns to our subscribers and to 
colporteurs is to permit them to make expenses and still 
to sell the cloth-bound edition in all volumes and languages 
at 35 cents each— and no more,— except when sold in 
small out-of-the-way places where they cannot be had by 
freight, and must therefore cost additional for mail or express 
charges, when the price shall be 45 cents and not more. 
These terms apply to the United States and Canada, and 
any orders received henceforth will be understood to be 
based upon these terms. (Canadian colporteurs will be 
allowed the proper amount of the customs duty to permit 
them to conform to this rule.) We are convinced that the 
sale of the Dawns at so low a price will inure to the general 
advantage of the cause we serve, and the wholesale rate is 
based on this belief: the foreign translations and larger 
English volumes are supplied considerably below cost. 



R3097 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
INSANITY OF THE DOUKHOBORS. 



VARIOUS are the forms of insanity or mental 
unbalance. The whole world of mankind is 
mentally unbalanced some to one degree 
some to another degree, as the result of original sin 
and its death sentence which assails all the energies 
—mental and moral as well as physical. All are not 
wicked to the same degree or in the same manner. 
Some are insanely jealous, some insanely cruel, some 
insanely covetous or selfish, and the Doukhobors 
furnish an illustration of insane unselfishness. The 
lesson is that none of us have good sense enough to 
direct our own courses. All need the divine aid provided 
for us in the Word of God. Those who do 
accept this divine guidance by full consecration and 
submission to the holy spirit are Scripturally said to 
possess "the spirit of a sound mind," and to be 
"wise" with a wisdom which cometh from above. 
It will be remembered that about three years ago 
the public press gave detailed accounts of the arrival 
in Canada of about 4,000 Russian peasants styled 
Doukhobors, who were emigrating on account of 
their religious convictions— refusal to serve in the 
Russian army, etc., etc. Next we learned that they 
were in conflict with Canadian marriage laws because 



R3098 : page 323 

averse to perpetual marriage obligations and ceremonies. 

Now we learn that their false conceptions 

of liberty have taken a new form and that they have 

concluded that it is not right to deprive horses and 

cattle of their liberty, making them servants and menial 

slaves. In consequence their fields are idle and 

their good harvests unreaped while their horses and 

cattle disport themselves at liberty. Consequently 

many are likely to die of privation during the approaching 

winter. Truly conscience is a dangerous 

thing unless instructed by God's Word and thus 

guided by the spirit of a sound mind. Concerning 

these people and their troubles we give some extracts 

below. 

The Boston Transcript remarks that it is "a religious 
mania, the like of which has perhaps never 
been seen in this country," and continues:— 

"Fully four thousand Doukhobors, who settled in the 
Yorkton district, Northwest Territory, will starve or 
freeze to death, or be on the verge of starvation this year, if 
the Dominion Government does not take active steps to prevent 
their present religious mania from going further.... 
Nearly every one of the Doukhobors seen was clad in the 
lightest of cotton garments. They would afford no protection 
from an October breeze, to say nothing of a severe 
winter blast; and they say they will wear no other. In 
many of the houses visited a bag of flour was the only food 
visible. The Doukhobors will eat a few vegetables; but in 
few instances had they even brought them into their homes. 
Men originally strong were gaunt, hungry wrecks; and on a 
recent trip into Yorkton for flour a dozen big men, harnessed 
like mules to a heavy wagon, almost fell by the roadside 
through exhaustion and starvation. The women, so 
far, have escaped any of the work that must fall on the men 
since they have discarded the use of animals; but, if this 
year's crop is to be harvested, they will soon have to harness 
themselves up to the heavy wagons as the men do. 
They have made absolutely no provision for the future; and, 
what is perhaps worse, the religious mania that possesses 
them is becoming more intense and is spreading. The attempt 
by the Dominion Government to help these people has 
apparently had no effect. How it will end will probably be 
told when the intense cold of that district sets in." 

The London Morning Journal says of this 
matter:— 

"These 'maniacs' are apparently simply a gentle Christian 
sect who have been suddenly seized with the question which 
Buddhists answered trenchantly enough many a century 
ago. Asking themselves by what right they dared to exploit 
any living and sentient creature with capacities of pleasure 
and independence as great as their own, they became strict 
vegetarians. But the Russian idealist is capable of a fierce 
consistency. Be he tyrant or nihilist, Tolstoyan or Doukhobor, 
he makes no pact with ideas. Having ceased to slay 



animals for food, the Doukhobors could find no sanction for 

R3098 : page 324 

subjecting them to the servitude and mutilation of the farmyard. 

They released their horses and cattle, renounced eggs 

and milk, wool and leather, and now they are attempting 

to live on bread and water— clad, we suppose, in cotton. 

It is a hardy enterprise, but, unless indeed, like Pythagoras, 

they have scruples about beans, there is no reason 

why they should fare worse than the millions of good Buddhists 

who even strain water lest there should be life in it." 

Quite true, millions of Buddhists died in the recent 
famine in India, refusing to eat animal food— the 
animals starving also. We regret to note a similar 
delusion and false conception of holiness creeping in 
amongst "Vegetarians";— a disposition to consider 
the eating of meat "unclean" and "unholy"; a disposition 
to consider themselves superior to meat-eaters, 
and to despise them;— to call them "cannibalistic," 
etc. We offer no objection to those who claim that 
they have better health as a result of a purely vegetable 
diet: it is every man's duty to supply to his 
system the diet which will in his judgment yield the 
largest degree of comfort and efficiency in his case. 
But we do object to the claim of special sanctity and 
acceptableness with God on account of a purely vegetable 
diet. Those who take that position are distinctly 
setting themselves up as wiser than God, and holier 
than our Lord Jesus who not only ate animal food 
(lamb and fish at least) but who miraculously created 
fish for food. (John 6:11; 21:6-11.) The inspired 
Apostle "bound" the question and settled it (Matt. 16:19; 
18:18; Acts 15:28,29): the Apostle Paul declaring: 
"Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in 
the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving 
heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils; 
...forbidding to marry and commanding to abstain 
from meats which God created to be received 
with thanksgiving by them that believe and know the 
truth." (I Tim. 4:1-4.) Realizing man's natural unsoundness 
of judgment, Christians should "not lean 
to their own understanding" but should seek the wisdom 
of God, and nowhere is this wisdom better illustrated 
than in him who was "holy, harmless and 
separate from sinners." Whatever our Master did 
and taught it would be blasphemy for us as his disciples 
to call wrong or sinful for us or for others. 

Mr. A. St. John, an Englishman who became 
converted to Tolstoyan philosophy instead of Christianity, 
and who recently visited America in the interest 
of the Doukhobors, gives his views of their 
present craze in the "Midland Herald" (England) as 
follows:— 

"The time of emigration, of change of circumstances, of 
unsettlement and resettlement, proved to be a perhaps severer 



strain on the character of these peasants than all their 
sufferings in the Caucasus and Siberia. They were worn 
out to some extent, I think, in body and spirit, and they 
came into circumstances where the work was new to them, 
and they came into an atmosphere— well, perhaps where a 
little materialism prevailed. At one time some of them 
seemed lazy and unreliable— and then some of them seemed 
to become demoralized and materialized. There were cases 
of quarreling and fault-finding here and there. The leading 
men were mostly in Siberia. The state of affairs was 
lamented. I don't know what has come over our people. 
They are quite changed. If only we had our Siberian exiles 
here; then it would be quite different.' This is the sort of 
thing I heard occasionally. Many were sad and ashamed. 

"But the old spirit was there still. And now it has revived, 
I think. And I suppose that, in reaction from the 
period of materialism, has come a time of heightened spirituality 
(what shall we call it?). Some have gone to great 
extremes. One letter told me of a man who had fasted 
thirty-six days, and was not expected to live. But for the 
most part it has been evident from their letters that they 
have been for some time quietly and carefully thinking out 
the problems of living in their present surroundings while 
fulfilling the highest demands of conscience. Thus, tho 
some feel inclined to give up milk and butter, yet they do 
not want their children and old and sick folk to suffer in 
consequence. And while they feel compunction in making 
animals work for them, those same animals whom they can 
see enjoying so immensely the free life on the prairie, yet 
they do not wish to sell them to others, nor by giving up old 
habits too suddenly, or too wholesale, to entail suffering on 
the weak, or unpreparedness for emergency... 

"What I want to impress upon people here is that these 
are— a great many of them at least— thinking peasantry. 
They are not all the same. That is one of the points in 
which I am so proud of them. They have their conservative 
old stagers and their moderates and their progressives. 
They have their formalists and their broad freethinkers. 
And they are human, oh, so human! Of course the Canadians 
don't understand them. But if the Canadian Government 
goes on with the kind and sympathetic forbearance 
that it has hitherto pursued, and if we will wait and watch 
what comes of it all, we may learn a lot." 

"Let your moderation be known unto all men," 
says the Apostle. A live conscience needs to be 
"taught of God" in order that moderation and not 
mental unbalance shall result. The truth in its purity 
will seem erratic enough to worldly people who cannot 
comprehend it, and every other peculiarity should 
be carefully avoided. Conscientious blunders are 
amongst the most injurious. Note the mistaken conscientious 
conviction of Saul of Tarsus that he ought 
to persecute Christians. Note also the claim of Seventh 
Day Adventists that they must work on the first 
day of the week if they would have divine approval 
and everlasting life. As an illustration of a misguided 



conscience and its baneful effect in social affairs 
we mention the case of an editor's wife. She at one 
time took pleasure in assisting him in his work. By 
and by a deluded and misguided conscience told her 
that God wished her to be editor in chief and publish 
what she pleased. When the editor demurred that 
he dare not abandon his stewardship, the deluded 
conscience told its owner that she should no longer 
co-operate, but more, that she should break her marriage 
covenant in deserting her husband and home, 
and that she should say all manner of evil against him 
falsely, until such time as he would yield to her the 
liberties of the journal— which her conscience told her 
was God's will. 

The moral of all such lessons is, "Be not wise 
above what is written." "Study to show thyself approved 
unto God, a workman that needeth not to be 
ashamed,— rightly dividing the Word of truth." 

R3099 : page 325 

"AWAY FROM ROME" MOVEMENT IN ENGLAND. 



The Fortnightly Review contains an article from 
the pen of Rev. Arthur Galton, a clergyman of the 
Church of England, who formerly went over to the 
Roman Catholic communion but returned. Rev. Galton 
in serious vein declares "that he has been made 
the spokesman for one hundred and fifty secular clergymen" 
of the Roman Catholic church, pledged "to 
work jointly as a corporate body, by constitutional 
means and through canonical methods, for the reformation 
they desire" in the Roman Catholic Church 
and its "unlawful authority." He declares: "It is 
obvious to everyone who studies history with an impartial 
mind, that the English people and the Roman 
court are incompatible," and adds:— 

"Between the Norman conquest and the middle of the 
fourteenth century, when our rulers generally were strong, 
when our sense of a national and an independent life was 
growing, that incompatibility and the friction caused by it 
are manifest in contemporary annals. The grievances then 
complained of were dealt with by legislation in the century 
that followed. These grievances, to sum them up shortly, 
were all attributed to the misgovernment, the cupidity, and 
the ever-growing usurpations of the Roman court. Some of 
our forefathers entered the Christian Church with a grateful 
and generous devotion for the Roman bishops, which 
continued until their sentimental affection was destroyed by 
the scandalous reality. Their practical experience of the 
methods and officials of the Roman court forced them to 
repudiate its authority, for political, financial and ethical 
reasons. In spirit, in aims, in methods and institutions, the 
English people and that narrow oligarchy of Italians, which 



pretends to be the Catholic Church, are by their respective 

qualities necessarily opposed to one another. Religious 

questions enter much less into the mutual estrangement between 

Rome and England than most theological controversialists 

imagine. Numerous and flagrant individual cases, 

as well as the general effects of the Roman system in political 

and ecclesiastical affairs, must compel serious thinkers 

to ask themselves whether the Papal Government, as such, 

has any religion at all, except in phrases; or whether it can 

have had any, as a corporate institution, since the pontificate 

of Nicholas the First. The most prominent and abiding 

impression conveyed by the papacy, since the ninth 

century, is that it has been a political and financial organization 

masquerading in a theological disguise for the attainment 

of temporal domination." 

"The writer and his friends see no hope of a reform by 
any ordinary means. Their plan is to combine, and to act 
together. They do not wish to make a new sect, nor do 
they wish to be merged into the Church of England. They 
intend to set up a bishop of their own, the validity of whose 
orders cannot be challenged by the papal theologians, or 
doubted by any Catholic. They wish to work still among 
and for their own people. The details for this are all arranged. 
For the lawfulness of this course, they appeal to 
ancient precedent and to the regulations of canon law. It is 
admitted, as they argue, that in a case of necessity, if lawful 
requests be denied by the existing authorities, the sufferers 
may provide an alternative authority for themselves. Few 
people, who know and face the facts, can deny the existence 
of grave abuses, which are a danger to faith and morals, as 
well as a violation of constitutional and canon law. Few, 
probably, can say with any truth that they expect a reformation 
by ordinary means, and through the Curia. The utterances 
of the Pope, the declared policy of his advisers, 
the growth of the religious orders, the whole condition of 
affairs in the Papal Church, proclaim surely a state of necessity. 
This of itself clears the reforming movement from 
that charge of schism to which it might be liable in ordinary 
times. These reformers look upon themselves as 
Englishmen by inheritance and birth, but not quite as 
Englishmen in church affairs. Their attitude, both with 
regard to Rome and Canterbury, is similar to that of certain 
communities in early days who were allowed, without 
any taint of heresy or schism, to be ministered to by their 
own bishop, and not by the local bishops where they happened 
to reside. These reformers, then, propose to establish 
a subsidiary or strangers' bishop. They mean to repudiate 
the jurisdiction of bishops who are merely delegates 
and nominees of the Roman court. By severing themselves 
from the abuses and the usurped authority of that mundane 
organization, they do not abdicate their rights in the Catholic 
Church, they do not give up their reverence for the 
lawful and primatial authority of the Roman bishops, nor 
do they forget the precedence which is due by right to the 
historical position and the long services of their venerable 
See. If the papacy will only accept an unreasonable service, 



and continue to assert an unlawful authority, the 

charges of heresy and schism recoil of necessity upon itself. 

The position of these new reformers, with regard to 

Rome, is precisely the position and attitude of our own reformers 

in the sixteenth century." 

"The reformers, for whom this article is written, have no 
drawing toward these neo-Anglicans, whom they consider 
more Romanized and narrow than the Romans. They bid 
them remember the position, the traditions, and the history 
of the English Church which they appear so strangely to 
have sophisticated or forgotten. They implore them to realize 
that the existing Curia may be broken to pieces, or may 
be broken away from lawfully, but it will never yield to persuasion, 
or grant any constitutional reform. Those who 
know it are compelled to give up all hope of reformation 
and reunion by means of it. Those who have only a theoretical 
imagination of it, who dream about it as an ideal, 
are surely ill-advised and worse, not to profit by the experiences 
and warnings of those who knew it only too well 
through its mundane, arbitrary, scheming, and un-English 
administration." 

JEWISH WOES IN ROUMANIA. 



"It is the time of Jacob's trouble," as the prophets 
foretold. The poor Jews are subjected to tribulations 
in one country after another by so-called 
Christians who are totally ignorant of real Christianity. 
Now it is Roumania that persecutes, and all 
right-minded people are pleased to note that Mr. 
Hay, U.S. Secretary of State, has addressed a communication 
to the great powers of Europe calling attention 
to the fact that the "Berlin Conference" of 
European Powers (1878) created Roumania a separate 
State upon condition that its laws should maintain 
religious liberty, and that this arrangement is 
being violated. Whether the appeal will bear any 

R3099 : page 326 

fruit is doubtful; but it can surely do no harm to thus 
lift up a voice for Justice. 

Concerning the persecutions the Roumanian Bulletin 
(London) says:— 

"These conditions of life, humiliating tho they be, would 
not in themselves have sufficed to render the lot of the Roumanian 
Jews desperate, for it is conceivable that even without 
civil rights and opportunities of culture human beings 
may still manage to live with some degree of comfort. It 
soon became clear to the Roumanian Government, however, 
that a large and increasing unassimilated element in the 
country would inevitably lead to serious social and economic 
complications, and accordingly measures were taken to 
guard against this fresh danger. These measures have had 



for their object the increase of misery and of the difficulties 
of life among the Jews, with the ultimate view of keeping 
their numbers stationary. 

"In pursuance of this terrible policy, almost every form 
of Jewish economic activity has been the subject of restrictive 
legislation aimed ostensibly at aliens in general, but in 
reality affecting only the Jews. They have been expelled 
from the revenue service, the tobacco regime, and the railway 
organization. They are excluded from government 
tenders and contracts. They are placed at the mercy of their 
Christian competitors in trade, who alone are allowed to be 
members of chambers of commerce. Their participation in 
the management of financial corporations and joint-stock 
companies is severely limited. They may not act as brokers 
in any trade, and they and their agents are excluded from 
grain and cattle markets. Their expulsion from the drink 
traffic has ruined thousands of them. It is calculated that 
20,000 were reduced to beggary by the law of 1884, which prohibited 
them from trading as pedlars." 

The Roumanian government evidently desires to 
force the Jews to emigrate, and the Jews are doing 
so as rapidly as possible. On this point the Spectator 
(London) says:— 

"They wish to reach America, but the Americans will not 
receive them unless they can prove that they are not paupers; 
and as they are two hundred thousand in number, the 
collection of the necessary funds is a work of difficulty and 
time. In Roumania they have absolutely no rights, and live 
at the mercy of a population which hates them to such a degree 
that their parliament has declared all Jews to be foreigners, 
altho they have been resident for centuries. 
Neither Germany nor Austria will do anything for them, 
and it seems impossible for Western Europe, which is more 
tolerant, either to protect them or to find them a new 
habitat." 



R3099 : page 326 

OUR GENERAL CONVENTIONS. 

OUR two Annual Conventions (one at Des Moines, 
Iowa, the other at Washington, D.C.) belong 
to the past. The first, held September 13-15, 
served a large western district, and was attended 
chiefly by friends residing in Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota, 
North and South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Arkansas 
and Texas,— the attendance at the largest session 
being about 350. The interest of those present 

R3100 : page 326 

was both deep and fervent, as attested both by words 
and looks. God's blessing was with us, our cup of 
joy and sympathy ran over, and we trust continued to 



do so after our return to our homes, so that the convention's 
joys and blessings reached and is still refreshing 
many times the number privileged to be in 
attendance. Thirty symbolized their consecration by 
water immersion. The convention was addressed by 
a large number of speakers, of one heart and one 
mind. The Christian Church kindly put its meeting 
house at our disposal on the entire day of the baptism 
service, which was preceded by a discourse explanatory 
of its deep import from our standpoint. 

Each Convention seems better than the one previous, 
which at the time seemed so full of divine favor 
as to leave nothing to be desired. The last convention, 
at Washington, was no exception to the general 
rule in this respect: it was the largest we have 
ever had in point of numbers, and so far as we were 
able to judge, a fuller measure of the holy spirit could 
not be looked for ever, in the earthen vessels. Over 
800 attended;— about 550 to 600 of these being from 
abroad— from Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, 
Tennessee, Kentucky, Alabama, Illinois, Kansas, 
California, Georgia, North and South Carolina, 
Virginia, West Virginia, New York, New Jersey, 
Massachusetts, and Ontario. 

The Calvary Baptist Church edifice of Washington 
was kindly put at our disposal for a discourse 
on baptism, which was followed by the immersion of 
45 sisters and 42 brothers, amongst the latter being 
five formerly ministers, one Methodist, one a Second 
Adventist and three Baptists. Two of the latter remarked 
that they had immersed many without understanding 
the true significance of the ceremony or 
of the command back of it. 

Like the Des Moines Convention, this one concluded 
with a Love Feast— though truth to tell the 
sessions throughout were love feasts with the Lord 
through his word and spirit and in prayer and praise. 
The "Pilgrim" brethren, supported by the Elders of 
the local congregation, and by the colporteurs to the 
number of about thirty, bade goodby to the convention 
visitors in general who (about 500) filed past 
them, led by such of the number as were the chosen 
Elders of various congregations, numbering about 
forty. Many eyes were dimmed with tears of joy and 
sympathy, and many lips expressed longing for the 
great Convention mentioned by the Apostle, when all 
the Elect shall meet in glory;— "the General Assembly 
and church of first-borns, whose names are written 
in heaven." Many too were the ejaculations of 
praise for divine blessings upon the eyes of our understanding, 
and of prayer for continued leading and 
instruction in the right ways of the Lord; and "The 
Lord bless thee and keep thee" seemed to be upon 
every lip. 

In one way these Conventions are quite expensive, 



R3100 : page 327 

but in another way they are very inexpensive. 

Probably $5500 or $10 per head, would not be too 

high an average estimate as respects the visitors; and 

about the same amount per capita for the home congregation. 

But who can estimate the value of the 

knowledge and spiritual uplift thus secured, and carried 

to other hundreds in every direction? Good results 

have already been noted also from quartering 

the friends with Christian families of Washington. 

Several have already become interested and are reading; 

and we doubt not the Washington Church will 

have a blessing in numbers as well as in interest and 

love and zeal— tho in these last respects it is difficult 

to imagine any great improvement, above what was 

shown by their untiring efforts to serve and please the 

brethren and in the careful preparations made 

beforehand. 

"Praise God from whom all blessings flow." 



R3100 : page 327 

THE BLIGHT OF SIN AND ITS ONLY CURE. 

"As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness 

even so must the Son of Man be lifted up: 
That whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have 
everlasting life."— John 3:14,15. 

ISRAEL'S experience in the wilderness prolonged 

thirty -eight years on account of 

their unreadiness, lack of faith to enter Canaan 

at first, was doubtless a season of valuable instruction 

in various ways; tho very little is told us 

respecting this period. Evidently those years of 

drilling in the laws, sacrifices, etc., brought the people 

to a comparatively moral and religious condition; 

so much so that their next prominent sin was 

in the nature of boasting of their holiness— pride of 

heart. Admitting degradation and sin and faithlessness 

in the past, they felt that they had made great 

progress and should no longer be dealt with as formerly. 

Admitting that it had been necessary for 

Moses and Aaron to rule them imperiously, they 

denied that this was any longer necessary; and 

under the leadership of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, 

quite a sedition developed;— the influence extending 

so far that it included two hundred and fifty leaders 

and most prominent men of Israel. Their contention 

was that all Israel was now holy (Num. 16:2,3); 

and that, therefore, Moses and Aaron should 

no longer be considered the only ones with whom 

God would communicate,— the intimation being that 



they were endeavoring to perpetuate a hierarchy 

which God had not established, and which true Israelities 

should not recognize. 

There is a lesson here for spiritual Israelites: It 
teaches us not to become heady or highminded or 
boastful or proud of spiritual attainments and godliness. 
It teaches us that in God's estimation there is 
no holiness that does not include humility and full 
submission to the divine arrangement. It reminds 
us also of the prophesied rebellion that will take 
place in the close of the Millennial age, amongst 
those who will have reached perfection under the 
Millennial Kingdom, some of whom will manifest 
their unfitness for eternal life by their lack of full 
submission to the divine arrangement. 

Moses called to him the representatives of the insubordination; 
kindly and patiently he reasoned with 
Korah, the one who responded to his call, pointing 
out to him the Lord's arrangement; from the others 
he received but an insulting refusal to discuss the 
question. This kindness, forbearance and endeavor 
to help those whose feet were slipping out of the 
way, all the more commends the leader to our sympathy 
and appreciation, and teaches us to be gentle 
and patient with "those that oppose themselves" to 
the divine order. (2 Tim. 2:25.) But we are not to 
expect success in every instance, even as Moses had 
no success in this case; where the heart is wrong it 
cannot be guided by reason; and pride, boastfulness 
and ambition are evidences of a wrong condition of 
heart. 

So far from endeavoring to use force against these 
men, Moses took them at their word and invited them 
to display the powers, privileges and divine authority 
which they claimed; and appointed that they 
should the next day meet with himself and Aaron and 
let the Lord by his providences decide matters. 
Korah's influence over the whole congregation was 
evidently very great; it is generally easier to influence 
people by telling them that they are better 
and greater than they had previously supposed— it 
works upon their pride. However, the Lord spared 
the people, tho he gave an illustration of his indignation 
against their assumptions,— by causing the 
earth to open and swallow up these three leading 
"holiness" rebels, their tents, families, etc., and by 
causing a plague to break out in the camp, in which 
the two hundred and fifty chief men who had joined 
in the conspiracy, died. One lesson here is that we 
should beware that our holiness is of the proper kind 
—not self -righteousness, but submission to the 
righteousness which is of God. Although these men 
did not die the Second Death, but will, in due time, 
share in the benefits of the great atonement accomplished 
by the antitypical Priest, nevertheless, they 
typified persons who enjoying great favors of the 



Lord misappropriate these, applying them selfishly 
and in pride, will die the Second Death, and with 
them their allies, sharers in their sin. 

One would suppose that so striking a manifestation 
of the divine will would thoroughly correct the wrong 
spirit amongst the people, and show them the difference 
between their boastful self -righteousness and 
the righteousness of full submission to the divine arrangement 
which alone could have the divine approval. 
But not so; human perverseness is shown 
in the fact that on the next day the leaders of Israel 

R3100 : page 328 

assailed Moses and Aaron with the charges that they 
were unholy men, murderers— that they had killed on 
the previous day, by some power of their own, some 
who were truly the Lord's people. As a consequence 
the Lord's indignation was enkindled against the people 
and they were spared, by the interposition of 
those whom they had traduced, only after 14,700 of 
their number had perished by pestilence. This same 
spirit of pride, rebellion, and its consequences may be 
noted in our day; how many there are who, because 
not right at heart, are in more or less sympathy with 
those with whom the Lord has no sympathy! They 
have seen "heady" ones rise up in the congregation 
of the Lord, seeking to draw away disciples after 
themselves, and afterward have seen these rejected of 
the Lord, instead of becoming great leaders as they 
expected; they have seen how, in the Lord's providence, 
the earth (worldliness or various false ideas) 
swallowed them up, buried them in oblivion so far as 
leadership was concerned; yet after witnessing the 
Lord's dealings with these, in putting them out of the 
light of present truth, etc., they are still sympathetic 

R3101 : page 328 

with them and complain that their fall into the darkness 
and oblivion was not of the Lord, but the fault of 
his "faithful." These resemble the Israelites who 
blamed the loss of these "renowned" would-be leaders 
upon the Lord's truly appointed servants, Moses and 
Aaron. Let us learn from this lesson to be always 
on the Lord's side, and to keep our hearts so free 
from prejudice, pride and self-will, that we may always 
be able to discern which is the Lord's side in 
every controversy. Those who do not so, are likely 
to lose their spiritual life as the 14,700 in this type 
lost natural life. 

After impressing the lesson of divine appointment, 
the Lord called for the rods of the chief men of every 
tribe— Aaron representing the tribe of Levi, and these 
rods were laid over night in the Most Holy; they were 
brought forth the next morning in the sight of all the 



people, and no change had taken place in any of them 
except the one belonging to Aaron, which was covered 
with buds, blossoms and almonds. Thus did the 
Lord emphasize his choice of the tribe of Levi and of 
the Aaronic priesthood, and impress the lesson of 
their recognition upon all Israel. So, too, the Lord 
has chosen Christ as the High Priest of our order, 
or profession, and the Church and household of faith, 
to be associated with him in the work of the ministry. 
These will ultimately be made known to all who desire 
harmony with the Lord; to all who will enter 
into the Millennial Canaan;— all the people will then 
know that God puts a wide difference between the 
"household of faith" and various teachers of morality, 
higher criticism, etc., who have denied the faith and 
who are attempting to teach upon other lines than 
those laid down in the Scriptures, of which the cross 
of Christ is the center. The light, the vitality and the 
fruits of righteousness are centered in the household 
of faith, and this will be made manifest to all. 

Two other incidents of about this time— the close 
of the wilderness detention,— were the death of 
Miriam, Moses' sister, and the death of Aaron, his 
brother. The forty years being about completed, the 
people were ready now, under the Lord's direction, 
to enter Canaan. Kadesh Barnea had evidently remained 
the center of their encampment, and their 
Tabernacle had evidently continued there, tho of necessity 
so large a body of people with their flocks and 
herds must have roamed over quite an extensive 
area during those thirty-eight years, and of this we 
find various indications. (Num. 33:19-36.) The Canaanites 
probably feared an invasion and had to 
some extent fortified the country in the vicinity of 
Kadesh Barnea, the southern borders of Canaan, and 
perceiving now that the Israelites were preparing to 
move, they made an attack upon them and took some 
prisoners;— probably by way of forewarning and intimidating 
them. This was the occasion for the vow 
mentioned in verse 2, that the cities of the Canaanites 
should be utterly destroyed when taken. 

Verse 3 need not be understood to mean that Israel 
vanquished the Canaanites and destroyed their cities 
at this time; it is rather to be viewed as a parenthesis, 
an explanation that afterward, during the campaign 
of Israel in Palestine, God in harmony with their 
vow, did deliver to them the cities of the land, and that 
they did destroy them. They called the place Hormah 
as a remembrance of their vow. The right of such 
a total destruction of an enemy and his property 
would not be allowed in the civilized world to-day; 
we are to remember, however, that the Lord in these 
dealings with Israel was making types far reaching 
in their significations. In the type, the Canaanite 
and his citadels, etc., represented sin, its enticements, 
its blandishments and strong entrenchment in the 



weaknesses of the flesh. No compromise or truce 

with sin is to be made on the part of the new creature; 

it is to be a war of extermination;— and this 

was the signification of the type. It helps us to understand 

the matter much better, too, when we know 

that those Canaanites who were destroyed were not 

turned over by the Lord to devils for eternal torment; 

—but simply went down into the great prison-house 

of death, just the same as their fathers had done before 

them, only in a different form of death. It mattered 

nothing whether these died of pestilence or by 

the sword;— the time will come, anyway, when they 

shall all be brought forth from the prison-house of 

death by the great Redeemer, the antitypical seed of 

Abraham, to have an opportunity of coming to a full 

knowledge of the truth that they may be saved;— 

and that everlastingly, if they will, upon condition of 

their obedience and heart-conformity with the 

divine will. 

Israel made a request of the Edomites (descendants 
of Esau, their father Jacob's brother) that they 
might pass through their country with a view to 
entering Canaan from its eastern side instead of from 
the southern. The Edomites refused the request, and 
thus compelled a long and tedious journey around 
their territory through a very arid, barren country. It 
was here that the people so recently claiming to be "all 
holy" became so discouraged that they again wished 
that they were back in the land of Egypt and murmured 

R3101 : page 329 

against God and against Moses and against 
the manna upon which they were still being fed. It 
was at this juncture as a punishment for their impatience 
and their despising of the Lord's leading and 
provision for them, that the Lord sent them the 
plague of 

THE FIERY SERPENTS 

Whether the Lord specially created these serpents 
or whether he merely took advantage of circumstances 
and conditions, as when he sent them the 
quail, we do not know, nor does it matter. In God's 
miracles he generally uses means to every end; 
these are to us miracles because we do not fully comprehend 
the means employed. As for instance, if we 
could imagine the knowledge of the method of telephoning, 
or the method of wireless telegraphy to be 
entirely blotted from the knowledge of man, the results, 
told in succeeding ages to people who knew not 
of the methods, would be miracles; we do not class 
them as such, because we understand the modus 
operandi. The fierceness of the attack of the serpents 
and the great mortality resulting amongst the Israelites 



might cause us to wonder; but we are to remember 
that it is estimated that in India, even at the 
present time "several thousand people annually die 
from the bite of the cobra." One writer describing the 
bite of a certain Brazilian serpent, says: "Even in 
those cases where the sufferer recovers, for a time the 
system is injured and the latent virulence of the poison 
can hardly be eliminated from the same even at the 
cost of festers, boils and ulcerations which last for 
many years. The nervous system is also very much 
affected as giddiness and paralysis are usually 
amongst the evidences of the strong venom which 
this reptile extracts by some inexplicable chemistry 
from perfectly harmless food." 

The people had learned something through their 
experiences, and hence needed not to be told that this 
visitation of the fiery serpents was a chastisement from 
the Lord for their murmuring and rebellion. We are 
to learn in this connection to differentiate between 
such experiences on the part of the Israelites and similar 
experiences on the part of the world in general. We 
are to remember that by the Law Covenant which 
God made with Israel at Mt. Sinai, he specially 
pledged their protection from disease and every adverse 
influence so long as they were faithful and loyal 
to him, and specially threatened that disloyalty and 
unfaithfulness would be punished by sickness, calamities, 
death, etc. --Lev. 26:3-46. 

To the Israelite, therefore, sickness and pestilence 
meant divine wrath— to the other nations it meant 
the ordinary course of events; they were neither protected 
from the various death scourges of the world 
nor were these death-dealing scourges specially sent 
upon them. 

The people came to Moses confessing their sin and 
asking his mediation with the Lord on their behalf; 
and, God-like, he did not stop to chide them when they 
were penitent and remorseful, but presented their case 
before the Lord most heartily. The Lord heard and 
answered the petition, but in a roundabout manner, 
well calculated to impress upon them their dependence 
upon him,— and to provide for us, spiritual 
Israelites, a great spiritual lesson. The remedy for 
the bites of the serpents was a look at a brazen (copper) 
serpent fastened to the top of a pole, said pole 
probably being carried about throughout the camp 
of Israel, that all the sick, suffering ones might have 
the opportunity of looking upon it and thus being 
healed. 

We are not to question the meaning of this as a 
type, for our Lord himself in our Golden Text declares 
it. The serpent on the pole represented Christ 
on the cross. True, the serpent represents sin, vileness, 
evil, pain, suffering; while our Lord Jesus could 
be our Redeemer only because he was holy, harmless, 
separate from sinners. The question arises then, 



Why was the serpent used to represent our Lord? 

Why was not Moses instructed to make a brazen 

dove, or a brazen lamb— as representative of the 

meekness and harmlessness and purity of him who 

died for us? We answer that a correct appreciation 

of the answer to this question is the key to an understanding 

of the great atonement provided by God for 

man, through the "Man Christ Jesus; who gave himself 

a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (I Tim. 2:5,6.) 

The serpent represented the atonement 

transaction better than any other emblem could. The 

serpent in Eden was Satan's agent and representative 

in the alluring of our first parents into sin: in this 

sense of the word the bite of that serpent, the devil, 

upon our race through our first parents, is destroying 

all the human family in death,— with the attendant 

pains and sufferings on account of which the Apostle 

declares, "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth 

in pain together." (Rom. 8:22.) It is impossible to get 

rid of the sin-virus of "that old serpent;" there is no 

R3102: page 329 

remedy that we can apply: mankind can only look to 
God for help; and the help which God provides is 
through the sending of his Son, the undefiled One. 
Nor will it do that that undefiled One should visit us 
and know our troubles and sympathize with us, and 
counsel us how to get rid of sin. No, this is not sufficient, 
he may not contradict or undo the Father's 
decrees, tho he may fulfil them— he may take our 
place, he may bear our penalty. And thus the Apostle 
expresses it, "He who knew no sin was made sin for 
us," that we might be made right in the sight of God 
through him. The serpent then represented sin, in 
every sense of the word; and as the whole world was 
serpented or inoculated our Lord must take the 
place of the sinner in order that the sinner might get 
free from the sentence; and this is why it was a serpent 
that was raised on the pole. "He was made sin 
for us"— treated as the one in whom centered the sin 
of the whole world. 

As the bitten Israelite looked to the brazen serpent 
and was healed in response, so in the antitype we 
who are bitten by the serpent of sin, and who are 
writhing and dying under its virus must look away 
with the eye of our understanding (now the eye of 
faith),— we must look unto Jesus. We must see him 
as the serpent, as the one who took our place, bore 

R3102: page 330 

our sin-penalty, became our substitute, and thus 
bought us from under the sentence of death. It was 
not sufficient that the Israelite looked into the sky or 
looked at a lamb or looked at a bird overhead, it was 



necessary that he look at the brazen serpent. So 

with us, it will not do that man look at Jesus in various 

lights and shadows, some believing one thing 

and some another respecting him; for according to 

the divine arrangement only the one kind of faith in 

Christ is efficacious— and that is the faith which recognizes 

him as the ransomer, as our substitute, "Made 

sin for us." Men may get some blessing from looking 

at Jesus as a great, model man, a great Jew, a 

great teacher, etc.; they may find such a look profitable, 

morally, mentally, physically; but from such a 

view they cannot get eternal life, they will still perish 

from the bite of sin unless they do more than this;— 

only those who view him as the antitype of the serpent 

in the wilderness have his promise of forgiveness, 

and acceptance with God unto eternal life. 



R3 102: page 330 

"HE GAVE THEM JUDGES." 

-JUDGES 2:7-16-NOVEMBER 16- 

"They cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he 
saveth them out of their distresses."— Psa. 107:19. 

ISRAEL'S HISTORY from the time of the 
division of Canaan amongst the tribes until 
the anointing of Saul to be their king, a period 
of 450 years*, is called the period of the judges- 
Joshua being the first judge and Samuel the last. 
These judges were evidently not elected to their position, 
but raised to it providentially. But as these 
judges had no power or authority, collected no revenues 
and held no office which they could entail upon 
others, it follows that any power or influence they 
possessed was a personal one, and to give it weight 
or force implied a proper acknowledgement of them as 
divinely appointed or raised up. This arrangement 
led the people continually to look to God for their 
helpers and leaders rather than to engage in an ordinary 
claptrap of politics in which personal ambitions 
and spoils would dominate and control. God 
did the nominating, and the people in proportion as 
they would come into harmony with him took cognizance 
of his choice (and practically endorsed it or 
voted for it) by their acceptance of the judge. There 
may have been a more methodical procedure in some 
instances, as is intimated in our lesson (verse 7), where 
the elders of Israel who had witnessed God's miraculous 
interposition on their behalf and who outlived 
Joshua, seem to have constituted the judges in the 
different tribes. 
This arrangement by which God gave Israel its 



judges is in considerable harmony with his dealings 

with spiritual Israel during this Gospel age— raising 

up for them from time to time special counselors, deliverers, 

ministers. Similarly Spiritual Israelites are 

not to caucus and wire-pull and decide for themselves 

who shall be their spiritual leaders; but are to regard 

the Lord as the great Chief Captain, and to look to 

him to raise up from time to time such spiritual chieftains 

as he may please. The acceptance of the leadings 

of these as God's appointees does not necessarily 

mean their selection by ballot, but may be indicated 

merely by giving ear to their teachings in harmony 

with the Word of the Lord. The lead of such spiritual 

lieutenants of divine appointment will always be 

marked by spiritual victories and the bringing of the 

Lord's people into closer heart-relationship with him. 

Any leadership which does not produce such fruits is 

evidently not of the Lord; the spirit of the Lord leads 

not to bondage, ignorance or strife, but to love, joy, 

peace of heart, liberty of conscience. 

Israel needed no congress or legislature, for it had 
one Lawgiver— the Lord— and the Law given at Mt. 
Sinai was to be perpetually the guide to the nation. 
The priests and Levites under the Law were the appointed 
helpers of the people in things pertaining to 
God— to instruct them in the Law and represent 
them in the typical sacrificing, atonement work, etc. 
In each tribe, also, the elders, according to their capacity, 
had charge of the civil affairs of the tribe. 
As for soldiers and a war department, they had none. 
The divine Law was to separate them from other 
nations, and if they would remain faithful to the 
Lord he was to be their protector against all 
antagonists. 

Similarly spiritual Zion in every congregation is 
to look out from amongst themselves fit men for the 
services needed; God's Law is to keep them separate 
from the schemes and warfares and entanglements of 
the world; they are to be his peculiar people, and his 
pledge to them is that all things shall work together 
for their good so long as they abide faithful to him. 
They, therefore, need no armies armed with carnal 
weapons, although they are all soldiers of the cross, 
pledged to fight against sin, especially each within 
himself, and to lay down their lives for each other— 
"the brethren." 

If the Book of Judges be read as a fully complete 
history of Israel for those four and one-half 
centuries, it would be a discouraging picture, and to 
some extent give the inference that they were continually 
in sin and idolatry, and suffering punishment 
therefor. But this would be an unfair view to take. 
On the contrary, the record passes by the happy period 
of Israel's prosperity, and specially points out their 
deflections from obedience to God and punishments 
for such transgressions and the deliverances from 



their troubles through the judges or deliverers whom 
God raised up for them. That this was in many respects 
a favorable time for the Israelites is implied 
in the Lord's promise, "I will restore thy judges as at 
the first, and thy counselors as at the beginning." 
-Isa. 1:26. 

Incidentally the story of Ruth and of the parents 
of Samuel (I Sam. 1) give us little glimpses of 
the other side of the matter— of the God-fearing piety 



*Millennial Dawn, Vol. II, Page 49. 

R3 102: page 331 

prevalent amongst many of the people, the happiness 
and contentment enjoyed. In our own day if we 
judge of the affairs of the world wholly by the daily 
history and details, in the newspapers, we might get 
the impression that crimes, strikes and accidents and 
imprisonments constituted the whole life in our 
own land; the great mass of the people attending to 
the ordinary affairs of life are scarcely mentioned. 
In accordance with this are the following lines from 
Whittier in which he rejoices in this land of liberty 
and blessing, notwithstanding the unfavorable reports 
thereof which go out to the world daily through the 
press,— 

"Whate'er of folly, shame, or crime 
Within thy mighty bounds transpires, 

With speed defying space or time 
Comes to us on the accusing wires; 

"While all thy wealth of noble deeds, 
Thy homes of peace, thy votes unsold, 

Thy love that pleads for human needs, 
The wrongs redressed, but half is told!" 

The Israelites had been instructed by the Lord 
to utterly exterminate the people of the land, which 
extermination we saw in a previous lesson prefigured 
our conquests as spiritual Israelites over the desires 
of the fallen nature. Israel, however, settled down to 
enjoy the Land of Promise without fully exterminating 
the condemned ones; and the false religion of the 
latter, later on contaminated the Israelites through 
friendship and fellowship; and thus these whom God 
had condemned gradually alienated the hearts of many 
from their full, proper loyalty to the Lord; seducing 
many of them into a lascivious idolatry. So with the 
spiritual Israelites who do not wage a valiant battle 
against the natural desires of their own fallen flesh— 
they find shortly that the flesh prospers at the expense 
of the spiritual life and that truces with the flesh 
mean that their love for the Lord is gradually cooled 



until some form of idolatry creeps in— the love of 
money, or of praise of men or of self, etc., dividing 
with the Lord the love and reverence of their hearts. 

We are not to suppose that all the Israelites fell 
away into idolatry; we are rather to understand that 
a considerable number of them became alienated for 
a time, repeatedly, from the love and worship of the 

R3103 : page 331 

Lord, and thus repeatedly brought upon them the 
Lord's disfavor. Verse 16 supports this thought, 
suggesting to our minds that our lesson is a condensed 
statement of the whole period of the judges- 
over four hundred years. Applying this to spiritual Israel 
we are not to expect that the Lord's displeasure 
with his people would delay until they had fully and 
completely gone into idolatry to self or wealth or 
fame; but rather that when some of the affections of 
the heart begin to go out to other things, the Lord's 
chastisements would be sent to reprove and rebuke 
and correct, while still there is in our hearts something 
of obedience and love toward him;— before the 
world, the flesh and the Adversary should have time 
to capture us completely. 

These records of divine chastisements, and Israel's 
subsequent repentance, and the Lord's deliverances, 
were all proofs of the divine love and care for 
that consecrated people. So far as we have information 
divine power was not exercised thus upon the 
other unconsecrated nations, for their reproof and 
correction, etc. They were left as strangers, foreigners, 
aliens from God and from his promises. So 
now the Lord's corrections in righteousness, his chastisements, 
etc., are evidences of special protection and 
care and relationship to the "house of sons." It is 
because of our acceptance in Christ and our consecration 
to the Lord, that he, in turn, has accepted us 
as sons and gives us the experiences, trials and difficulties 
needful to our testing and character-development; 
and it is to the intent that we may realize the 
treachery and the seductive influences of our own 
fallen natures, represented by the Amalekites and 
Canaanites, and that we may utterly destroy these, 
and thus come eventually into the condition mentioned 
by the Apostle when he declares that the consecrated 
should bring every thought into captivity to 
the will of God in Christ.-2 Cor. 10:5. 

When fleshly Israel learned one lesson after another, 
and as fast as each was learned sent a cry of 
loyalty up to God, his power was exercised on their 
behalf and their deliverance was effected. So with 
the Spiritual Israelite when he recognizes the true 
situation and with thorough repentance turns unto 
the Lord and cries for deliverance from his own weaknesses 
and imperfections according to the flesh;— his 



prayer is heard and his deliverance is provided for 

with the assurance that the Lord's grace is sufficient. 

The condition of the spiritual Israelite is represented 

in our Golden Text, "They cry unto the Lord in their 

trouble and he saves them out of their distresses." 

Such a cry to the Lord, however, implies that the sins 

and weaknesses of the flesh were contrary to the transgressor's 

will; it implies that in some manner he was 

seduced or entangled by the world, the flesh or the 

Adversary and that his heart is still loyal to the Lord 

and to the truth. All such who cry unto the Lord in 

sincerity and faith shall be heard, shall be delivered,— 

his grace is sufficient for us. 



R3103 : page 331 

WHO IS WORTHY? 

IN THE VISIONS of the Apocalypse we read 

of a wonderful scroll in the right hand of the 

great King who sits upon the throne of universal 

dominion. This scroll is a forceful representation 

of the divine plan, originally existing only in the 

mind of God, and which could not be made known to 

men until some one was found worthy to open the 

seals and display it to view. But "no one in heaven nor 

in earth was able to open the scroll, neither to look 

thereon," until one came whom the Revelator describes 

as the "The Lion [the strong one] of the 

tribe of Judah, the root of David," of whom the testimony 

is given— "Thou art worthy to take the scroll 

and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain and 

R3103 : page 332 

hast redeemed to God by thy blood out of every kindred 
and people and nation; and hast made them unto 
our God a kingdom and priesthood; and they shall 
reign on the earth."— Rev. 5:1-5,9,10. 

Excepting the bare promise (written on the outside 
of the scroll— verse 1) of salvation through the 
Seed of the woman, nothing could be known of the 
wonderful scheme for human restitution until the Son 
of God, having left the glory of the spiritual nature, 
took our nature and by the sacrifice of himself redeemed 
us from death. Then, having his righteousness 
imputed to us by faith, we are counted worthy 
to look upon the scroll as he opens the seals one after 
another. 

Great was the favor bestowed upon the Strong 
One of the tribe of Judah, in being permitted to open 
the seals— to carry out and make manifest the grand 
designs of infinite love— and great is the privilege of 
those who are permitted to look thereon as the seals 



are opened. It is not our purpose here, however, to 
treat of the peculiar symbols relating to the opening 
of the seals, but rather of what constitutes worthiness 
in us to look thereon, and what favor of God to us is 
implied in this privilege of looking. 

The knowledge of God's purposes is due only to 
those able and anxious to co-operate with him in their 
development; for God does not display his plans to 
satisfy mere idle curiosity. First, then, if we would 
comprehend what is revealed within the scroll we must 
have faith in what is written on the outside— the 
promised redemption through the precious blood of 
Christ— and must be sincerely desirous of knowing the 
details of God's plan in order to an earnest co-operation 
with it. In other words, there must be the earnest 
inquiry arising from a heart grateful for the promise of 
life through the Redeemer— "Lord, what wilt thou 
have me to do?" Such, and such only, are worthy to 
know, and such only ever come to see, in the sense of 
understanding and appreciating, the deep things of 
God written within the scroll. Such are the called according 
to the divine purpose, to be educated in and to 
serve the truth. Such are the righteous for whom the 
light (truth) is sown. Such was our Lord's attitude 
when he said, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God." 
(Heb. 10:7.) He was meek and lowly of heart and 
ever ready to render implicit obedience to the will of 
God; and it is to those who are similarly meek that 
he was sent to preach the good tidings (Isa. 61:1)— 
to open the scroll. "The meek will he guide in judgment; 
the meek will he teach his way." (Psa. 25:9.) 
If any man have this evidence of worthiness— this acquaintance 
with the truth— let him rejoice in his privilege 
and by his works manifest his continued 
worthiness. 

This worthiness is inquired for not only at the 
beginning, but all along the path of light. If we are 
not found worthy by the various tests applied from 
time to time, we cannot proceed in the path of light; 
and unless the unfaithful ones arouse themselves to 
greater diligence and watchfulness, the light that already 
is in them will become darkness. And how 
great, how intense must be the darkness of one cast 
out of light! (Matt. 6:23.) To find the glorious hope 
that once inspired our hearts slipping away and the 
truth whereon we built that hope beginning to seem 
like an old song or an idle tale, or as relics of the past 
to be displaced at any time by any plausible subterfuge 
of error which our wily adversary may be pleased 
to palm off as advanced divine truth, are indications 
that should arouse any one who discovers them to a 
realization of the fact that he is going into darkness— 
a darkness that will only become the more intense as 
he slips and slides along the backward track. 

All along the way, as we have said, we will find tests 
applied to prove our worthiness to proceed from 



knowledge to knowledge and from grace to grace. 
Who is worthy?— worthy to receive the truth, worthy 
to continue in the truth, worthy to suffer and to endure 
hardness as a good soldier for the truth, and 
finally to be exalted to power and great glory when 
truth and righteousness shall be exalted in the earth 
and their glorious triumph begun? 

Jesus said, "If any man will come after me, let 
him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and 
follow me." (Luke 9:23.) At the very beginning of 
our course we each found the cross confronting us, 
and had we not taken it up we would not have been 
counted worthy even to look with intelligent appreciation 
into the precious truths of God's plan. And 
as we advance from step to step and find the truth increasingly 
precious— sweeter than honey from the 
honey comb— we have these additional evidences of 
continued worthiness and should greatly rejoice in 
them as such. Our possession of these truths has thus 
far proved us meek enough to discard the popular 
theology of the nominal church and be counted as 
heretics, turncoats, fanatics, cranks, or whatever our 
former friends are, in their ignorance, now pleased to 
term us. And it has proved us meek enough to bear 
willingly this reproach for the great joy of thus realizing 
the Lord's approval, and of seeing by faith the 
great blessings in store for us if faithful unto the end. 

But "let him that thinketh he standeth take heed 
lest he fall;" for sudden and sharp will be many of the 
tests applied to prove our continued faithfulness. The 
world, the flesh and the devil all conspire to allure, 
ensnare and overcome us. The world will present its 
allurements through friends or wife or husband or 
children. They will try to encroach upon the clearly 
defined line which you have drawn between yourself 
and the world. Then the flesh will grow weary in 
fighting the good fight of faith, weary of the reproaches 
of the world, weary of the alienation of 
former friends and weary of the self-denying, sacrificing 
and daily cross-bearing life. Then if you turn 
aside for a moment to ponder on these things the 
devil will quickly see his opportunity and will cunningly 
devise some trial specially suited to your peculiar 
condition of mind, and a crisis comes in your experience, 
the result of which will prove the exact 
strength of your devotion to God and his truth. These 
tests God permits and even desires to have come upon 
us, in order that we may be thoroughly tried and 
proved either worthy or unworthy of the great reward 

R3104: page 333 

he has in keeping for those who remain faithful unto 
death. 

The Lord is seeking his precious jewels. Many 
of them are indeed diamonds in the rough. The real 



diamond is a noble, loyal, faithful character, devoted 
and uncompromising in its allegiance to God. Sometimes 
the circumstances of life have deprived such of 
education or culture and have left them only sufficient 
means for the barest necessities of life. But no matter, 
God's eye is on them: character is what he is 
looking for, and in due time, when that character is 
sufficiently developed, confirmed, tested and proved 
worthy of exaltation, he can and will add to it all the 
glories of knowledge and wisdom and grace and 
beauty. But first he will subject it to all the necessary 
tests. If it is a true diamond it will receive and it 
will also transmit to others the light of divine truth. 
Nothing so gloriously reflects the light as the diamond; 
and nothing so gloriously reflects the truth as 
the worthy character of the true and faithful saint. 

Another way of testing a diamond is to put it under 
pressure. If it is a real diamond it will stand the 
pressure, for the diamond is the hardest substance 
known; but if it is not a real diamond it will go to 
pieces and thus prove itself spurious. So God allows 
us to come under the constant pressure of years of 
toil and care and self-sacrifice to see how we will endure; 
and blessed is that diamond-proved character 
that endures to the end.-Jas. 1:12; Matt. 10:22. 

Sometimes the tests come in the way of trials 
of faith, and we are called upon to prove ourselves 
whether we be in the faith (2 Cor. 13:5) when some 
subtle errors are presented to us as advanced truth. 
But if we know the voice of the "Good Shepherd" 
we will not be easily beguiled. We remember the inspired 
counsel, "To the law and the testimony: if 
they speak not according to this word it is because 
there is no light in them" (Isa. 8:20); and to the law 
and the testimony we go, and, relying implicitly upon 
this as the infallible teaching of the Spirit of God, 
we are enabled to arrive at definite, clear and positive 
doctrine. We are not left in doubt as to what is truth, 
but are enabled to give a solid Scriptural reason for 
the hope that is in us, on which hope we dare implicitly 
to rest our faith, and with humble boldness to 
successfully withstand the assaults of error. But oh, 
how dead to selfish ambition, how fully devoted to the 
will of God such must be! 

Let us, dearly beloved, as we realize that thus far 
God has counted us worthy to look upon the scroll of 
his plan which has been unsealed for us by our blessed 
Lord Jesus, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, prove our 
worthiness to continue to look therein and to read 
the wondrous things of his law, by faithful obedience 
and loyalty to it in all things. Let us not undervalue 
our great privilege in being counted worthy to suffer 
some reproach and some hardness as good soldiers 
for the truth's sake; and also in being counted worthy 
to have some part in the blessed ministry of reflecting 
the light of divine truth; let us prove ourselves jewels 



of rarest value, diamonds indeed, heartily receiving 
and beautifully transmitting to others the light of 
truth, and faithfully enduring the severest pressure 
that God may permit to come upon us; for, if faithful 
in these small things we shall in due time be counted 
worthy also to reign with Christ in power and great 
glory. Let us not be like some who have only a little 
good earth on the surface of their hearts while the 
heart is really hard and stony. Let the good seed of 
divine truth sink down and take deep root, and then 
let it branch out in the light and bear its abundant 
fruitage to the Master's glory. So shall we be accounted 
worthy to see the King in his beauty and to 
live and reign with him as his beloved bride and joint-heir. 
And when to the "worthy Lamb that was slain" 
the voices of the multitudes ascribe blessing and 
honor and glory and power, they will also exclaim, 
"Let us be glad and rejoice and give honor to him for 
the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath 
made herself ready."— Rev. 5:13; 19:7. 



R3104: page 333 

THEY ALSO HAVE ERRED THROUGH WINE. 

-ISAIAH 28: 1-7 -NOVEMBER 23.- 

THIS is set before us as a temperance lesson. We 
will not say that it was not built upon certain 
conditions obtaining in Isaiah's time— that 
intoxication was a crying evil amongst the Israelites; 
but we do say that in our understanding this is a 
prophecy belonging specially to our day— whatever 
may have been the force, meaning or application in 
the day in which it was written. The whole tenor of 
this chapter as well as the following one, the twenty-ninth, 
in our judgment, proves this. Ephraim, used 
by the prophet as a name for the ten tribes of Israel 
in contradistinction to the two tribes called Judah, 
would seem to represent in our day nominal Christendom, 
and the drunkards of Ephraim would represent 
the intoxication of Christendom— not literal alcoholic 
intoxication, but the intoxication of error, of false 
doctrine, of human schemes and plans, the spirit of 
man and of the adversary in contradistinction to the 
spirit, the teaching of the Lord. This intoxication 
is referred to later on by the same prophet, saying, 
"They are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger 
but not with strong drink. For the Lord hath poured 
out upon you the spirit of deep sleep [spiritual stupor], 
and hath closed your eyes." (Isa. 29:9-12.) It 
is again referred to as the wine of Babylon with which 
all people have been intoxicated.— Rev. 17:2; 18:3. 
The fall of nominal spiritual Israel, the fall of 



Babylon in the great time of trouble now approaching, 
is described in verses 2,3. All who do not get 
rid of this intoxication of error, even tho members 
of the spiritual house, will have their portion with the 
world and with hypocrites in this coming storm, which 
will wreck completely our present civilization, social, 
political, financial and ecclesiastical. The glory 

R3104: page 334 

of Babylon at the present time is as that of a beautiful 
flower, but it shall quickly fade, its riches and its 
pride will cause it to be the more quickly devoured 
—as are the first fruits of the summer— by the lawless 
ones, the anarchists, who will be bred of discontent, 
and who will be developed rapidly as a result of the 
iniquity that will prevail because of this drunkenness 
of Babylon with false doctrines and false expectation 
and blind stupor to the great changes of dispensation 
now taking place. 

The explanation of a blindness, stupor and drunkenness 
so general as to affect not only the priests and 
prophets but all the people of Christendom, is referred 
to in verse 7. Babylon has had indeed the 
golden cup of the Lord's Word in her hands and has 
affected to give from it to the people the spirit of the 
Lord, but instead she has filled the cup and presents 
as the teaching of God's Word intoxicating errors 
which have misled the so-called Christian world. 
Thus the Adversary has used the nominal Church of 
God as his tool to deceive all that dwell upon the 
face of the whole earth— to misrepresent the divine 
character and plan. (Rev. 14:8.) Thank God for the 
promise that the time is coming when that old serpent, 
the devil, Satan, shall be bound a thousand 
years that he shall deceive the nations no more until 
the thousand years are finished!— Rev. 20:3. 

In the midst of such a general declaration of the 
drunkenness of mystic Babylon and the storm of 
divine indignation about to overthrow churchianity, 
it is comforting to find that the Lord breaks in upon 
the narrative, suggesting that in the midst of such 
general intoxication of error there will be a residue 
of God's people whom he can approve and bless. 
Verses 5,6, call the little flock to our attention— the 
Lord's jewels. In the midst of all this confusion incidental 
to the fall of Babylon, the Lord himself will 
crown his faithful with glory and beauty. Even in 
the present life his truth in their hearts shall cause 
their faces to shine, and their table shall be spread 
even in the midst of those who are their enemies, who 
will be compelled to admit that these have meat to 
eat that the world knoweth not of and that they have 
a filling of the Lord's spirit that gives them joy and 
peace even in the midst of trials and difficulties. It 
will be more than this; for very shortly it will mean 



that they shall receive at the Lord's hands the crown 
of life— be changed and receive the fulness of divine 
favor and blessing— glory, honor, immortality and 
joint-heirship with their Redeemer in his Kingdom. 
These enlightened by the Lord and filled with his 
spirit will have sounder judgment even in the present 
life and be able to do valiantly in disputing and disproving 
the spirit of error and its proud and boastful 
claims; and by and by, when changed and made partakers 
of the Kingdom glories, the Apostle assures 
us that these shall be amongst the judges of the 
world, saying, "Know ye not that the saints shall 
judge the world?" They will then with their dear 
Redeemer occupy the place of judgment during the 
Judgment Day, the Millennial Age, and overcome 
all the forces of error and darkness and evil, so that 
eventually the Lord shall bruise Satan under their 
feet, wholly overthrow his kingdom and influence, and 
establish in its stead the Kingdom of God under the 
whole heavens, destroying all who would corrupt the 
earth, bringing it, in harmony with the Lord's prayer, 
to that condition in which God's will shall be done 
on earth even as it is done in heaven. 



R3105 : page 334 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
POSITION OF THE WORLD IN MILLENNIAL AGE. 



Question.— Are the sins of the world class all canceled 
at death? or, is only their Adamic penalty paid? 
and do they have an individual penalty still to pay? 

Answer.— The sins of the whole world are paid, as 
far as divine justice is concerned— that is to say— God's 
account against Adam and his posterity has been sold, 
transferred and set over to him who purchased the same 
with his own precious blood. 

The sins of the world are not canceled, so far as 
they are concerned; but a way is opened up, under the 
New Covenant, by which each can obtain a release. 
The terms are that when brought to a knowledge of 
Christ and the redemption in him each for himself shall 
will to reform and no longer to serve sin, but to serve 
the Redeemer and to obey him. 

In view of this opportunity of retracing steps, it is 
proper for us to say that every word and action on the 
part of the world is either building up character or undermining 
it— either blessing or injuring the doer— 
either increasing or decreasing the number and weight 
of his stripes of punishment, all of which will be 
corrective. 



Thus we may say that the Adamic penalty is set 
aside until such time as the individual shall have been 
granted a trial on his own account. If in this trial on 
his own account he sins wilfully refusing to follow the 
instructions of his Redeemer, he will be dropped back 
again into the original penalty— "returned into sheol" 
—which will be the Second Death. 

Thus seen, the only individual penalty they have to 
pay will be that represented in their own degradation. 
We might include in this penalty any sins which they 
might commit in the present life against any degree of 
light; for such sins bring a special searing of conscience 
which the same deeds committed in ignorance would 
not bring. Hence all who thus sin against light receive 
proportionately a deeper degradation and will have correspondingly 
the more difficulty in extricating themselves, 
and returning to perfection under the favorable 
conditions of the next age. 

The world of mankind are not reckoned as coming 
into existence a second time, but as having their previous 
existence revived and continued, with the privilege 
of accepting Christ under the New Covenant, and 
being regenerated by him, and thus attaining life- 
resurrection by judgment, which will progress throughout 
the Millennial age, and reach completion at its 
close— those who accept there will reach perfect life, 

R3105 : page 335 

while those who reject will there be destroyed in the 
Second Death. From this standpoint the only effect of 
good and evil in the present life will be upon man's own 
conscience and character. 

In respect to I Pet. 4:6, briefly, I understand this 
to mean: that for instance we who hear the Gospel and 
who accept its terms have a two-fold standing— or are 
viewed in life from two different standpoints. The 
world views us and judges us according to the flesh, as 
human beings, just the same as the remainder of the 
world, but God judges us differently— to him we are 
new creatures, and he judges us according to our spirit, 
will, intention, and not according to the weaknesses and 
imperfections of the flesh. Hence it is that although 
we know that in our flesh dwelleth no perfection, nevertheless 
"The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us" 
—because God judges us not according to the flesh but 
according to the spirit. 

USE OF FERMENTED WINE. 



Question.— Is there any prohibition in the Mosaic 
Law respecting the use of fermented wine? Was the 
use of unfermented grape juice not authorized by the 
Jewish arrangement? 



Answer.— We do not know of any place in the 
Mosaic Law in which the priests of that system were 
prohibited the use of wine. But if you know of such 
a statement kindly draw our attention to it. But even 
if this had been the case, it would not typify our Lord's 
life from Jordan to Calvary; for the Scriptural declaration 
respecting our Lord is that he did use wine. You 
remember they said of him, "Behold a wine-bibber and 
a glutton"— not, we presume, because he over-indulged, 
in either eating or drinking, but simply because he was 
less abstemious in respect to food and drink than John 
the Baptist, his Forerunner. 

The prohibition of leaven would certainly apply 
as much to liquids as to solids during the Passover season 
amongst the Jews; but it is a mistake to suppose 
that wine contains any leaven after it is made. Leaven 
is sometimes added to grape juice in order to hasten the 
fermentation; but when the fermentation has all worked 
off the remaining wine is purer, freer from ferment 
and everything that would produce ferment than ever 
it was before. So far as we are aware, the Jews had 
no method of preserving grape juice unfermented. 
Their bottles were made of skin, and our Lord's parable 
shows that if new wine (grape juice) were put into old 
skin bottles that had lost their elasticity, the ferment 
would burst them, and the wine be lost; and hence the 
custom of putting new wine into new bottles, which 
would resist the strain of fermentation. Since the fermentation 
of grape juice sets in speedily, you can readily 
see that there would be no wine in all Palestine that had 
not finished its working or fermentation several months 
before the Passover season. 

There are few persons more appreciative than ourselves 
of total abstinence from all intoxicating liquors; 
yet we do not permit our opposition to intemperance 
to warp our judgment in respect to the use of wine 
mentioned in the Scriptures. I explain the difference 
between the customs of that time and this by the fact, 
first, that they had a comparatively mild wine, which 
contained only a small quantity of alcohol, the product 
of the grape; and further, by the fact that their climate 
and other conditions were less inclined to lead to excesses 
than are ours. As you perhaps have noticed, we 
generally use, as "fruit of the vine," at our Memorial 
Supper, at Allegheny, either hermetically sealed grape 
juice, or the strained juice of crushed and stewed 
raisins. 

Some tell us that the Hebrews never use the ordinary 
fermented wine during the Passover week. They 
no doubt are honest in intention, although they misrepresent 
the facts. For instance, if they inquire of a 
Hebrew— "Do the Jews during the Passover week use 
the ordinary wine?" the Hebrew would answer, "Oh, 
my, no, never— never!" From this they draw the inference 
that he means that they use nonalcoholic wine, and 
perhaps they are foreigners of tongue to each other, 



and but imperfectly catch each other's thoughts and 
unintentionally deceive each other. But what the Hebrew 
did mean was that he would not think of buying 
any wine which he would use during Passover week 
from any ordinary wine-seller— just as the strict Hebrew 
would not think at any time of buying his meat 
from an ordinary butcher, but only from a Hebrew 
butcher, whose beef was killed in the presence of a rabbi, 
and duly attested to have been killed according to the 
Mosaic Law. This to the Jew would be clean meat, 
while any other would be unclean. Similarly would the 
orthodox Jew act in respect to his wine, especially that 
used during the Passover week. It must come through 
what he recognizes as the legitimate channels guaranteed 
that no leaven ever came in contact with it, and 
that no Gentile ever had anything to do with it. To 
satisfy ourselves on the subject, we procured from a 
very particular Jew a bottle of the kind of wine thus 
approved. We found it to be of the ordinary alcoholic 
kind. 

YOUR HOUSE LEFT DESOLATE. 



Question.— Were the Jews cast into outer darkness 
about A.D. 70? or five days before the crucifixion, 
when our Lord said, "Your house is left unto you desolate."? 
-Matt. 8:12; 23:38. 

Answer.— As a house, or nation, Israel was rejected 
of the Lord at the time of the crucifixion, because of 
unpreparedness to receive the Lamb of God, the Messiah; 
but while the nation was there rejected and could 
no longer hope to be the seed which should be the 
blesser of all nations, nevertheless, in selecting the new 
nation, the holy nation out of every kindred, people 
and tongue, God was pleased to give the first opportunity 
of identification with the new nation to any of 
the fleshly Israelites who were Israelites indeed, and 
without guile. Consequently the Gospel went first to 
them and was confined to them for three and a half 
years,— Cornelius being the first Gentile convert. All 
of the period from our Lord's crucifixion down to the 
utter destruction of the Jewish polity A.D. 70, was the 
period of testing to that people: some of them, in right 
condition of heart, were accepted into the light and 
privileges then due; others, unworthy, were rejected 
from all divine favor and were in consequent darkness 
respecting transpiring events and ultimately felt the 
severity of the trouble figuratively called "weeping and 
gnashing of teeth." 



page 337 



SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. NOVEMBER 15, 1902. No. 22. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 339 

Is Belief in Miracles Essential to 
Christianity? 339 

Forty Millions for Religion 341 

Religion Mixing in Politics 341 

Austria's Troubles 341 

"My Covenant Will I Not Break." 342 

Gideon's Band Triumphant 347 

"Thy People Shall be My People" 349 

Special Items 338 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



VOLUNTEER MATTER SENT PREPAID. 

It is our intention that the Volunteer matter shall always 
go to destination prepaid, and this is our contract 
with the printer who is shipping them for us. Should you 
at any time be charged for the transportation you will now 
know that it is a mistake, and will please advise us at once 
that we may have the error corrected. 

PRICES OF DAWNS UNIFORM. 

The special prices on Dawns to our subscribers and to 



colporteurs is to permit them to make expenses and still 
to sell the cloth-bound edition in all volumes and languages 
at 35 cents each— and no more,— except when sold in 
small out-of-the-way places where they cannot be had by 
freight, and must therefore cost additional for mail or express 
charges, when the price shall be 45 cents and not more. 
These terms apply to the United States and Canada, and 
any orders received henceforth will be understood to be 
based upon these terms. (Canadian colporteurs will be 
allowed the proper amount of the customs duty to permit 
them to conform to this rule.) We are convinced that the 
sale of the Dawns at so low a price will inure to the general 
advantage of the cause we serve, and the wholesale rate is 
based on this belief: the foreign translations and larger 
English volumes are supplied considerably below cost. 



R3106 : page 339 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
IS BELIEF IN MIRACLES ESSENTIAL TO CHRISTIANITY? 



NO QUESTION in modern religious thought is 

weightier than this one which Professor 

Charles W. Pearson's much-discussed utterance has 

served to bring once more into prominence. The 

problem, of course, is far from being a new one. Indeed, 

it has been noted in several quarters that the 

Methodist professor used much the same arguments 

as those embodied in Hume's essay on miracles, published 

a hundred and fifty years ago. In none of the 

theological controversies of the past century was the 

conflict more earnest than in this one over miracles, 

Renan, Strauss, and Huxley ranging themselves actively 

on the one side, Bishop Lightfoot, Dean Farrar, and 

Mr. Gladstone on the other. The Rev. Dr. W. Robertson 

Nicoll, who is best known as a journalist, but who 

has also done considerable work in the field of theology 

as editor of the London Expositor and "The Expositor's 

Bible," goes over the ground again in his 

new book, "The Church's One Foundation." The 

first few sentences of the book show that this "foundation," 

according to Dr. Nicoll, is the miraculous 

Christ, and that, if there be no such Christ, "Christianity 

passes into the mist and goes down the wind." 

He declares:— 

"The church cannot without disloyalty and cowardice, 
quarrel with criticism as such. It is not held absolutely to any 
theory of any book. It asks, and it is entitled to ask, the 
critic: Do you believe in the Incarnation and Resurrection of 
Christ? If his reply is in the affirmative, his process and results 
are to be examined earnestly and calmly. If he replies 



in the negative, he has missed the way, and has put himself 
outside the church of Christ. If he refuses to answer, his 
silence has to be interpreted.... No one argues against the 
right of philosophers to affirm that goodness is everything, 
that miracles are impossible, and that nothing in Jesus Christ 
has any importance except his moral teaching. But Christian 
believers in revelation are compelled to say that these philosophers 
are not Christians. If they refuse to do so, they are declaring 
that in their opinion these beliefs have no supreme 
importance. To say this is to incur the penalty of extinction. 
For Christianity dies when it passes altogether into the philosophic 
region. To believe in the Incarnation and the Resurrection 
is to put these facts in the foreground. Either they are first 
or they are nowhere. The man who thinks he can hold them 
and keep them in the background deceives himself. They are, 
and they ever must be, first of all. So, then, the battle turns 
on their truth or falsehood. It does not turn even on the inerrancy 
of the Gospel narrative. It does not turn even on the authorship 
of the Gospels. Faith is not a belief in a book, but a 
belief in a living Christ." 

Dr. Nichol holds that here is a discussion which 
every Christian believer must enter upon with the 
keenest zest, since "it is a controversy not for theologians 
merely, but for every man who has seen the 
face of Christ, and can bear personal testimony to his 
power and glory." He continues:— 

"If we assume at the threshold of Gospel study that 
everything in the nature of miracle is impossible, then the 
specific questions are decided before the criticism begins to 
operate in earnest. The naturalistic critics approach the 
Christian records with an a priori theory, and impose it upon 
them, twisting the history into agreement with it, and cutting 
out what can not be twisted. For example, the earlier naturalistic 
critics, Paulus, Eichhorn, and the rest, insisted on giving 
a non-miraculous interpretation. Strauss perceived the 
unscientific character of this method, and set out with the 
mythical hypothesis. Baur set to work with a belief in the 
all-sufficiency of the Hegelian theory of development through 
antagonism. He saw tendency every where.... Dr. Abbott 
sets out with the foregone conclusion of the impossibility of 
miracles. Matthew Arnold says: 'Our popular religion at present 
conceives the birth, ministry, and death of Christ as altogether 
steeped in prodigy, brimful of miracle, and miracles do 
not happen.'" 

The trouble with all these and similar critics, declares 
Dr. Nicoll, lies in the fact that they start out 
with the assumption that "God can not visit and redeem 
his people" and that "His arm is chained and 

R3106 : page 340 

can not save." Is it not much more rational, he 

asks, to take the view that miracle is "the fit accompaniment 

of a religion that moves and satisfies the 

soul of men, and that asserts itself to be derived directly 

from God"? He goes on to say:— 



"Miracle is part of the accompaniment, as well as part 
of the content, of a true revelation, its appropriate countersign. 
Of course, those who take this ground do not 
deny, but rather firmly assert, the steadfast and glorious 
order of nature. But they hold with equal firmness 
that God has made man for Himself, and that if He has 
sent His Son to die for them, the physical order can not set 
the rule for the way of grace. If God has relented, nature may 
relent. They believe that if there is a personal God miracles 
are possible, and revelation, which is a miracle, is also possible. 
They are not dismayed when they are told that the Gospel 
age was the age when legendary stories and superstitions 
and miraculous pretensions of the most fanciful and grotesque 
kind abounded. Nay, rather their faith is firmer, for they 
take these stories and compare them with the Gospel miracles, 
and they say, How is it that the stories of the New Testament 
are lofty and tender and beautiful and significant, while the 
rest are monstrosities?. ..Granting the entrance of the 
Son of God into human history, granting the miracle of the 
Incarnation of the Supreme, there is little to cause any difficulty. 
Without the Incarnation, without the Resurrection, 
we have no form of religion left to us that will control or serve 
or comfort mankind." —Literary Digest. 



It is comforting to find some few of God's servants, 
tho still in "Babylon," keen enough to discern 
the real situation, and courageous enough to lift up 
voice and pen in defense of his cause. Very evidently, 
however, the nominal "Christian ministry" has gone 
or is rapidly going so far into unbelief of the very 
fundamentals of Christianity as to forfeit all claim to 
the name Christian,— as Rev. Nicoll suggests. It 
is not Christian faith to acknowledge that Jesus lived 
a noble life, superior to that of other men, and that 
his teachings were superior to others of his day. It 
is not Christian faith to claim what the Bible denies 
respecting "the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood 
of man;" nor to proceed on this basis to claim 
that Jesus was a son of God in common with all others 
of our race, and peculiarly acceptable in proportion 
as he was superior to others of his race. 

No, this is not Christianity: will not, and do 
not Jews, Mohammedans, Confucians, Buddhists and 
many others,— admit all this respecting our Master, 
—and some of them more? Are these all Christians? 
And if not, are those ministers Christians who still 
wear the livery of Christ in colleges and pulpits, for 
valuable considerations, and who are still under solemn 
vows to a faith which they sometimes publicly, 
but more often semi-privately, disavow? Assuredly 
not. Let us get back to that honesty of thought and 
word which calls disbelief in the fundamentals of 
Christianity, "unbelief," i.e., "infidelity." 

We are told that Infidelity has disappeared;— 



that Renan, Paine and Ingersoll have lost their place 
and power as opposers of Christianity. The very contrary 
is true: every college and seminary, secular and 
theological, has become a hotbed of infidelity, in which 
the leaders in world-politics, world-business, and 
world-religion are being taught, under the sanction of 
the "highest authorities," the very disbelief in the 
Bible which Infidelity has all along urged. The 
places of Renan, Paine and Ingersoll are more than 
filled by classical, scientific and theological doctors; 
—blind leaders of the blind. 

Let no one be confused by these false shepherds, 
who are rapidly leading astray their confiding flocks; 
saying, peace and safety! All who follow them will 
soon find in their hearts an aching void,— a leanness 
of soul,— a Christlessness which will render miserable 
indeed all who have once "tasted of the heavenly 
gift and been made partakers of the holy spirit." 

Christ and the apostles were either right or wrong 
in their teachings;— their claims were either true or 
false. If false, everything built upon them must logically 
fall with them;— including the very name 
Christianity, their synonym. If they were true, all 
that they taught stands together; and the name 
Christian belongs to these doctrines, and its application 
to other teachings is a sin; and its appropriation 
by others is grand larceny— robbery. 

The fundamental teachings of Christ and his 
apostles (true Christianity) are (1) The fall of man 
into sin and under its penalty— death. (Rom. 5:12,17-19; 

1 Cor. 15:22; 2 Cor. 5:14; Rom. 6:23). (2) 

The ransom of the race from condemnation by virtue 

of the sacrifice of Christ "finished" at Calvary. 

(I Tim. 2:5,6; Rom. 5:18; Jno. 19:30.) (3) The 

salvation, or recovery of the race, or so many of 

the same as will accept the grace of God in Christ 

when brought to a knowledge of the same, by a judgment-trial 

and restitution, called resurrection. (Acts 3:19,23; 

Jno. 5:28,29.) (4) The previous and preparatory 

trial, testing, judgment of an "elect" class 

whose resurrection to "glory, honor and immortality" 

will be instantaneous at the second advent of 

the Redeemer for the establishment of the Kingdom 

of Heaven in the earth. -Rom. 2:7; 8:17,28,29; 

2 Tim. 2:11,12; I Pet. 4:12,13; I Cor. 15:51,52; 
I Thess. 4:15-17. 

Upon these scriptural premises the entire fabric 
of Christianity was built, and in proportion as any one 
of them is either denied or omitted "the faith once 
delivered to the saints" is lost, and the door is opened 
to false beliefs, and ultimately to utter unbelief;— 
cutting the cables by which the anchor of faith serves 

R3107 : page 341 

securely to hold us to heavenly hopes. The cutting 



of these faith-cables means the temporary, if not the 
eternal loss of vital union with our Lord the Lifegiver. 
The growingly popular evolution theory is diametrically 
opposed to all these fundamentals of Christianity, 
and that is warning enough to the wise, but for 
no others. 

FORTY MILLION DOLLARS FOR RELIGION. 



At the beginning of the twentieth century, an 
interdenominational movement was organized in England 
and this country for the purpose of raising $50,000,000 
as a special fund to be devoted to various 
projects for the furtherance of religion, such as the 
payment of church debts, home missionary work, the 
endowment of religious institutions, etc. The Church 
Economist (New York), which has been making an 
investigation into the present condition of this fund, 
finds that about $40,000,000 has already been raised. 
"If it be true that money talks," comments the Chicago 
Tribune, "then it is talking in a most convincing 
way as to the great interest at present in the cause 
of religion and the fundamental prospect of the 
churches." 

Fully half of this great total, declares The Church 
Economist, was raised in this country, the Methodists 
North alone claiming $17,000,000. The Canadian 
Methodists and Presbyterians, each of which bodies 
set out to raise $1,000,000, have collected respectively 
$1,250,000 and $1,430,000. The English Wesleyans 
have secured $4,500,000; and the English Congregationalists 
$3,312,000. Congregationalists in Wales 
have raised $860,000; in Australia $415,000. --Digest. 

RELIGION MIXING IN POLITICS. 



The National Reform Bureau has established 
what corresponds to a mercantile agency concerning 
the leading people in every town in the United States, 
except that their religious status instead of their 
financial capital and resources is the subject of the 
work. Old telephone books have been secured of 
every town in the United States having a telephone 
system, and these books have a large share of the people 
of prominence on their rolls. This is the nucleus 
of the index. Then, through trusted confidential 
helpers in each town, the names are checked off with 
signs showing what each individual can be depended 
on to do. Perhaps one man will be decidedly irreligious, 
and not interested in [political] reforms, but, for 
personal or family concerns may be greatly agitated 
over the question of temperance. The same may be 



true with divorce legislation, and with Sunday questions 
of all kinds. The bureau has twelve lines of 
work, but it does not limit its requests for assistance 
to persons who happen to sympathize with it in all of 
its lines. Of course, the records show a large number 
of names as in favor of everything. 

The Congressman who is "shaky" on any vital 
measure finds himself deluged with communications. 
Perhaps the churches in his district adopt resolutions 
which are forwarded to him. Petitions from the Women's 
Christian Temperance Unions are hastily transmitted. 
And there is no overestimating the influence 
of such things on the congressional mind. ...Senator 
Blackburn, of Kentucky, once said to Dr. Crafts: 
"Why, you have put my whole state in a turmoil 
over this matter. I would wager that I have got as 
many as twenty letters about it." Since twenty votes 
would not be a large percentage in Kentucky, the impression 
which a few letters make can not be better 
illustrated. 

A few years ago, during the congressional recess, 
all of the wise men of this latitude were habitually 
ridiculing the idea that Congress could take any action 
regarding the duly elected representatives from 
the State of Utah. These wise men went into discussions 
of the constitutional phases of the question, and 
of how impossible it would be to do anything consistent 
with our fundamental law and the rights under it 
of a sovereign State. Any man who ventured to dissent 
from this prediction had but one argument: "Do 
not forget the Southern Presbyterianism. Brigham 
H. Roberts must look to his Democratic associates of 
the South for support, if he is to have any, but they 
can not forget the rugged Presbyterianism of a large 
share of their constituents." The prediction was 
entirely sound. There was little constitutional ground 
for throwing Mr. Roberts out, but he had to go, and 
this very Reform Bureau played no small part in 
bringing that result to pass. 

Seven bills have been passed as drawn by the 
Bureau and introduced at its request, including the 
new and drastic divorce law of the District of Columbia, 
which will seemingly compel the establishment 
of a divorce colony at Chevy Chase, across the Maryland 
line. Others are the new divorce law in the 
Territories, the anti-canteen law, the resolution proposing 
a treaty to prevent the sale of intoxicants and 
opium to native races of the South Seas, and the 
Sunday-closing amendment to the St. Louis fair bill. 
The Bureau, by similar activities, doubtless prevents 
the passage of such legislation as might otherwise get 
through.— N.Y. Evening Post. 

AUSTRIA'S TROUBLES. 



It is stated that the Austrian Government has grave 
reason to fear an agrarian rising in Galicia, where in the 
last rising nearly two thousand landlords were murdered. 
The landlords of Galicia are Poles, and, being doubtless 
pressed by the low prices, are reducing wages already too 
low for even tolerable existence. The peasantry, who are 
Ruthenians, and have a traditional quarrel of race with the 
gentry, are therefore rioting in all directions; and there is 
a demand from the nobles that the province shall be placed 
in a state of siege. The demand will probably be granted, 
and the peasantry cannot resist the troops; but unless its 
views have greatly altered of late, the Government of 
Vienna will be greatly annoyed and perplexed, the Ruthenians 
being far more loyal to the house of Hapsburg than the 
Polish aristocracy are. This question of tenure is becoming 
a very serious one throughout Eastern Europe. From 
the Ural to the Danube the actual cultivators of the soil 
hardly get enough to live on, and, partly from suffering, 
partly from a growing consciousness that others are happier, 
are beginning to demand proprietary rights. A 

R3107 : page 342 

wealthy Government could manage a compromise through 
large loans, but in Eastern Europe there is no money to 
spare, and the policy adopted both in Russia and Austria 
is to enforce a nearly impossible status quo.— London 
Spectator. 



The industrial boom of recent years, combined 
with the phenomenal crops of this favored land, have 
tended to close the eyes of the world to the fact that 
the conditions of the gold standard are unfavorable 
to the agriculturists. As already pointed out, from 
Scripture, these conditions will not be changed by any 
political party; but will eventuate in the cry of the 
reapers, the agriculturists; and be followed by anarchy, 
which shall cause "all faces to gather blackness" 
and "the mighty man shall weep there bitterly"; 
—the time described as the "time of trouble, such as 
was not since there was a nation," in view of which 
the Apostle says: "Go to now ye rich men, weep and 
howl for the miseries which shall come upon you."— 
James 5:1-4; Joel 2:6-11; Zeph. 1:14-18; Dan. 12:1. 



R3107 : page 342 

"MY COVENANT WILL I NOT BREAK. 

"My covenant will I not break, nor alter the 
thing that is gone out of my lips."— Psa. 89:34. 



THESE WORDS of Jehovah God are very comforting 
and satisfying to his faithful children. 
As faith becomes a basis for things hoped for, 
so confidence and experience constitute a basis for 
faith to rest upon. The unchangeableness of our God 
is one of the attractive features of his character: his 
assurance is, "I am the same, I change not." Even 
when the Lord's word or sentence is against us— as 
in the case of his pronouncement against sin and sinners 
—and even though his unchangeableness will not 
permit him to excuse sin or clear the guilty, this very 
constancy becomes an assurance to us that as God has 
been strict and unchangeable in regard to the penalty 
pronounced, he will be equally strict and equally 
unchangeable concerning all the good promises and 
covenants which he has made to us. 

As an illustration of this unchangeableness, we 
note the fact that under the death sentence six thousand 
years have elapsed, and over 50,000,000,000 of our 
race have gone into the prisonhouse of death;— yet 
God has not relented or shown the slightest sign of 
change. His sentence was a just one, and it could 
not be revoked. Then came in his love; and without 
violating his justice he provided a great sin offering,— 
"a ransom for all." In connection with this manifestation 
of love, in man's redemption, the Creator 
gave certain covenants and promises; and as we have 
learned of his unchangeableness in respect to the 

R3108 : page 342 

curse, the sentence, we learn proportionately to have 
confidence in his unchangeableness in respect to the 
promises he has made our race, based upon the great 
redemption effected for us. 

"O, what comfort it brings, 
My soul sweetly sings, 
I am safe from all danger 
While under his wings." 

It is considered worldly wisdom to take for granted 
that no man will keep a covenant which he subsequently 
finds to be to his own disadvantage, unless he 
is bound by some kind of penalty— by the law. And 
those who have not learned to expect something of 
this kind of worldly wisdom in connection with their 
worldly affairs, have ofttimes been sadly disappointed 
and worsted; and their plans and arrangements based 
upon the covenants of others have been marred. The 
tendency of such experiences is to shake our confidence 
in humanity in general— and alas, sometimes, 
to shake our confidence even in some who have named 
the name of Christ and professed to be our brethren. 
Nevertheless, even such trying experiences 



have always worked blessings to such of the Lord's 
children as have accepted them in the proper manner. 
Such have said to themselves, The more I 
find of unfaithfulness and injustice in mankind, the 
more do I appreciate the absolute faithfulness and justice 
of the Lord, and of such of his people as do prove 
themselves loyal to principle; and the more earnestly 
do I determine that my own course in life shall be 
such as will always acknowledge the principle of justice, 
and make my positive and finished bargain and 
engagement like our Lord's— unbreakable, 
unalterable. 

The Lord indicates not only his own estimation 
of this principle, but his desire to see it in all who 
aspire to membership in his family. To such he says, 
"Blessed is the man who voweth to his own hurt and 
altereth not." The Lord would have us careful how 
we would make covenants, vows, either to him or to 
others; but having made them, his will is that we 
shall consider them sacred, inviolate; even though 
we should find subsequently that the arrangement 
was working out unfavorably as respects our temporal 
interests. There are some limitations in this direction 
which we will consider later on. 

DIVINE COVENANTS AND PROMISES. 

There is a difference between conditional and 
unconditional promises which should not be overlooked. 
Some of the Lord's covenants are conditional, 
as for instance, the Law Covenant, which 

R3108 : page 343 

begins, "If ye obey my laws and keep my 
statutes," etc., I will do thus and so unto you. The 
Covenant of the Law, while it did bring to Israel 
"much advantage every way, chiefly in that to them 
were committed the oracles of God" (Rom. 3:1,2), 
was, nevertheless, a conditional covenant; and since 
Israel did not and could not keep its side of that covenant, 
therefore the divine promises attached to it and 
made conditional upon obedience, passed away so far 
as the people of Israel were concerned. All of the 
law's demand were met by our Lord Jesus, and to him 
and him alone passed all the divine agreements and 
obligations under that Covenant. The Lord has, 
however, made unconditional covenants with mankind: 
the first of these was through our representative, 
Noah, after the flood. As representing the race, 
God covenanted with Noah that he would never again 
destroy the world with a flood of waters; and the 
pledge of that covenant was the rainbow. It was 
wholly unconditional— it did not stipulate that no 
flood would come if Noah and his posterity would be 
faithful to the Lord, etc. 



Another unconditional covenant was that made 
with Abraham which reads, "In thee and in thy seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 12:3.) 
There are no conditions or limitations 
here. It does not say, If you and your seed 
will be faithful, I will bless all the families of 
the earth through them; nor does it say, If all 
the families of the earth will seek me, they 
shall be blessed through your seed. There are 
no conditions or limitations whatever. As a matter 
of fact, God knew from the beginning that the natural 
seed of Abraham would not be fit to be the channel 
of blessing. From the very beginning he foreknew 
Jesus as the seed of Abraham and the Head of 
the Gospel Church, his body— as unitedly the foreseen 
and promised "seed of Abraham." He foresaw, 
even, that many who would be called during this 
Gospel age would fail to make their calling and election 
sure; and from the very beginning he had in 
mind as the seed of Abraham only the "called and 
chosen and faithful." 

God knew the end from the beginning, he knew 
that he would find such a class. He has been seeking 
them throughout this Gospel age, out of every kindred 
and people and tongue: he has been trying 
them, as the Apostle Peter says, with "fiery trials;" 
—proving their love and loyalty, and developing in 
them fruits and graces of spirit, in harmony with his 
own, such as will fit and prepare them as a whole, under 
their Lord and Head, for the great work of blessing 
the world, when the appointed time shall have 
fully arrived— during the Millennial age. Nor was 
it necessary to place limitations upon the blessing of 
all the families of the earth; because the blessing to 
be conferred upon all is not an everlasting one, but 
merely a blessing of knowledge, of opportunity, of 
assistance— to the intent that so many of mankind 
as will to do so may come to a full knowledge of the 
truth, into harmony with God, and to full perfection 
of being. Afterward they will be tested as to their 
loyalty, and only the worthy will be granted life everlasting 
—all others being ultimately destroyed in the 
Second Death. Evidently there was no necessity for 
putting conditions and limitations upon this covenant. 
It represents God's good and benevolent purposes toward 
our race. He knew that his only begotten Son 
would be glad to become man's Redeemer, for the joy 
that he would set before him; he knew also that, in 
the time appointed for it, he could find amongst mankind 
a sufficient number who would appreciate the 
privilege of fellowship and joint-heirship with their 
Redeemer, and gladly and faithfully endure the tests, 
and acquire the character necessary to this work of 
blessing which he had purposed in himself. 

Another covenant mentioned in the Scriptures as 
an unconditional one was that made to Israel's king, 



David— that his throne should be established forever 
—that of the fruit of his loins he would raise up a 
great one to sit on his throne in perpetuity. God 
could make this covenant without any limitations 
whatever, because he had already arranged that Jesus, 
according to the flesh, should be born of the house, 
of the lineage, of David and that his throne should 
be forever. David's throne, we are to remember, was 
the throne of the Lord, as we read, "Solomon sat 
upon the throne of the Lord in the room of his father 
David." God never acknowledged any throne in 
Israel except his own. It was entrusted to David 
for a time, and after him for a time to his posterity 
according to the flesh: it has been "overturned" during 
"the times of the Gentiles," but eventually, "he 
shall come whose right it is," and the Lord will give 
it unto him— the throne of the Lord, the throne of 
David. Indeed, even the name of David was a synonym 
for Immanuel, since its meaning is "Beloved." 
Christ is God's beloved Son in whom he is well 
pleased, and to whom, therefore, he has appointed the 
honors, dignities and authority of the Kingdom 
which is to bless all the families of the earth, according 
to the promises made to Abraham. 

Another unconditional promise, or covenant, is 
called the "New Covenant." This one is also without 
limitations, without conditions; the divine Word 
says, "Behold the days come, saith the Lord, when I 

R3108 : page 344 

will make a New Covenant with the house of Israel 
and with the house of Judah: not according to the 
covenant that I made with their fathers in the day 
when I took them by the hand to lead them out of 
the Land of Egypt; because they continued not in 
my covenant, and I regarded them not [that being a 
conditional covenant], saith the Lord. But this is 
the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel 
after those days, saith the Lord: I will put my 
laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts; 
and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me 
a people: and they shall not teach every man his 
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know 
the Lord: for they shall all know me from the least 
to the greatest. For I will be merciful to their 
unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities 
will I remember no more."— Heb. 8:8-12. 

Nothing can be more clear than that this New 
Covenant is without a solitary condition, so far as the 
people to be blessed by it are concerned. It is a covenant 
or agreement wholly on one side— an unconditional 
promise on the Lord's part of what he will do 
for the world. We say for the world advisedly, because 
we are to remember that in respect to the Day 
of Atonement sacrifices and the blessings therefrom, 



Israel is a type of all the world of mankind desiring 
to come into covenant relationship with the Lord, as 
the Levites represented the household of faith, and 
the priesthood was typical of the royal priesthood, 
the Church,— Jesus the High Priest, and consecrated 
believers the underpriesthood.— I Pet. 2:9. 

What a wealth of blessing God has bound himself 
to accomplish for our race! How glad we are 
that there are no human conditions or limitations to 
hinder the fulfilment of these gracious promises, nor 
to unsettle our faith and our rejoicing therein! We 
do not mean to say that man will ultimately have 
nothing to do toward his own deliverance from sin 
and death; on the contrary, he will certainly not be 
delivered against his own will. But the blessings 
mentioned in these covenants are not the everlasting 

R3109 : page 344 

blessings pertaining to the eternity beyond the Millennium: 

they relate to the blessings of the Millennial 

age, which are, in divine providence, arranged 

to be world-wide— to include "all the families of the 

earth" for all of whom a blessing of knowledge and 

assistance and opportunity for return to divine favor 

has been provided by the Creator. 

But how could God do this, may be inquired,— 
if he is just and will not clear the guilty? How could 
he promise all these blessings and opportunities to 
those who are admittedly guilty— sinners? We answer 
that this part of the divine program and arrangement 
is specified particularly in the prophecy 
of Isaiah (42: 1-7.) There Jehovah points out 
his honored servant, the Lord Jesus, through 
whose faithfulness the entire work of blessing the 
world shall be accomplished; and the key to the entire 
matter is found in the statement "I. ..will 
appoint thee for a covenant of the people, for a light 
of the nations."— Vs. 6, Leeser. 

Israel's experiences under the Law Covenant prove 
to us what God knew beforehand; namely, that the 
fallen race was so out of condition as to be unable to 
keep any covenant which he could properly make 
with them. The proposition, therefore, upon which 
the Abrahamic Covenant and the New Covenant are 
based, is that God would provide a substitute for 
Adam in the person of his well beloved Son, who, 
first demonstrating his own worthiness, would delight 
in carrying out his Father's plan for the blessing of 
our race: and with him God would make the covenant 
for the blessing of the world. As the world's representative, 
he would appoint or enter into a covenant 
with him, on behalf of the people. And to this our 
Lord assents, declaring that his death was "for the 
sins of the whole world" and that it was "the blood 
of the New Covenant" that sealed, made binding, 



made effective, God's New Covenant. The New Covenant 

is given to Israel and the world only indirectly: 

the Father's dealings are not with Israel nor with the 

world under this New Covenant, but with the Mediator 

of the New Covenant,— the Christ. During this 

Gospel age he is accepting the Church as the members 

of the body of this great Mediator, through the 

merit of the Head. When the entire Mediator shall 

be complete, the covenant will come into force, become 

effective to all the families of the earth,— thus constituting 

the blessing mentioned in the covenant made 

with Abraham. 

The curse of the divine sentence will then end, 
and divine favor and power will be given the great 
Mediator who shall then begin his great work of ruling 
and teaching mankind in righteousness, and administering 
laws and regulations for their benefit;— 
for their physical, social, mental and moral uplifting. 
The whole arrangement shall be in the hands of the 
Mediator and his work of helping and restoring the 
race which he purchased with his blood shall progress 
throughout the Millennial age. At the close of the 
Millennial age, having accomplished all that can possibly 
be accomplished for the race,— having brought 
all to a knowledge of the truth, having given all an 
opportunity of restoration to divine favor and restitution 
to perfection,— there will be a final testing on 
the Father's part, and all found worthy— all who 

R3109 : page 345 

shall have learned to appreciate the divine character 
and the principles of the divine law— will be granted 
life-everlasting; and all found contrary to this shall 
be esteemed wicked, and shall be destroyed from 
amongst the people.— Acts 3:23; Psa. 145:20. 

"THAT WE MIGHT HAVE STRONG CONSOLATION, WHO 
HAVE FLED FOR REFUGE TO LAY HOLD UPON THE 
HOPE SET BEFORE US: WHICH HOPE WE HAVE 
AS AN ANCHOR OF THE SOUL, BOTH SURE 
AND STEADFAST. "-HEB. 6:18,19. 

The words of our text apply to these exceeding 
great and precious covenant-promises of the divine 
Word. They assure us that our God will never break 
these covenants— yea, more, that he will not even alter, 
or amend, or change them in any particular. We can 
rest in hope, assured that he who has begun the good 
work in us and on behalf of the world, is able not 
only to complete the work in us, but to accomplish 
more for the world than it or we can ask or comprehend. 
Does not this knowledge of the immutability 
of the divine covenants give us a confidence, a faith in 
the Lord which brings with it strong consolation for 
every trial, every difficulty, every disappointment of 



this present time— assuring us that all of our experiences 
are working together as parts of a great whole 
of the divine program, not only for our glory, 
honor, immortality, but for the blessing of the world 
of mankind? They surely do ! Hallelujah, what a 
Savior! 

If now we allow our minds to gather in to some 
extent the scope of these promises as expanded and 
explained by the apostles in the New Testament, we 
see that they take hold of, not only the life which is 
to come, but also of that which now is. They give 
us new joy, new courage, new zeal, new incentive 
in connection with the common tasks and duties of 
life,— to our families, to our neighbors, and to ourselves, 
and above all to our God. And they give us 
confidence and assurance in all the great and gracious 
hopes set before us in the gospel— in the Lord's willingness 
to do for us, and in his power to do exceedingly 
and abundantly more than we can ask or think. 

GODLIKE FAITHFULNESS TO COVENANTS. 

In two ways we who are pupils in the school of 
Christ are instructed. (1) By being shown through 
the perfect law of liberty our weaknesses and imperfections. 
(2) By being shown God's greatness and 
perfection. We need to see that we are not right, 
that we come far short of the glorious condition in 
which we (in Adam) were created, and which condition 
alone God could pronounce or consider "very 
good." The longer and more intently we look into 
the perfect law of liberty, the more we will discern 
our own blemishes, and the less favorably we are 
likely to think of ourselves; so that we might become 
discouraged were it not for the Lord's assurance that 
while he knows our imperfections better than we do, 
yet he is not regarding these, but covering them— 
allowing the merit of our dear Redeemer as a robe of 
righteousness to make us perfect and acceptable before 
him;— and that this acceptance and covering 
applies to us as long as we are seeking to walk in the 
Lord's way— "not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit." We see the Lord's character portrayed in 
his law given to Israel; and again in the still higher 
statement of that law, expressed by Jesus as the perfect 
law, the comprehensive law, the Law of Love— God's 
law, necessarily representing his character. Furthermore, 
God's promises also represent his character, 
and this double revealing to us of the divine character 
is with a view to an incitement of our love for 
those principles of righteousness, goodness, truth. 

While seeking to copy the Lord in every particular, 
and to be fully rounded out in character-likeness 
to him, let us now have specially in mind as a part of 
the lesson of this text, God's faithfulness to his engagements; 
and let us, as his people, resolve that by 



his assistance and grace we will grow daily in this 
quality, in his likeness— that we, also, may say of 
ourselves, concerning our covenants or agreements, 
as the Lord says of himself, "My covenant will I 
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my 
lips." 

COVENANTS-COMPLETE AND INCOMPLETE. 

As there are some who are not sufficiently conscientious 
in their covenants and engagements— not 
sufficiently aware of the responsibilities assumed in 
making a covenant, and who are, therefore, disposed 
to break them or to alter them, so there are some, on 
the other hand, who have not their conscience sufficiently 
balanced by their other reasoning faculties to 
understand the difference between complete and incomplete 
agreements. These have need of a word of 
caution on what constitutes a final and irrevocable 
covenant, bargain, agreement. Mankind in general 
has long recognized the difference between the discussion 
of an agreement and the consummation of the 
same; hence it is that civil law, in the interest of 
peace and justice, makes the arrangement that in 
matters pertaining to the purchase or sale of real 
estate, a binding agreement or contract shall be in 
writing, and shall be signed and sealed as final and 
irrevocable. The conversation respecting the matter 
may progress for minutes, for hours, for weeks, for 

R3109 : page 346 

months, as the case may be, and one feature after another 

may be discussed pro and con, and terms may 

be discussed over and over,— but the bargain is not 

complete until the matter has been finally stated in 

writing in a manner acceptable to both parties, and 

their acceptance of the same indicated by their signatures, 

and the passing of some money or other consideration. 

Once such an absolute contract has been made, 

no child of God should think of breaking it, unless it 

should develop that he had been the subject of fraud 

and misrepresentation, and through this had been induced 

to sign. But the point we wish to make is, that 

there was a definite time when the covenant was made, 

after which it must not be broken, and that up to 

that time either party had the unquestionable right 

to alter, change, or amend his views respecting it and 

to act accordingly. The Lord's people should learn, 

more and more, to exercise the "spirit of a sound 

mind";— to think well of what they are about to do, 

before doing it;— and this implies also that they will 

seek for divine guidance in what they do. Indeed, 

having covenanted themselves to the Lord, with all 

of their interests and affairs, they are to treat every 

matter from this standpoint, and to consult the divine 



will and to follow it to the best of their understanding, 
leaving all the subsequent consequences and results 
in the Lord's care. 
A matter which sometimes has given rise to considerable 

R3110 : page 346 

difficulty among the Lord's people, is marriage 

engagements. There is confusion of thought 

as to how much obligation goes with an "engagement." 

Under the Jewish arrangement the betrothal 

preceded the marriage festivities by about a year, 

but the betrothal was really the marriage. It was 

discussed pro and con by the friends of the bride and 

bridegroom, and all particulars arranged and put into 

writing and signed. It was so binding that unfaithfulness 

on the part of the bride to her betrothal vows 

was punishable under the law. This Jewish custom 

was evidently arranged purposely to be a type of the 

betrothal of the Gospel Church to Christ, her heavenly 

Bridegroom. Our contract of union with the 

Lord, both on his part and ours, is entered into now, 

during the Gospel age, but the actual union or 

"nuptial feast," will not take place until, at his second 

advent, the entire company of the Bride shall 

have passed beyond the vail, "changed"— entered 

into the joys of her Lord. But marriage "engagements," 

as they are known amongst us to-day, are 

totally different from Jewish "betrothals." 

According to our custom, the marriage covenant 
is entered into a legal manner either before an 
officer representing the civil authorities, or by a ceremony 
performed by a minister of the gospel. This is 
the marriage covenant; this is binding; this is unalterable; 
this must not be broken; the pledges here 
made must be observed, in letter and spirit. But the 
"engagements," which frequently last for weeks, 
months, or years preceding the marriage covenant, 
are not covenants at all— in the strict, proper sense of 
the word. They are merely provisional arrangements 
between the parties looking forward to a marriage 
covenant and ceremony as their consummation;— and 
so much so, that any treating of the "engagement" 
as a consummated union is declared illegal, unlawful. 
Of course it might be possible for two persons to make 
such vows to each other without the presence of a 
minister or other ceremony, as to be properly binding 
and obligatory throughout life; but this is unusual, 
extremely exceptional, and forbidden by State laws 
as contrary to general welfare. 

The marriage "engagement," therefore, properly 
understood, is merely a provisional agreement 
between a man and a woman eligible to marriage, to 
keep each other's company with a view to marriage 
—with a view to such an intimate acquaintance with 
each other's characters, dispositions, affairs, etc., as 



would give to each reasonable opportunity of judging 

as to the desirability of consummating a marriage 

covenant. Of course, this implies equally an opportunity 

and right to decide not to marry if in his or 

her judgment it would not be desirable. In breaking 

any ordinary agreement or "engagement" for marriage 

there is nothing, therefore, that is dishonorable 

or covenant breaking,— but everything that is reasonable, 

right, proper. It is in the interests of both 

parties that it should be so. If either party is disposed 

to cancel the "engagement," it would certainly be 

unwise, as well as unjust, for the other party to selfishly 

insist on consummating it with a marriage covenant, 

which would be binding; because a marriage 

is only for those who are one, and if either party feels 

to the contrary of this, it is the very best reason why 

both should conclude they are not one in their interests, 

tastes, preferences, etc. 

We mention this matter here particularly because 
it is a question that is frequently referred to us by 
persons engaged to be married at the time the truth 
reaches them. They come to see matters in a new 
light: life comes to have a new meaning for them 
under the illumination of the truth, and marriage 
comes to have a new force and weight; a decision respecting 
a partner in life comes to be a question in 
which the Lord's will is recognized as paramount. 
The other party to the engagement generally fails to 
see the change in conditions, and perhaps admires the 

R3110 : page 347 

proposed companion all the more, because of the 

graces which the truth adds to character. The unregenerate 

may perhaps incline to be insistent, and to 

urge that it would be wrong for the Christian to break 

an "engagement." This is unsound reasoning, 

wholly sophistical; and those who use it are generally 

fully aware of this; and yet it is sufficient at 

times to cause great trouble of conscience to some who 

are anxious to fulfil their obligations in every 

particular. 

This is our justification for these extended remarks 
on this phase of the subject. 



R3110 : page 347 

GIDEON'S BAND TRIUMPHANT. 

-JUDGES 7:l-8-NOVEMBER 30- 

"It is better to trust in the Lord than to 
put confidence in man."— Psa. 118:8. 



GIDEON was one of the judges of Israel raised 
up by the Lord. He delivered his people 
from the Midianites who had invaded Palestine 
and taken possession of its most fertile part, pillaging 
the country of its produce. Under God's special 
covenant with Israel we know that he would have 
protected them from these invaders had they remained 
faithful to him. We are not surprised, therefore, that 
the narrative shows that the Israelites at this time 
had succumbed to the idolatrous influences of the 
Canaanites who still dwelt in the land. Gideon's 
father was one of the chief men of his tribe and district, 
and upon his plantation he had erected a statue 
to Baal in the midst of a consecrated grove, on a 
hilltop. Notwithstanding this established idolatry in 
the home, Gideon appears to have had considerable 
knowledge of the true God and of the deliverances 
effected by him for his people in the past, and when 
conversing with his angel visitor he shows not only 
his knowledge of the Lord's dealings in the past, but 
his surprise that he had ceased to care for his people. 
It did not seem even to occur to him that the Lord's 
disfavor, as manifested in the successes of the Midianites 
against Israel, was on account of Israel's disloyalty 
to the Lord in idolatry, etc. It is probable 
that this same sentiment pervaded the nation in general 
and that, in some sense of the word, they respected 
Jehovah at the same time they worshipped 
Baal also. 

God's favors to spiritual Israel and his protection 
are along spiritual lines against spiritual enemies and 
spiritual difficulties; and yet, how few spiritual Israelites 
when they get into spiritual difficulties realize that 
it must, in some sense of the word, be traceable to the 
Lord's providences! How few of them properly look 
to see to what extent their spiritual adversities, weaknesses, 
coldness, alienation from the Lord, etc., are 
due to the permission of some kind of idolatry in their 
hearts! Not an idolatry, probably, that entirely ignores 
the Lord; but one which, while thinking favorably 
of his spiritual blessings and victories of the past, 
simply wonders at his disfavor of the present, and 
fails to recognize that it is impossible to serve at the 
same time both God and Mammon; that God's favor 
and close communion and protection can not be expected 
while we permit in our hearts a rival reverence 
for wealth or fame or human institutions and creeds, 
or self or family, to any degree or extent. 

Evidently the Lord saw that the Israelites were at 
this time ripe for a change;— that under the adversities 
inflicted through their enemies they were humbled 
to such an extent that they would be ready to 
see where was their fault, and to turn from idolatry 
again to the Lord. But the Lord wished an agent for 
his service, and instead of using a supernatural one— 
an angel— he chose, as usual, to use a man. And he 



chose, as usual, to use a suitable man, fit for the purpose. 
Gideon would seem to have been a man of 
middle age, for he had a son at this time of probably 
fifteen years of age; he was well born, as is implied by 
the record that he was fine of form and feature. 

True, the adage is "handsome is, that handsome 
does"; it is true, too, that some who are handsome 
fail to measure up to their appearance in the conduct 
of life; nevertheless, it is beyond question that 
to those who can read character, the face and form, 
unless marred by accident, indicate the character and 
the training. The noble, the brave, the generous, the 
wise, by nature, by birth, show these qualities in feature 
and form; nevertheless God is not always able 
to use as his servants the naturally noblest and finest 
of the human family: too frequently with such nobility 
goes a spirit of pride and self-conceit, which renders 
the individual unsuited to the Lord's purposes of the 
present time, when humility and obedience to the 
Lord are the prime essentials. The Apostle noted 
this, saying that not many wise, not many noble, not 
many learned hath God chosen, but the weak things 
and the ignoble things— rich in faith, heirs of the 
Kingdom. (I Cor. 1:26.) How gracious is this arrangement 
which opens the way to the highest divine 
favor for the humblest who hears the voice of the 
Lord and responds thereto with humility and zeal! 
Let the ignoble, then, who have tasted of the Lord's 
grace, be encouraged to trust that even though ignoble 
by nature the grace of the Lord is able to work in 
them such a transformation of character that they may 
in heart, at least, became copies of God's dear Son, 
and thus be prepared for the finishing touches of our 
promised "change" in the First Resurrection. 

As Gideon's band may be considered a figure or 
illustration of the overcomers of this Gospel age, the 
Church, the little flock,— so Gideon himself would 
fitly represent the Captain of our salvation, whose 
example we are to follow, and whose character is to 
impress all his followers. Of Gideon it is declared that 
he looked like a king's son— that in appearance, form, 
etc., he had a nobility which marked him as above the 
ordinary rank and file. So our Lord Jesus is the 
King's Son, and so all whom he accepts to be of his 
little band, his little flock, are to be conformed to his 
image by the power of God working in them "to will 

R3110 : page 348 

and do of his good pleasure;" working in them 
through a knowledge of the truth;— the knowledge of 
the exceeding great and precious promises of God's 
Word. Whatever they are by nature, it is God's design 
that eventually they shall be like their Lord and 
Captain, see him as he is and share his glory, honor 
and immortality. 



After receiving the Lord's invitation to be the 
deliverer of his people, Gideon also received a test: 
he was to hew down the trees constituting the grove 
of Baal and was to overthrow the statue and was to 
offer to the Lord sacrifices upon a rock, using the 
wood from Baal's grove and image as the fuel. Sure 
that he was following the Lord's command, he did 
not wait to gain even the consent of his father, much 
less that of his people in that vicinity who he knew 
would be greatly incensed by such a procedure. Assuring 
himself that his commands were of the Lord, 
he hesitated not one moment but accomplished the 
destruction and made the offering, doing the work by 
night knowing it would be interrupted by the people 
if done in the day time. The citizens of his clan demanded 
his life, appealing the matter to his father 
who, evidently, was a chief amongst them; but the 
wise decision of the father was that if Baal could not 
defend himself against his son, there was certainly no 
need of any one taking up the cause of Baal. 

Thus the Lord protected the one whom he had 
chosen for his servant and brought him more markedly 
than ever before the attention of the people, so 
that when he sent out invitations for volunteers from 
various quarters, an army of thirty-odd thousand assembled 
to his standard. Then came the sifting which 
is particularly noted in this lesson; (1) Gideon's army 
had a chance to see the hosts of the enemy, more 
than five times as numerous; (2) they had a chance to 
consider that their enemies were used to warfare while 
they as a people had for now a long time been accustomed 
to the peaceable pursuits of agriculture. 
When, therefore, Gideon requested that as many as 
felt fearful should withdraw, it depleted his army to 
the extent of two-thirds; yet many if not all of these 
who first volunteered but were now rejected, probably 
had an opportunity a little later on of joining in 
the battle after the Midianites had been discomfited 
and were in full retreat. But the ten thousand courageous 
men, fearless in the presence of an enemy 
many times their own strength, must have been men 
of faith in the Lord, men who, in some respects at 
least, resembled Gideon, in their hearts, in their courage, 
in their trust in Jehovah; nevertheless there were 
still too many for the Lord's purpose, and a thorough 
sifting was made by which the Lord separated three 
hundred of their number for his special service under 
Gideon. 

The selection of Gideon's little flock reminds us 
of the selection of the Lord's spiritual people. Of 
these there is first a call to faith in the Lord, resulting 
in justification and acceptance; secondly, there is a 
call to consecration, in full view of the requirements, 
in full view of the enemy, and our Captain requests 
all of the justified ones who come to him to sit down 
first and count the cost, whether or not they are willing 



to sacrifice their all under his leadership. The 

large majority when they come to see the cost, to 

realize the battle that must be waged between the followers 

of the Lord and the forces of the world, the 

flesh and the Devil, are rather inclined to say, We prefer 

not to engage in battle, we are timid, we are fearful, 

we have not sufficient confidence either in Gideon or 

Gideon's God. It is in accord with the Lord's will 

that such should be considered separate from God's 

army, though they may have subsequently an opportunity 

for joining in the battle against evil. 

It is not sufficient that we should have faith in 
the Lord and in the Captain of our salvation and 
should make our consecration to the Lord's will; but 
further tests are made with the view to making a final 
selection of a very special class to constitute the little 
flock. It will be the test of water— symbolizing the 
truth; it becomes a very important question to every 
consecrated one as he is brought to a knowledge of 
the truth how he will receive it,— appropriate it: in 
the picture or type those accepted of God to be Gideon's 
little flock, used their hands to lift the water to 
their mouths, a sup at a time as a dog uses his tongue 
to lift the water; while the others drank like as a horse 
who puts his mouth into the water and sucks it. The 
hand is a symbol of energy and we might understand 
this to signify that the persons most approved of the 
Lord, will use energy and discretion in partaking of 
the truth— these will not bow down in the mire of human 
servility, but will maintain their own erectness 
of manhood and will partake of the water of truth, 
lifting their heads upward and acknowledging its 
heavenly origin by whatever stream or channel it may 
come to them. 

The selection complete, the remainder of the 
brave men were not sent home but to Gideon's tent, 
or headquarters, there to be ready for their share in 
the battle later. Those whom God would specially 
use were supplied with peculiar implements; first a 
ram's horn; secondly, a pitcher; thirdly, a lamp, or 
torch, placed inside the pitcher and thus obscured 
from the view of their enemies. The three hundred 
were divided into three companies and the individuals 
of each company were scattered. They approached 
close to the enemy and practically surrounded their 
camp; when Gideon blew, all who heard the blast 
gave similar blasts upon their trumpets; when Gideon 
broke his pitcher and let the light of his torch or firebrand 
gleam forth, the others did the same, blowing 
meantime with their trumpets and alternately shouting, 
"The sword of the Lord and of Gideon." It was 
the Lord's battle and the Lord's arrangement and it 
carried out as intended; the Midianites awakened 
from their slumbers, panic stricken, believed themselves 
surrounded by immense hosts, and fled precipitately, 
killing one another in their fright and confusion. 



Perceiving the routes they would take, Gideon 
hastened with his ten thousand followers to intercept 
them and to complete the defeat. Meanwhile others 
of the people, learning of the condition of things, 
joined in the battle to the ultimate and utter discomfiture 

R3110 : page 349 

of the Midianites, and the destruction of the 

vast majority of their hosts, including their leaders. 

Our Captain, the Lord, has given special instructions 
to those whom he will specially use in the conflict 
of evil now in progress. Each one shall follow 
the example of the Captain of our salvation; first, 
he shall blow upon the trumpet representing the proclamation 
of the truth, and that the sword of the spirit 
of truth is of Jehovah and of his anointed Son, and 
secondly, they shall break their pitchers and let their 
light shine out. The pitchers represent our earthen 
vessels, and the breaking of them in order to let the 
light shine out signifies that to which we are exhorted 
by the Apostle; saying, "I beseech you therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, 
your reasonable service." We see how our Chief-Captain 
broke his earthen vessel; we see what a light 
streamed forth. Our highest ambition must be to 
follow his example, to walk in his steps, to lay down 
our lives for the brethren as he laid down his life for 
us. Meantime the blowing of the trumpet is to progress 
and the shouting in the name of Jehovah, our 
Captain, and the sword of the spirit of truth is to be 
wielded;— the result will be victory; the enemies of 
the Lord will be overwhelmed. 

But many others than the little flock will be associated 
in the work of overthrow, though theirs will 
be a special work as specially chosen instruments of 
the Lord. Now is the time for response to the call of 
our Captain; now is the time for standing the tests 
and being full of faith and confidence in the Lord, 
that he is able to give us the victory. Now is the 
time for standing the test of truth, accepting it as 
from the Lord and lifting our hearts in gratitude. 
Now is the time for understanding the will of the Captain, 
following his example, and imitating him and 
laying down our lives for the brethren, and as sacrifices, 
holy and acceptable to God and our reasonable 
service. Now is the time for the proclamation 
and for publicly declaring our confidence in him who 
called us, who gave us the light and who has privileged 
us to be his little flock; and very shortly will 
come the time for the fleeing of the enemy. Let us 
be faithful to our tests and opportunities, and thus be 
accounted worthy of a share in the service and the 
glory that shall follow. 



R3110 : page 349 

"THY PEOPLE SHALL BE MY PEOPLE." 

--RUTH l:16-22-DECEMBER 7- 

"Be kindly affectioned one toward another."— Rom. 12:10. 

WHILE THE BOOK OF RUTH is not prophetical, 
but merely historical, it is valuable to 
us in various ways. (1) It furnishes an important 
link in the chronological chain leading down to King 
David and, hence, a part of the chronological line leading 
down to the Man Christ Jesus. (2) It gives a 
glimpse of the habits and customs of the Israelites in 
general as an agricultural people. In this respect it 
is in marked contrast with the Books of Judges, Kings 
and Chronicles, which dealt more particularly with 
the rulers, generals and wars. (3) The story of Ruth 
points a very beautiful lesson of fidelity, sympathy 
and love amongst the people at that time, and inculcates 
a similar lesson of kindness of disposition amongst 
the spiritual Israelites, guaranteeing them, along this 
line, blessings both for the present and for the future. 

Somewhere about Gideon's time, when scarcity 
amounting almost to famine prevailed in Palestine, as 
a judgment of the Lord upon his people for some measure 
of coldness or unfaithfulness to him and to their 
covenant, Naomi's husband determined to emigrate 
with his family to the other side of the Dead Sea— to 
the land of Moab. The Moabites were the descendants 
of Lot, but, nevertheless, the Lord marked out to his 
people Israel that they were not to be considered the 
children of Abraham— that they were not fellow-heirs 
of the promises made to Abraham, and, therefore, they 
were not subjects of special dealings, disciplines, providences, 
etc., as were the Israelites. Naomi and her 
two sons went with her husband apparently without 
regret, to the land of Moab, hoping thereby to better 
the prospects of the family. It was a mistake, however, 
as she afterwards realized, to attempt to regulate 
their own affairs when they were specially under the 
Lord's protection and guidance. 

As Israelites they should have esteemed the divine 
promises so highly that they would not have left 
the land of promise and the people of promise to 
commingle with those who were strangers to those promises 
and more or less idolaters. To be on the Lord's 
side amongst the Lord's people should have been esteemed 
far more important than earthly prospects. Naomi, 
however, is not to blame in connection with this matter; 
the responsibility rested with her husband, and it 
is evident that her heart was never fully in sympathy 
with the move, because about ten years subsequently, 



when her husband and two sons died, she promptly 
determined on a return to the Lord's people and to the 
land which he had given them. 

Human nature is much the same everywhere and 
always. How many there are to-day who mistakenly 
seek to map out their plans for the present life in disregard 
of their highest interests, in disregard of the 
Lord's promises and the relationship which they have 
entered into by covenant with him ! How many there 
are who forget that the Lord's arrangement with all of 

R3110 : page 350 

his covenant people is that he will supervise their 
affairs and cause all things to work together for good to 
them ! Instead of making temporal interests the chief 
concern, Naomi's husband should have been making 
the religious interests of himself and family his chief 
concern, so that if he had been living in Moab under 
greater prosperity, he should rather have been willing 
to go into the land of promise amongst the Lord's people, 
though such a course would seem to mean a 
blighting of some of his earthly interests. 

The Lord's people of Spiritual Israel will do well 
to bear this thought continually in mind— that spiritual 
interests are to be given the preference always; 
that temporal affairs are to be managed and controlled 
from the standpoint of the everlasting welfare;— from 
the standpoint of spiritual growth and development 
and prosperity;— from the standpoint of the best interests 
and influences upon their children. They should 
not only hesitate to follow any suggestion that would 
take themselves and their families into unfavorable, 
godless surroundings, but they should determine that 
not under any consideration would they follow such a 

R3111 : page 350 

suggestion;— that on the contrary the Lord's people 
should be their people, even though this meant less 
of the comforts and luxuries of this present life: it 
would surely mean greater spiritual blessings and favors 
for the present time, and persevering would mean 
the gaining of the glorious reward which our Lord has 
promised to the faithful who love him more than they 
love houses and lands and kindred, etc. 

Evidently Naomi's life and example and her faithfulness 
to the Lord had made an impression amongst 
those with whom she was specially in contact,— her 
two daughters-in-law, both of whom resolved to go 
back with her to the land of Canaan. On the journey, 
however, she reflected that these two young women 
would be sacrificing much— leaving kindred, homes, 
acquaintances, customs, and good prospects to go with 
her to a land where they would be considered foreigners 
and probably be discriminated against. She, therefore, 



urged them to return to their own people, to the 

religious worship, etc., to which they had been accustomed. 

She feared that their resolution to accompany 

her would result in disappointment later on. 

Her disinterested course in this matter reminds us 

very much of our Lord's words to some who proposed 

to become his disciples. He advised them first of all 

to sit down and count the cost; this he did, not because 

he wished to stumble or to turn back any who 

had inclinations to follow in his footsteps, but because 

it is best on general principles that people should not 

undertake that in which their hearts are not fully and 

deeply interested; because, otherwise, they are sure to 

make a failure. They who sit down and count the 

cost and then rejoicingly follow in the Lord's footsteps 

of suffering and trial, glad to be accounted worthy to 

suffer for his name's sake, and to walk in his footsteps, 

—they alone are the kind who will gain the prize. 

Those who would follow without the spirit of sacrifice 

would be sure to miss the prize, and all the sacrificing 

they might do would be burdensome and measurably 

disappointing. 

Naomi's argument appealed to one of her daughters-in-law, 
who did return to her Moabitish home, 
concluding that after all it would be too much of a sacrifice 
for her to part with her kindred, etc. Ruth, on 
the contrary, had come to love her mother-in-law so 
deeply and to respect her religion so thoroughly that 
although it cost a tear to part with home and kindred 
and to contemplate the trials of poverty in a foreign 
land, she, nevertheless, fully resolved that such a home 
amongst those who reverenced the true God and were 
heirs of his promises was more to be esteemed than 
anything she was leaving. Her impassioned words to 
her mother-in-law are noted throughout the world as 
being amongst the most beautiful expressions of sympathy, 
kindness and devotion. Some one has arranged 
them in poetic form, thus:— 

"Entreat me not to leave thee, 

And to return from following after thee; 

For whither thou goest, I will go; 

And where thou lodgest, I will lodge; 

Thy people shall be my people, 

And thy God, my God; 

Where thou diest I will die, and there will I be 
buried. 

The Lord do so to me, and more also, 

If aught but death part thee and me."— Vs. 16,17. 
A good and faithful, God-fearing, God-serving, 
God-honoring mother-in-law, Naomi surely was, to 
have so deeply interested Ruth in herself and in 
her God and in his promises to her people. There 
is a lesson here, not only for mothers-in-law, but 
for all of the Lord's people. Not all are able to 
preach and to teach the Word of God publicly or privately, 
but all can teach through their daily lives and 



glorify their Father in heaven in their bodies and spirits 

which are his, by living a godly life, by telling in 

the simplest manner of the hopes and promises which 

control their own hearts and inspire their own courage 

and devotion. The Apostle Paul had in mind this 

same thought of the general influence of life and character 

when he said, "Ye are manifestly declared to be 

the epistle of Christ." Our Lord had the same thought 

in mind when he declared, "Ye are the light of the 

world.... Let your light so shine before men, that 

they may see your good works, and glorify your Father 

which is in heaven." That Naomi had told her 

R3111 : page 351 

daughters-in-law respecting her God and his promises 
to his people is evident; but to have told them of this 
and not to have acted and spoken and lived in accord 
with this faith and hope, would have been contradictory 
and, undoubtedly, never would have influenced 
Ruth to forsake her own people and her father's house, 
and to cast in her lot with her mother-in-law and the 
Israelites. 

Arrived at her home city, Bethlehem, Naomi, who 
had been well known ten years before, and whose 
friends probably never expected to see her again, was 
greeted by her name; but she replied, Call me no 
longer Naomi (which signifies lovable, pleasant), but 
call me rather Marah (which signifies bitter). She 
explained to them that the Lord's providences in respect 
to her affairs had been severe afflictions;— the 
Lord had testified against her course— had not prospered 
herself and family in the course they had taken. 
No doubt later on she came to see that the Lord's 
afflictions upon her had really been for her good, bringing 
her back to the land of promise and to fellowship 
with her people, so that her last days were probably 
the best of her life. 

So at times it may be with some of the Lord's 
spiritual Israelites; his chastisements and afflictions and 
disciplines may seem to indicate his displeasure, but 
really, from the standpoint of faith and knowledge, 
they may afterward be seen to have been blessings in 
disguise. However, much depends upon the way in 
which the Lord's disciplines are received. Had Naomi 
suffered herself to become sour and morose and rebellious 
against the Lord, no blessing would have followed 
her trying experiences; but the fact that she permitted 
these to draw her closer to the Lord and to his people 
formed the channel of her blessings. And this lesson 
also is easily applied by us all as spiritual Israelites to 
our experiences. 

The remainder of the lesson gives us an insight 
into the customs of the time, and incidentally shows 
us how the Lord rewarded the noble character and 
faith of Ruth. That she did not come to Bethlehem 



with great expectations and selfish motives is evidenced 
by the fact that she set out to earn a living for herself 
and her mother-in-law. She was young and 
strong, and could, after the manner of the times, go 
into the harvest fields and glean such stray handfuls 
of the grain as were missed by the men who did the 
reaping. This was permitted by the Jewish law; the 
grain growing in the fence corners might be gathered 
by any of the poor for their own use. Providentially 
Ruth was guided in her humble efforts to make a living, 
to the field of a man who was a kinsman to Naomi, 
and to whom she (Ruth) was subsequently married 
and became one of the mothers in Israel, from whom 
descended King David and ultimately Mary, the 
mother of Jesus. 

It is well that the Lord's people note even in this 
little incident something that may be helpful to them. 
We are to commit our way to the Lord and sincerely 
and unselfishly determine to follow the path of righteousness; 
then the Lord shall be our God; then his 
people shall be our people. Testings will come as to 
whether or not we are willing to do our duty in respect 
to the common affairs of life, laboring with our hands, 
providing things honest in the sight of all men. As 
we go forward in the line of duty, the Lord guides our 
steps and overrules in our affairs and brings us blessings, 
but if we fail to take the proper steps and to do 
with our might what our hands find to do, we miss the 
blessings. 

The fact that these two women could journey from 
Moab to Bethlehem by themselves and without molestation, 
and the fact that Ruth, unknown and unprotected, 
could safely glean in the fields without interference 
of any kind, speaks to us strongly of the general law 
and order prevalent amongst the Israelites— the general 
recognition of the divine law and the general conformity 
thereto. We are to remember, too, that at this 
time the laws were liberally administered, and that, so 
far as we are made aware, there was neither army or 
police organization to enforce them. The people were 
comparatively free and evidently in some respects 
moral, noble and trustworthy. This is illustrated 
further in the course of Boaz. How few employers of 
labor to-day, as they visit their farms, would be in any 
degree inclined to salute their laborers as Boaz did his; 
saying, "The Lord be with you!" And how few farm 
laborers of to-day would respond as did these of Boaz; 
—"They answered him, The Lord bless thee." Evidently 
the employers and employees of our day could 
learn some profitable lessons from the past, notwithstanding 
the fact that Evolutionists would endeavor to 
convince us that back in the days of Boaz men must 
have been much nearer the monkey condition than 
to-day. The facts are to the contrary. 

Furthermore, we notice the generosity of Boaz, 
that instead of dealing selfishly and miserly in respect 



to the gleanings of the woman, he gave directions to 
his servants that they purposely let fall an occasional 
handful when binding the grain, that Ruth's gleanings 
might thus be enlarged. Christian employers and 
employees need not to go back to the Jewish Law and 
to the customs of the Jews as illustrated by Boaz and 
his laborers; for we have a still higher law and much 

R3112: page 351 

advantage every way over them. If their knowledge 
of the Lord led them to kindly salutations and kindly 
actions, much more should the Christian's greater 
knowledge of the divine will and his anointing of the 
holy spirit enable him to be kind, considerate and 
affectionate toward others— doing good unto all men as 
we have opportunity, especially to the household of 
faith. 

Our Golden Text is an exhortation to spiritual 
Israelites and is in full accord with the sentiments of 
this lesson as witnessed by the conduct of Naomi and 
Ruth and Boaz and his laborers. Let us with increasing 
light and knowledge and privilege make still further 
progress in all the fruits of the spirit of love. 

Finally,— It is unsafe to neglect to have the Lord 
for our God, and to neglect to make his people our 
people. Acceptance of the Lord means ultimately a 
change in all of life's interests and affairs if we would 
abide in his love and favor. The sacrifice of earthly 
things may cost us tears and heart-aches at first; but 
eventually we will be more than compensated— as was 
Ruth, only in higher, spiritual blessings. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIII. DECEMBER 1, 1902. No. 23. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 355 

The Church as the Maker of the 
World's Conscience 355 

Sees Industrial War Ahead 357 

The Mountain of the Lord's House 357 

"Speak, Lord; for thy Servant 

Heareth." 359 

Christmas Hopes and Joys 362 

Review of the Year 365 

"The Lord is My Shepherd." 365 

Interesting Letters 366 

Special Items 354 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



OUR CHARTS. 



WALL CHARTS, five feet long, painted on substantial curtain 
cloth, with spring roller. Suitable for parlor meetings and 
small halls. These are in good supply, at $1.50 each, express 
paid. 

We have been delayed in sending out the small prophetic 
charts suitable for insertion in the new Bibles, on account of 



our printers. We hope to have these before long, and will 
make further announcement later. 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 

MANY of the truths of the Gospel were "preached beforehand" 
in the types and shadows of the Jewish economy. In 
the service of the tabernacle in the wilderness were embodied 
the principles of the entire plan of salvation, based upon the 
sacrifice of Christ, as represented in the bullock whose blood, 
sprinkled upon the mercy seat, made atonement. 

The significance of each article in the tabernacle, as well as 
of the sacrifices made therein, is set forth in TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
OF BETTER SACRIFICES, a pamphlet of 120 pages, neatly 
bound and illustrated. We have this booklet in good supply 
now. Price, 10 cents, postpaid; 50 cents per dozen. 



R3112: page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

THE CHURCH AS THE MAKER OF THE WORLD'S 
CONSCIENCE. 

THIS TOPIC is treated in a manner with which we 
sympathize but do not agree, by Rev. S. Z. 
Batten, in an article in the American Journal 
of Sociology. He asserts that money and military 
glory are the "false ideals" before the world, and 
inquires whether or not the Church has really spoken 
out against either of these. He thinks not and 
proceeds:— 

"In church and college, in society and in the 
press, rich men are honored and flattered and held up 
as models to be adored and imitated. The influence 
of all this, as any one can see, is to degrade the common 
morals; it is to set up a false ideal of life; it is 
to fire the imagination of the young with unholy and 
unworthy ambitions; it is to cast discredit on the 
poorer and humbler workers in the kingdom of God. 
Every careful student of modern society declares that 
the reign of commercialism has come, and with the 
reign of this commercialism there has come a sad confusion 
of moral values. This commercialism places 
money above life, and things before men. 'Our whole 
society,' says Felix Adler, 'is infiltrated with the 
money-getting idea.' There is danger lest a commercialism 
utterly destitute of moral and spiritual 
conceptions shall usurp the place which should be held 
by truer and Christlier ideals.... 

"Closely akin to this is another false ideal which 
is set up before the people for honor and imitation. 
As every one knows, the military ideal has held sway 
for untold ages over the minds and hearts of men, and 



the great men of history are largely military leaders 
and conquerors. How far militarism is necessary in 
an imperfect and evolving society it does not concern 
us here to inquire. The military captain no doubt 
has had his work to do in the world, and let him have 
his wreath of laurel leaves. But the military ideal, it 
is needless to say, is not the Christian ideal, and the 
two can never be completely harmonized." 

Mr. Batten considers it the Church's duty to 
quicken the political conscience of the world; and 
considers it a dangerous sign that people have ceased 
to expect unselfishness in politics. He continues:— 

"As every one knows, a double standard of morality 
prevails, and men have one kind of right for their 
personal and family lives, and a different kind of right 
for their political and commercial lives. All such 
things as sentiment, conscience and love are ruled out 
of politics, and we are told that the Decalogue and the 
Sermon on the Mount have nothing to do with a political 
campaign. ...The chancellor of the German 
empire has lately declared: 'I can not conduct foreign 
policy from the point of view of pure moral philosophy. 
It is not ours to ask what is right and what 
is wrong. The politician is no judge of morals; he 
has solely to maintain the interests and rights of his 
country.' Another man, not himself a practical politician, 
but a political philosopher, Professor Willoughby, 
declares: It is, in fact, quite superfluous to show 
in this age that from their own inherent nature divine 
and moral sanctions can have no application to political 
matters.' So long as such sentiments prevail in 
high places, it is not surprising that they should 
appear in low places. And so long as such sentiments 
prevail, whether in high places or in low, that long 
the church of Jesus Christ will have a most fiery and 
relentless mission." 

Inquiring into the church's attitude on social 
questions, he declares that "in our time the power of 
Christianity is to be proved by its ability to create a 
Christian type of human society," and adds:— 

"It is intolerable to all right religion that numbers 
of people should be miserable and needy while 
there is plenty to spare in the Father's house. No 
one who believes in Jesus Christ can believe that it is 
the will of the heavenly Father that one part of the human 
family shall go hungry and destitute while another 
part is living in luxury and ease. The most tragic fact 
about this poverty and ignorance is not the hunger 

R3112: page 356 

and suffering, though these are sad enough. The saddest 

feature about it all is the waste of human life, 

the fact that the wonderful possibilities in these human 

brothers are never unfolded and realized. A 

social and industrial system in which one man controls 



thousands of lives and is possessed of millions of 
money; in which able-bodied men willing to work 
walk the streets in desperation looking for a job; in 
which thousands of women, owing to oppressive labor 
and small remuneration, are under a continual temptation 
to barter womanhood for gain; in which are 
tenements not fit for pig-sties where women fight with 
fever, and infants pant for air and wail out their little 
lives; in which the sweater's den and the grog-shop 
thrive— such a society is very far, indeed, from that 
order which God wishes and ordains." 

To the query, Isn't this a hazardous topic? he 
replies:— 

"That may be; but hazardous to whom? To 
the preacher? All the real hazard to him arises from 
the fact that he is faithless to his trust. To the 
hearers? Would to God it were more hazardous to 
those who are guilty of the monstrous wrongs which 
hurt their fellows and hinder the kingdom of God!... 

"The mission of the church is evident; the 
church's credentials are clear; the need of the world 
is great. Nothing could be more weak and pitiful 
than for the churches to confess that whole provinces 
of life lie beyond their interest. Nothing could be 
more cruel and cowardly than for the churches to say 
that they have no word to offer on the problems which 
make the peril and the opportunity of our time. 
Nothing could be more calamitous and short-sighted 
than for the churches to leave to outsiders, to unbelievers 
often, the discussion of current wrongs and 
the leadership in moral reform." 

THE GENTLEMAN'S WRONG VIEW-POINT. 

We admire Mr. Batten's zeal and courage for the 
right, but discern that, like many more, he is in trouble 
by reason of a misconception of the divine plan of 
the ages and the Church's mission thereunder. 

The Church should, indeed, "lift up a standard 
for the people," the world;— in her pulpits, in her 
press, and in the "living epistles" of her people. 
But she is not to blame that the world in general will not 
follow her precepts and example. Did our Lord himself 
or his apostles transform politics? or reconstruct society? 
or abolish wars and injustices in their day? 
Assuredly not. Unsatisfactory as is the condition of 
things at present it was much worse for the poor 
"groaning creation" then. (Rom. 8:22.) Were our 
Lord and the apostles at fault then? By no means. 
Neither is the Church to blame that present conditions 
are what they are. 

But perhaps Rev. Batten would reply: The conditions 
now are different from what they were in the 
days of the apostles;— now we have what we call the 
"Christian World" of Europe and America and in 
these lands of "Christendom"; surely we should expect 



Christian methods in politics, finance and society. 

What folly, dear brother! Is it possible for us 
to deceive ourselves into thinking that the world is 
Christianized? Is it possible for us even to consider 
that the professed church-membership is Christianized? 
Surely the term Christian world is as much 
a misnomer as the term Christian Scientist. Calling 
worldliness Christianity no more makes it so 
than calling black white would change it. 

The Church "whose names are written in heaven" 
consists only of those who have the spirit, mind, 
will, disposition of their Lord and Master, their Redeemer. 
These, today as ever, are but a "little 
flock" as compared to even the nominal church, and 
are scattered here and there throughout the sects, 
whose Babylonish, worldly, fleshly spirit troubles 
them, but whose wine of false doctrine deceives them. 
(Rev. 14:8; 17:2; 18:3.) Wherever they are, they 
are striving after and more and more attaining to the 
high ideals of their Teacher, whose word they hear, 
reverence and follow. During the absence of the 
Chief Shepherd the flock has become greatly scattered 
by "wolves," and misled by "goats" into various 

R3113 : page 356 

sectarian pens, where the wolf and goat influences 
are very unfavorable and trying to them; but they 
still remain sheep and still listen for the Shepherd's 
voice. 

We are living now in the day of the Shepherd's 
return;— he is calling his sheep not into a different 
pen and bondage, but to Christian freedom, with himself. 
And they are hearing his voice, "Come out of 
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and that ye receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) 
As at his first advent he gathered the Israelites 
indeed out of the Fleshly House, so now he will gather 
the same class out of the nominal Spiritual House. 
Then will his Kingdom come and his faithful have a 
share in it with their Lord. 

Then, the social and moral and religious and 
political and financial standards of the world will be 
in their hands (I Cor. 6:2); with full power and 
authority to execute justice and judgment, and to lift 
up the poor and the needy, and him that hath no 
helper under the present regime of selfishness. But 
now, the true Church does not rule the world, but is 
an insignificant minority, charged by their Master to 
learn lessons in meekness, patience, faith and character-likeness 
to himself and merely to let their "light" 
shine before men whom they are forewarned they 
will be unable to influence to any appreciable extent; 
—because the darkness hateth the light and will refuse 
to be scattered by their tiny lamps, and will flee only 
when the Lord and his glorious Kingdom shall shine 



forth as the Sun of Righteousness. 

R3113 : page 357 

The Church indeed is to have as correct standards 
as possible now, and to display these before 
the world. They have already modified and do continually 
modify the world's conscience and standards; 
but they cannot transform them. The few who are 
transformed become soldiers of the cross;— "not of 
the world" even as their Master was not of the world. 



As for the world, it is probably no worse at heart 
than it has ever been; but it has greater opportunities 
than ever for exercising its selfishness: moreover 
the world is probably more sincere, more candid, less 
hypocritical than of yore, and with a greater freedom 
each encourages the other to speak and act more 
nearly out of the abundance of the heart than formerly. 
This, however, it cannot be denied is dangerous 
under present conditions. Full liberty is sure to 
be more or less dangerous to all except saints,— the 
true Church— and even they must keep constant 
guard, and realize that they are not their own— that 
they have given up their liberty to the Lord and become 
his bond-servants, at liberty only to do what he 
approves. 

OURS A HIGHER STANDARD. 

The Lord's people are not to forget that while 
they should live up to the spirit of the world's best 
laws, they may go much farther than these in many 
respects. These laws represent the world's ideals as 
respects justice and generosity and kindness and unkindness; 
and frequently fall far short of the Lord's 
standards. It is not enough, therefore, that we keep 
within the laws of man: it is for the true members of 
Christ to "lift up a standard for the people"— God's 
standard, the Golden Rule. 

In morals, too, the Lord's people are not to measure 
themselves by the world's standards; but to remember 
that it is their duty as exponents of the divine 
standards to discern sin and meanness and selfishness 
in the bright light of the spirit of the Truth and 
to measure up to that as nearly as their imperfect 
bodies and their environment, with the Lord's grace 
assisting, will permit. 

SEES INDUSTRIAL WAR JUST AHEAD. 



Dr. E. G. Hirsch sees in the struggle between the rich 



and powerful of America and the dependent classes the same 
conditions that existed in France just prior to the French 
Revolution. In a sermon delivered last night at Temple Israel, 
treating on the situation in the anthracite coal region 
of Pennsylvania, he sounded a note of warning to the "men 
who so audaciously declare that the treasures of the earth 
are by unquestionable right their own, to have and to hold 
against all mankind." 

Today he reiterated the statements of the sermon. 

"Our religion teaches," he said, "that a man's property 
is not his own, but is merely held by him in trust for the 
benefit of all. The powerful of earth should realize that 
we are in the midst of the same conditions that existed in 
France and which brought on the Revolution. 

"The rich and powerful classes in France refused to 
take warning from what was going on about them and relied 
upon the power which they fancied they had. The 
Revolution came like the eruption of a volcano, and we in 
America should take warning. 

"The earth belongs to God and not to individual men. 
Therefore whatever man produces should be administered to 
the benefit of all and not for that of the selfish few. 

"The proper social condition is not one where men crush 
down the multitudes and disregard their claims upon their 
consideration, but where wealth is so distributed and organized 
that social well-being is within the reach of all 
honest and virtuous men. 

"Right now we are standing over a volcano which may 
burst forth with all the fury of Pelee. The security of the 
men who despise the downtrodden burden-bearers is a 
fancied security. 

"In times past the police and military forces of the 
country have been willing to protect them. They forget 
that these forces are drawn from the very ranks of the people 
they are oppressing, and that their sympathies are naturally 
with their own people. Therefore if they continue 
to disregard the wishes of the people and to fling insults at 
them the time will come when their calls for protection will 
fall upon unheeding ears. 

"It is a saddening thought that a 'captain of industry' 
could become so inflated with his own arrogance as to lay 
God-given claim to his holdings upon the earth. Such a 
man is but fanning the smoldering embers of hate, discontent 
and unrest, so that the prosperity for which he hopes 
will pay the penalty. If they are temporarily successful 
in their oppression they must expect the discontent and 
hatred of the conquered to continue to rankle and to burst 
forth anew as soon as the oppressed have rested and recruited 
their strength.— Chicago American. 



R3113 : page 357 

THE MOUNTAIN OF THE LORD'S HOUSE. 



"The earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof; the world, and they 
that dwell therein. For he hath founded it upon the seas and established 
it upon the floods. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? 
or who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean 
hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul 
unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully."— Psalm 24:1-4. 

IN THIS PSALM the prophet David takes the 

standpoint of the dawn of the Millennial age, 

when, after the great time of trouble, the 

kingdoms of this world will have become the Kingdoms 

of our Lord and of his Christ (Rev. 1 1: 15), — 

when the "Times of the Gentiles" will have been fulfilled, 

and "he whose right it is" will have taken unto 

him his great power and begun his glorious reign. 

Those who have studied the plan of the ages and its 

times and seasons know that this is due to be accomplished 

by the year 1915,— only 12 or 13 years from 

the present time. Then will the words of this prophecy 

be fulfilled— "The earth is the Lord's and the fullness 

thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein; 

R3113 : page 358 

for he hath founded it upon [instead of] the seas, and 
established it upon [in place of] the floods."— 
Verses 1,2. 

The earth, the world, the seas and the floods, the 
hills and the mountains are all used here, as in numerous 
other instances, in a symbolic, and not in a literal 
sense, which would be absurd in this connection. The 
earth and the world represent the present social order 
of things, or human society as at present organized. 
The seas and the floods represent an increasingly 
large class of mankind which restlessly recoils against 
the restraints of the present social order and at times 
grows turbulent and threatening. The hills and mountains 
represent governments. 

When the earth is the Lord's and the fullness 
thereof, it will not be because all the kingdoms of this 
world will have been converted to God and purified, 
and their kings permitted to reign by the grace of 
God, as they now claim to do, and because all the now 
restless masses of men will have become docile and 
submissive to the present governing powers; but it 
will be as the prophet declares, because God will have 
"founded it upon the seas and established it upon the 
floods." That is, the present earth, or social organization, 
and the present heavens, or ruling powers, will 
have passed away, and the new earth will be established 
upon the ruins of the old. When the waves of 
the restless sea-element of society shall have arisen 
in their might and overwhelmed the whole present 
social order, so that the wild and stormy sea of anarchy 
shall prevail everywhere, then, amidst the 
wreck and ruin, the desolation and universal despondency 



and despair, the voice of Jehovah will be heard, 
saying, "Be still, and know that I am God; I will be 
exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the 

R3114: page 358 

earth." (Psa. 46:10). And out of the wild commotion 
of that stormy sea God will bring order and peace. 

Instead of this restless sea of humanity he will 
found the new earth, the new order of things; yea, and 
he will firmly establish it upon [in place of] the floods; 
there he will establish his Kingdom "which cannot be 
moved." (Heb. 12:28). And he will set his King upon 
his holy hill of Zion and give to him the nations for 
his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth 
for his possession. (Psa. 2:6,8). Then, indeed, shall 
the King, the Lord's anointed, reign in righteousness 
and princes shall decree justice (Isa. 32:1); and, 
in consequence, there shall be abundance of peace so 
long as the moon endureth.— Psa. 72:7. 

There will then be but one Kingdom (mountain 
or hill) in all the world— the Kingdom of God; and his 
Anointed will be King in all the earth in that day. 
(Zech. 14:9). This hill or kingdom of the Lord is that 
to which the Psalmist refers when he raised the question, 
"Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, and 
who shall stand in his holy place?" To ascend into the 
hill of the Lord is to come into his Kingdom as loyal 
and obedient subjects, as true citizens, worthy of all 
its blessings and privileges; and not as aliens and foreigners, 
having no part nor lot in the common interests 
and inheritance of all the true and loyal people 
of God, viz., eternal life and all its blessings of righteousness, 
peace and everlasting joy. Who indeed 
shall be counted worthy thus to ascend into the mountain 
of the Lord? "And who shall stand in his holy 
place?" The reference here is to the antitype of the 
typical temple of God, which, standing upon the top 
of Mount Zion, prefigured the glorious true temple, 
the Church of the living God, in Kingdom power and 
glory. Who shall stand in that holy place in that age 
of glory and blessing now so near at hand?— who 
shall be counted worthy to reign with Christ in his 
Kingdom? 

The answer to both inquiries is the same "He that 
hath clean hands and a pure heart; who hath not lifted 
up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully." 
These will be the required qualifications for citizenship 
in the Kingdom, when the Kingdom is established; 
and they are also the qualifications required now 
of all those who would be heirs of that coming Kingdom. 
It will be observed that the qualifications mentioned 
are not those of faith (for faith in the gospel 
of the Kingdom, which includes faith in Christ the 
King and Redeemer, is implied in the desire to be in 
the Kingdom in any capacity); but the qualifications 



mentioned here are those of character. The Scriptures 

elsewhere make more specific mention of the 

necessary faith, but always implying a character consistent 

with the faith. (Acts 16:31; John 3:16,36). 

The prophet does not ignore faith, but points to that 

character which is the legitimate consequence of a 

true faith exercised unto godliness. A faith which 

does not produce character is null and void. (Jas. 2:17). 

Therefore it is plain that both the heirs and 

the subjects of the Kingdom of God must have that 

character which is both begotten and developed by 

the faith of the gospel; for if the faith of the gospel 

be held in unrighteousness there is no place in the 

Kingdom for any such. (Rom. 1:18). Let us consider 

the character-requirements here mentioned. 

"Clean hands."— That means clean actions, clean 
conduct. If bad habits of any kind have been cultivated, 
they must be promptly forsaken. The hands 
must not be defiled with the holding of bribes, nor 
with the gain of oppression, and every evil thing must 
be resolutely put away. (Isa. 33:15). It is in vain 
that any profess loyalty to God and to his anointed 
King and Kingdom while they continue in a sinful 
course of action. Loyalty to the Kingdom signifies 
determined opposition to sin in all its forms and a firm 
resistance of it. 

"A pure heart."— That signifies purity of will, intention 
or purpose, which, like the needle to the pole, 
always turns toward righteousness. Though some 
sudden or strong temptation may for an instant, 
through the weakness of the flesh, draw it to the right 
or to the left, yet quickly it recovers its normal position 
which is true to righteousness and truth. A pure 
heart loves righteousness and truth, and hates iniquity. 
It loves purity, and despises all that is impure 
and unholy. It loves cleanliness of person, of clothing, 
of language and of habits. It delights only in 
the society of the pure, and shuns all others, knowing 

R3114: page 359 

that "evil communications corrupt good 
manners." 

"Who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity."— 
Pride is an abomination to the Lord and to all those 
who partake of his spirit. It is a weed which, if once 
permitted to take root in the heart, will soon crowd 
out every grace. The Psalmist says, "I hate vain 
thoughts"; and such should be our sentiments. The 
grace of humility, meekness, is one of the most beautiful 
that can adorn the character. It takes a sober 
estimate of personal qualifications, is not puffed up, 
does not behave unbecomingly, and seeks to exercise 
its talents, not for pride and vain glory, but for the 
joy of doing good. It is modest, candid and sincere, 
both in consideration of its own qualifications and 



those of others. What comfort and pleasure are found 
in the society of those possessed of such a spirit! 

"Nor sworn deceitfully."— Those who make a solemn 
covenant with the Lord, and who thereafter wilfully 
despise or ignore it, have sworn deceitfully; and 
surely no such disloyal subjects can be admitted 
either to citizenship or heirship in the Kingdom of 
God. But those who, in this age, have made a solemn 
covenant with God and who are true to their covenant, 
even unto death, they shall ascend into the holy place, 
the temple of God— they shall be the heirs of the 
Kingdom, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ; while all 
such, in the age to come, shall be recognized and 
privileged citizens of the Kingdom. These shall receive 
the blessings of the Lord promised in his Word. 
After first receiving the imputed righteousness of 
Christ through faith, they may, under divine grace, 
be made perfect in righteousness and worthy of eternal 
life. 

This is the generation of them that seek the face of 
the God of Jacob. Men do not obtain these blessings 
without seeking them, nor without seeking them in 
God's way— through Christ, by humble reliance upon 
his finished work of redemption, and by the full consecration 
of all their ransomed powers of mind and 
body to his holy will, which is only our reasonable 
service. 

Beloved, ye who are called by his grace to stand in 
his holy place, let us ponder these things. Are our 
hands clean and our hearts pure? are we humble 
and faithful to our covenant? Let us see that we meet 
these conditions, and let us run with patience the race 
set before us, looking unto Jesus. 



R3114: page 359 
"SPEAK, LORD; FOR THY SERVANT HEARETH." 
-I SAMUEL 3:6-14.-DECEMBER M.- 
SAMUEL, the prophet, is one of the grand, strong 
characters of Old Testament times. The 
story of his early devotion to the Lord and 
his obedience and perseverance in well doing, constitutes 
a grand lesson, not only for young Christians, but also 
for those more advanced in years, including parents. 
As the story of Ruth gives us glimpses of a time of life 
of the Israelites such as is generally obscured by the 
records of wars and troubles, so also does the story of 
Samuel. He was of the tribe of Levi already consecrated 
to the Lord, and accepted. An insight into the 
deep piety of his parents is given in the first chapter 
of the Book. A child born under such circumstances 
of prayer and devotion to the Lord, could not, under 



natural laws, fail to be noble minded and religiously 
inclined. Would that we could impress this thought 
upon all Christians who become parents— that their 
children should be devoted to the Lord from the moment 
of conception! and daily prayer and effort should 
be made that the pre-natal influences might all conduce 
to the highest mental, moral and physical welfare of the 
offspring. "Who can bring a clean thing out of an 
unclean?" asked the Prophet, and he answers, "Not 
one." Our expectation should not, therefore, be that 
the children even of the saints would be absolutely perfect; 
but we are to remember that the Lord accepts 
the heart, the intention, the will; and that agreeably 
to his arrangement of nature, the mind, the intention, 
the will of the parents may be expressed in their child. 
True, the imperfect mind cannot even grasp or picture 
perfect things, but it can approximate them, and in 
that same proportion it can impress that approximation 
of character upon the offspring. There is an old adage 
that "blood will tell"— that is, that culture and good 
breeding will be marked in the offspring. It is surely 
a fact that character will tell. Christians, thoroughly 
devoted to the Lord and seeking day by day to know 
and to do the divine will, and who are under the 
instruction of the holy spirit in the school of Christ 
and somewhat developed in grace and in knowledge of 
the truth, whose minds are transformed by the renewing 
of the holy spirit, and their affections set upon 
things above, will surely mark and impress the spiritual 
qualities of their own hearts upon the natural offspring. 
Such children, well born and devoted to the 
Lord from conception, will, of course, in childhood be 
trained by the same parents in the ways of the Lord, 
in the ways of righteousness, of justice, of truth and of 
love. Thus begotten and thus trained, it seems very 
improbable that they should afterward depart from the 
way of the Lord, or that they should permanently remain 
transgressors, even though temporarily misled 
through temptation. 

While the Lord has directed his children not to be 
unequally yoked together with unbelievers, nevertheless, 
where the yoking or marriage has occurred prior 
to their covenant with the Lord, he has arranged that 
the fruit of their marriage, their children, shall be 
accounted as the Lord's through the consecrated parent; 
and his blessing will accordingly be with the consecrated 

R3114: page 360 

child regardless of the fact that one of its parents 
was an unbeliever. The Apostle clearly states this in 
I Cor. 7:14. 

It is a serious error— and one into which some 
Christians have fallen— to suppose parentage to be dishonorable 
or sinful— some even claiming that "original 
sin" was of this sort. The Scriptures teach quite to 



the contrary, declaring that "marriage is honorable in 

all, and the bed undefiled." We are to remember, too, 

that the divine plan for the propagation of the race was 

arranged and the command to multiply and fill the 

earth was given before sin entered the world— before 

the disobedience in Eden. The Apostle severely reprimands 

those "forbidding to marry," and distinctly 

says, in his letter to Timothy, "I will therefore that 

the younger women marry, bear children, guide the 

house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak 

reproachfully."— I Tim. 5:14. 

Neither is this in conflict with his declarations in 
I Cor. 7, that "he that marrieth doeth well but he 
that marrieth not doeth better." In his letter to Timothy 
he is speaking of the younger persons of the 
congregation; whereas in his advice in Corinthians he 
is addressing such members of the Church as had made 
a full consecration of themselves to the Lord, and were 
seeking to run in the race course toward the mark for 
the prize. And our advice to others on this subject 
should be strictly along these inspired lines. The 
advice not to marry will usually be found helpful to 
those who have made a full consecration of themselves 
to the Lord, who will find that they can accomplish 
more in the Lord's service free, as far as possible, from 
earthly obligations and division of heart. But for 
others who are not "new creatures," though moral 
and well disposed, marriage is the reasonable and proper 
expectation of life according to divine arrangement; 
it should not be hindered, but should be counselled as 
wisely as possible. 

We are to recognize a difference between the consecrated 
parents of Samuel and their prayers for a son, 
and the proper prayers of consecrated people of the 
present time. Only since Pentecost have the Lord's 
people been privileged to be "new creatures in Christ 
Jesus," begotten of the holy spirit; and such seek and 
pray for spiritual rather than natural children;— by 
spending their lives as did their Master seeking to transform 
children of the first Adam into spiritual children of 
God. It is in view of this, and when addressing spirit-begotten 
ones, that the Apostle declares that "he that 
marrieth not doeth better,"— because he will, generally 
speaking, find the unmarried condition most favorable 
to his new ambitions. 

Born in response to prayer and consecration, Samuel 
was, doubtless, a remarkable boy; and his parents 
showed the sincerity of their prayer in the fact that he 
was early brought to the high priest at Shiloh and formally 
presented to the Lord's service. We read that 
this was when he was "weaned," but are not to suppose 
that it was when as an infant he was weaned from 
the breast; but, rather, interpreting the word on a larger 
scale we should understand it was when he was weaned 
from his mother, in the sense of being able to get 
along without her care: this was probably when he 



was from ten to twelve years of age. 

We are often surprised that Christian parents, begotten 
of the holy spirit, do not manifest more of this 
spirit which actuated the parents of Samuel. Many 
seemingly consecrated people hold back their most 
precious possessions, their children, from the Lord, 
and incline to devote them to some worldly calling in 
life— medicine, law, industry. Whether their course 
is prompted by too great humility or by too great selfishness, 
it is not our province to determine; but seemingly 
they either have not the faith to believe that the 
Lord would accept their offering, or they cherish, perhaps 
but half consciously, a desire to see their children 
prosper after the manner of the world, and fear 
that their consecration to the Lord might in some 
manner blight their earthly prospects. What a great 
mistake! Do not such parents know that it is their 
privilege to present themselves to the Lord and all 
they have, including their children? and do they not 
know, too, that "The blessing of the Lord, it maketh 
rich, and he addeth no sorrow with it"? (Prov. 10:22.) 
Can they not realize that it is better to be a doorkeeper 
in the house of the Lord than to dwell in the 
tents of wickedness? and that greater happiness would 
accompany a devoted life, even though spent in poverty, 
than could come through any other course, even 
though surrounded by every luxury? Have they not 
learned these lessons from their own experiences? and 
can they not apply them likewise to their own children? 

Samuel ministered to Eli in the temple; that is, 
he served the high priest— who was specially the Lord's 
servant and representative— in his dwelling apartments 
which were close by the tabernacle,— for the temple 
was not yet built. Samuel's parents, in thus subjecting 
him early in life to the duties of a servant, were 
really putting him in a most excellent school. In our 
opinion it is a mistake to suppose that the early years 
of life— from ten to eighteen— should be largely spent 
in play; not only is the wisdom of bringing children 
early into positions of responsibility, and, more or less, 
of routine and drudgery exemplified in the case of 
Samuel, but it is also exemplified in the cases of many 
of the prominent people of this land today. Mr. Carnegie, 
whose fame is world-wide, entered early upon 
the drudgery of life as a telegraph messenger. Mr. 

R3114: page 361 

Edison, whose fame as an electrician is also world-wide, 
began life's drudgery as a newsboy. And thus it is in 
perfect accord with the experiences of today in worldly 
things that we perceive that the consecration of Samuel 
as a servant of Eli at an early age had probably 
much to do with the firmness and grandeur of his 
character when, subsequently, he became the Lord's 
prophet, and the last and the greatest of Israel's Judges. 



Our observation is that there is no more common 
mistake made by parents than that of supposing their 
children could not understand or appreciate religious 
things properly at an early age— say twelve years. The 
experience of Samuel and our own experience and that 
of many others assure us that some of the deepest religious 
sentiments may be experienced as early as twelve 
years of age. This should be watched for by the parent 
and should be cultivated with much more care 
than they cultivate the tenderest flowers in their gardens. 
The flowers of veneration, spirituality, hope, 
faith, trust, in the child-mind need and should have 
tenderest care and watering and weeding and assistance. 
The parent by nature and by divine direction occupying 
a responsible position as gardener to these, must 
appreciate flowers in the hearts of his own family; and 
if he neglect his responsibilities he is culpable and will 
surely suffer, not only disappointment in respect to his 
children in the future, but suffer also in that he will 
be the loser of certain blessings in his own heart; because 
it is a part of the divine arrangement that he 
that watereth others shall himself be watered. 

Public responsibilities and duties, and trying to 
save other people's children, can never excuse any 
Christian parent from his responsibilities toward his 
own children; nor can he shift his responsibilities 
upon Sunday School teachers. His neglect of duty 
will surely work to his own disadvantage as well as to 
the disadvantage of his offspring; and if in the past 
he has been negligent in this matter he cannot too soon 
rectify matters, though he will need to pray for and to 
seek to exercise greater wisdom necessary to overcome 
his past neglect. 

The story of the Lord's first message to Samuel is 
beautiful in its simplicity. The boy evidently was 
accustomed to obeying the calls of Eli for various services 
at various times, and to this end had his sleeping 
apartments near by— Eli was advanced in life, about 
seventy-eight years of age. Three times the Lord called 
Samuel, and he answered, "Here am I," and went 
to Eli. It was after the third call that Eli instructed 
him to say, "Speak, Lord; for thy servant heareth." 

The record is that for a long time such a message 
from the Lord had been "precious," that is, scarce: 
Eli, although a good man, and sincere and faithful and 
kind in his dealings with Samuel, had been too lax in 
his dealings with his own sons, who were priests and 
had much to do with the services of the tabernacle, and 
who, therefore, in every sense of the word should have 
been pious and exemplary men. The Lord had already 
sent Eli a warning message respecting his sons 
who were profligate and open transgressors, not only in 
financial affairs, but also in morals. Eli should have 
realized his responsibilities and should have checked 
their wrong course and, if necessary, should have dismissed 
them from the service of the tabernacle even 



though they were his own sons; but in proportion as 
he had grown weak in mind and body, they had grown 
strong, self-willed and impious, and the old man seems 
not to have had the necessary strength of character to 
deal with them. The Lord's message delivered to Samuel 
was in respect to Eli's family and the punishment 
that should come upon them for their sins, which were 
much more grievous in view of the fact that they were 
the exemplars and instructors of the people. 

Eli's experience with his wayward sons calls for 
our sympathy; yet doubtless in some respects, at least, 
he brought his difficulties upon himself by reason of 
his neglect of the early training of them in the ways of 
the Lord, in the ways of his righteousness. Doubtless 
he often looked at the faithful lad who ministered to 
him so patiently and industriously, and wished that 
his sons had been of similar disposition; but the time 
so to wish advantageously and profitably was long 
gone by; they should have been begotten in the spirit 
of consecration, and trained in conformity therewith, 
and the Lord's Word for it is that when they were old 
they would not have departed from it. There is a lesson 
for parents here, too; the fact that the Lord's 
service is to be considered of primary importance and 
is to be defended even at the expense of their own flesh 
and blood. 

In the morning Samuel hesitated to tell his 
kind master, Eli, the unfavorable message he had received 
of the Lord in the night; but Eli was anxious 
to know whatever the Lord had to say, and importuned 
until Samuel told him all. There is a good lesson here 
for the Lord's people— a lesson of humility and kindness; 
the lad might have felt puffed up to think that 
the Lord, who so seldom spoke to any, had now spoken to 
him; he might have felt himself honored and above Eli, 
in that the message spoke of the discomfiture of the latter; 
pride might have made him boastful and inconsiderate 
of the feelings of his master so that he would have 
taken delight in telling him of the calamities that 
would come, and how greatly he had been honored of 
the Lord. Samuel, on the contrary, exhibited the 
spirit of meekness, apparently not even considering the 
honor that had come to him; but, rather, sympathizing 

R3114: page 362 

with his master he would have preferred not to 
burden his heart with the message of calamity. 

The Lord is speaking now to some of his faithful 
ones through his Word, through his "knock" (Rev. 3:20), 
which tells us of his presence, through the signs 
which mark the incoming of the new dispensation: are 
any disposed now to be haughty and proud and boastful 
because the Lord has permitted them to hear his 
voice and to know something of his plan and of the 
calamities coming upon Babylon? Should they not 



rather be filled with humility so that self would be lost 

sight of entirely? Should not all favored of the Lord 

speak of the trouble coming upon Babylon sympathetically, 

with a disposition to assist to an escape, rather 

than a disposition to gloat over and rejoice in coming 

troubles in which present systems will be completely 

overthrown? 

The Lord speaks in our day in a different manner 
from that in which he spoke in olden times: as the 
Scriptures declare, "God, who at sundry times and in 
divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by 
the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by 
his Son. " (Heb. 1:1,2.) The Word of the Lord is 
still precious and scarce in that it is not, at the present 
time, given to all, but only to a certain class; as it is 
written, "He that hath an ear to hear let him 
hear." The majority of mankind have no ear to hear 
at the present time, no eye to see the glorious beauty 
of God's plan. As the Apostle explains, "The god of 
this world hath blinded their minds"— earthly things, 
earthly ambitions, earthly hopes, earthly calls and 
voices, distract their attention, fill their capacity; but 
blessed are our eyes for they see, and our ears for 
they hear, and blessed shall we be if, like Samuel, 
when we hear the Lord's message we respond promptly, 
"Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth." Such as 
thus respond shall be taught of God— by the Word of 
his grace,— the words of the Lord Jesus, and the 
words of his inspired apostles— instructed and guided 
in the understanding of these through the holy spirit, 
through the various helps and channels and agents 
which the Lord is pleased to use— perhaps a tract, perhaps 
a book, perhaps a letter, perhaps a conversation, 
perhaps a sermon. 

He who would continue to be taught of the Lord, 
must continue to listen for his voice, continue to be in 
the hearing and obeying attitude of heart. The difficulty 
with some apparently is that their own wills are 
not fully extinct, dead— that their consecration is not 
complete; hence while consecrated enough to wish not 
to disobey the Lord's voice, they have certain ideas of 
their own respecting what his voice should say, and 
they prefer to interpret his message in conformity to 
their own preferences: they will to do more or less 
their own wills, and will to hear the Lord's voice directing 
them in accordance with their own wills. This is 
a most dangerous situation and is generally accompanied 
by self-conceit and self-assertion and will ultimately 
lead far from the Christian's goal. Let each of 
us resolve by the Lord's grace that we will out of honest 
heart continually seek to hear the pure Word of God, 
and that with a desire to obey it as far as we are able. 



R3114: page 362 



CHRISTMAS HOPES AND JOYS. 

--LUKE 2:8-20.-DECEMBER 31.- 

"For unto you is born this day in the city of 
David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord." 

CHRISTMAS (or Christ's festival) by general usage 
is celebrated on December 25th; and 
since its commemoration is not enjoined in 
the Scriptures, but is merely a voluntary commemoration 
of a great fact rather than of a particular date, we 
do well to celebrate it decorously at the usual time;— 
notwithstanding the fact that we disagree with the date, 
and hold, according to the evidences, that our Lord 
was born about October 1st, and that December 25th, 
nine months previous, was probably the date of the 
annunciation.*— Luke 1:30,31. 

Our confidence in Jesus that he was the sent of 
God, the Redeemer, the Messiah, the Deliverer of his 
people, rests not merely upon the testimony of the 
apostles in the New Testament records, wonderful and 
convincing as these testimonies are: they gain nine-tenths 
of their weight and importance from the fact 
that they evidence the fulfilment of promises, types 
and prophecies given by the Lord with more or less explicitness 
from time to time throughout the preceding 
4,000 years. He who does not discern something, at 
least, of the divine plan of the ages in connection with 
our Savior, his birth, his three and one-half years' ministry, 
his sacrificial death, his resurrection, his ascension, 
etc., fails to get the real strength of the divine 
revelation, designed by the Lord to be the firm foundation 
for his people's confidence in him and in all the 
glorious things which he has promised he would yet 
accomplish through this great Savior. 

Note the original promise of the Savior shortly after 
sin had wounded our first parents and brought them 
under divine sentence. (Gen. 3:15.) Note the promise 
made to Abraham respecting Messiah that he 
should be of his posterity. (Gen. 22:18.) Notice the 
same to Jacob. (Gen. 28:14.) To David. (2 Sam. 7:12-16.) 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., p.54. 

R3115 : page 363 

Through Isaiah the prophet, his coming 

and his greatness are foretold. (9:6,7; 11:1-9.) Daniel, 

the prophet, also refers to the importance of his 

work of making an end of sin and bringing in everlasting 

righteousness, and thus sealing the visions and 

prophecies which the Lord had just given respecting 



him and the favor to come through him. (Dan. 9:24.) 
We recall also how he was typified in Isaac who was 
not only the heir of the promises made to Abraham, 
but who was also in a figure put to death and received 
again from the dead. We remember also the types 
and figures of the Mosaic arrangement, and how Moses 
himself was declared to be like unto the greater one to 
come after him. 

Had the hopes of Israel been merely concoctions 
to deceive the people, we may be sure that the deceiver 
would have been careful to have marked out some 
remarkable line of parentage for the coming Messiah; 
—free from blights, scandals, etc.; but this was not 
done; instead, the weaknesses of the flesh amongst our 
Lord's progenitors are fearlessly noted. Judah, the 
son of Jacob, and head of the tribe from which our 
Lord sprang, was not above reproach and his general 
character was faithfully portrayed; his son, Phares, 
through whom our Lord's lineage runs, was born of an 
unlawful union. Rahab, the harlot of Jericho, a foreigner 
who became an Israelite indeed, was amongst 
our Lord's progenitors; so was Ruth, the Moabitess, 
another foreigner adopted as an Israelite. The line 
even through David is compromised by coming through 
Bathsheba, the widow of Uriah, the Hittite. The New 
Testament writers are similarly candid and make no 
hesitation in recording the genealogy. All of this is in 
full accord with the scriptural presentation of the matter; 
namely, that our Lord's virtue, his sinlessness, 
his separateness from sinners, was not through the 
flesh, not through his mother, but through his Father, 
God.* 

According to the flesh, Jesus Christ took hold of the 
seed of Abraham, as the Apostle explains; but as we have 
already seen, through various circumstances he was indirectly 
related also to the outside world. All of this is 
interesting to us, but nothing to be compared to our 
still greater interest in the fact that our Lord Jesus, 
although born a Jew under the Law, and redeeming 
those who were under the Law, did more than this, 
in that his death as planned by the Father and accepted 
by himself was a propitiation "for the sins of the 
whole world." He died as the ransom price for Adam 
and his sin, and thus purchased from condemnation 
not only Adam, but his entire posterity involved 
through his transgression; hence, as the Apostle points 
out, "He is able to save [deliver] unto the uttermost 
all who come unto God through him." (Heb. 7:25.) 
Not only so, but our Lord's circumstances of birth and 
early experiences in comparative poverty as a working 
man, impress us with the thought that he is indeed 
able to sympathize with mankind in every station of 
life; having passed from the glory of the Father to the 
lowest condition of humanity and back again, he is 
surely able to appreciate and to sympathize with all 
conditions and classes. 



The narrative of our lesson is so simple as to require 
few comments; our chief interest centers in the 
message which our heavenly Father sent us through 
the angels at the time they announced the birth of 
Jesus: "Fear not"— the angel understood well that 
through sin and degradation a fearful apprehension 
comes over man when he finds himself in contact with 
spirit beings; he is apprehensive of certain further condemnation 
or punishment; his acquaintance with man 
in influence, authority and power, leads him to dread 
the still greater authority and power of the Almighty, 
lest it should be injurious to him. Only the true 
Christian, having the eyes of his understanding opened 
to appreciate the length and breadth and height and 
depth of the love of God, can have that perfect love 
toward the heavenly Father which is built upon an 
intimate knowledge of his Word, and which casteth 
out all fear. We are reminded of the prophet's words 
respecting the Lord's people of today, "Their fear toward 
me is taught by the precept of men." (Isa. 29:13.) The 
Lord would have his people free from this fear, though 
not free from a proper reverence toward him. 

The message continues, "I bring you good tidings 
of great joy which shall be to all people." How slow 
the Lord's people have been to believe this message and 
to accept the Savior at his full worth! How prone 
they seem to be to suppose first of all that he was to be 
a Savior merely for the Jews; or secondly, a Savior 
merely for a special elect class; or thirdly, a Savior 
only for those who under present darkness, ignorance, 
prejudice, superstition and devilish influences, manifest 
a special love for righteousness! But how broad 
is the statement— great joy— for all people! Our faith 
is not broader than the positive declaration of the Scriptures, 
when we hold firmly that our God graciously has 
arranged that every member of our poor fallen race 
shall yet be blessed with a clear understanding not only 
of his own weaknesses and imperfections through the fall, 
but also by a clear understanding of the great redemption 
price paid by the Savior, and a share in the glorious 
opportunities thus secured to return, if he will, 
back to full harmony with God and to full blessings 
and everlasting life. 

The angels did not declare that our Lord came to 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. V., chap. iv. 

R3115 : page 364 

bring universal and everlasting salvation to all people; 
but they do declare that the good message of joy, 
of privilege, love, hope, shall extend to all people. 
The explanation of this is that a Savior had been born 
—a deliverer of the weak, the helpless, the dying, able 



to succor to the utmost all who would come to the 

Father through him; able to open the blind eyes and 

to unstop the deaf ears that all may come to an appreciation 

of the goodness of God shining toward them in 

the face of the Lord Jesus. 

The word Savior, otherwise rendered Deliverer, 
signifies in the Syriac language, literally Life-giver. 
What a wonderful thought is conveyed by that word! 
What is it that our poor, dying race needs? It needs 
deliverance from the sentence of death, and then it 
needs deliverance from death itself, into life complete 
and abundant and everlasting. Our Lord has already 
become our deliverer in the sense that he has bought 
us with his precious blood, that he has settled our 
account with Justice. As a result of this work already 
done (since the church which is the body of Christ has 
followed in the footsteps of our Lord and has about 
"filled up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ," (Col. 1:24), very shortly now, under the 
sounding of the Seventh Trumpet, the mystery of God 
will be finished,— completed,— and atonement for the 
sins of the world shall be proclaimed with a full emancipation 
proclamation to all people. Good tidings of 
great joy it will surely be! full of gracious opportunities 
for enlightenment, restitution and obedience, and 
for a full return to all that was lost by father Adam, 
including life in perfect degree— lasting life! 

No wonder after this message had been delivered, 
the Lord permitted an angel host to serenade the proclamation, 
and incidentally to prophesy also of the grand 
results yet to flow from the great work of redemption, 
which was then only beginning in the birth of the 
Redeemer! Properly the anthem begins with praise to 
him that sitteth upon the throne, to him who devised 
the great and wonderful plan of redemption and who 
sent his Son, our willing Redeemer; glory to him in 
the highest— in the highest strain of heart and voice, 
with fullest appreciation of him as a Savior! Next 
came the consequences on earth; namely, peace;— not 
such a peace as men might patch up between themselves 
and between nations and parties, and that under 
present conditions would be sure very soon to be scattered 
to the winds; but a peace with God, a peace 
which comes from a restoration to the race of the divine 
good will. It was because divine justice could not spare 
the guilty, that the sentence of death, the "curse," has 
borne down upon our race for now six thousand years. 
Under that divine sentence of death the dying race has 
become impoverished, not only physically but mentally 
and morally, and selfishness has become the rule, and 
in its wake have come all our selfish ambitions and 
pride and strife and vain-glory and money love which 
have caused so much of the trouble that mankind has 
experienced. 

But now, glory to God in the highest! because 
peace has been established upon a firm foundation— 



the lifting of the curse through the payment of our 

penalty by the Lord's own arrangement! As soon as 

the body of Christ has suffered with the Head, the 

great antitypical day of atonement will be complete, 

and peace between God and man will be established, 

will be renewed, and as a consequence the Redeemer 

shall take to himself his great power and reign for the 

purpose of blessing and uplifting those whom he purchased 

with his own precious blood. In their interest 

it will be necessary that the great peace shall be introduced 

by the breaking in pieces of present institutions 

with the iron rod of the new Kingdom, as the vessel of 

a potter they shall be crushed as henceforth useless; 

that in their stead may come the grander and perfect 

institutions of the Lord's Kingdom. He will wound 

to heal, to bless, to bring in peace on the basis of everlasting 

righteousness; for ultimately he will destroy all 

those who, after being brought to a knowledge of the 

truth, will still love unrighteousness and tend to the 

corruption of the earth. He will destroy them, not in 

anger but injustice, in love, that an everlasting peace 

in full accord with that which is in heaven may prevail 

upon earth. 

Wherever the story of God's redeeming love has 
gone, even though confused by various falsities, it has 
carried more or less of blessing with it;— even to neglectful 
hearers and not doers of the Word, it has 
brought blessing; and still more blessing to others who 
hear partly and obey partly; but its greatest blessing 
has been to the little flock, the royal priesthood who, 
entering into the spirit of the divine arrangement, have 
realized themselves justified through faith in the precious 
blood, and in harmony with the invitation of the 
Lord have gone forward, presenting themselves living 
sacrifices that they might have fellowship with Christ 

R3116 : page 364 

in the sufferings of this present time, and also, by and 
by, in the Kingdom glories that shall follow. It is 
this class chiefly that is now rejoicing in a still fuller 
opening up of the divine Word so long beclouded by the 
falsities coming down from the dark ages; it is this class 
that is chiefly now rejoicing in the discernment of the 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the divine 
love and of the divine plan which has purchased the whole 
world and will eventually recover from present degradation 
all who under the favorable conditions of the 
Millennial Kingdom will develop the character which 
God demands of all who shall have eternal life— a love 
of righteousness and hatred of iniquity. 



R3116 : page 365 



REVIEW OF THE YEAR. 

-DECEMBER 28.- 

Golden Text— "Lord, thou hast been our dwelling 
place [refuge] in all generations."— Psa. 90:1. 

HAPPY surely will all those be who at the close of 
the year can look backward through it and 
realize that safe and secure in the city of 
refuge which God has provided for us as his people, we 
have been prospering, rejoicing, growing under his 
favor and guidance in a knowledge of himself and of 
his plans respecting mankind; and especially respecting 
the elect church, the body of Christ, which in the 
school of Christ is now being prepared for the glorious 
work of the Millennial Kingdom. We trust that our 
dear readers will find much of encouragement as they 
look back. If we can see that we have faithfully 
sought at every step to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, 
we will have special cause for rejoicing; and if we see, 
on the contrary, that some of the steps have been crooked 
and perverse, and if we mourn for such digressions 
from the narrow way, we may be sure that the Lord is 
very pitiful, of tender compassion, ready to forgive, to 
heal, to help. It is for this very reason that he provided 
this city of refuge, and for this very reason that 
we must needs abide in it continually— abide in Christ 
under the cover of his merit and his robe of righteousness. 
It will comfort our hearts, in any event, to 
remember the suggestion of the Apostle that if God so 
loved us while we were yet sinners that he gave his 
only begotten Son for our redemption, much more 
does he love us— more even than that, now that we are 
adopted into his family and seeking to walk in the 
footsteps of Jesus, however imperfectly our good desires 
may be accomplished. 

We need to make fresh resolutions continually 
along the way, and now at the close of the year is a 
favorable time for this. Not that we liberate ourselves 
in any degree from the everlasting covenant into which 
we entered with our Lord, but that recognizing its permanence, 
we strengthen ourselves by re-asserting it to 
the Lord, telling him of our good desires and intentions 
in respect to faith for the future, and improving so notable 
an occasion as the beginning of another year for 
this reiteration of our loyalty and of our confidence in 
his faithfulness. 



R3116 : page 365 

"THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD." 
THE LORD, in calling his people his sheep, 



chose a very significant emblem of the character 

he would have manifested in them. The 

most noticeable characteristics of the sheep are meekness, 

docility and obedience to the shepherd to whose 

care they fully entrust themselves. They are very true 

to the shepherd: they study his voice, watch for the indications 

of his will, and trustfully obey him. When 

they hear his voice, quickly, and without the slightest 

hesitation or faltering, they run to obey it. But the 

voice of a stranger they will not follow, for they 

know not the voice of strangers. 

What a lesson is here for the Lord's "little flock," 
over whom he is the good Shepherd. The weakest 
lamb in the flock knows his voice and hears him say, 
"This is the way: walk ye in it." And while there are 
thousands of voices calling, now in this direction and 
now in that, the Lord's sheep, acquainted with his 
Spirit and his Word, turn away from all save the well 
known voice of the Shepherd. In various ways our 
Shepherd speaks to his flock of sheep and lambs. His 
written words treasured up in the heart mark the 
way of truth continually; his special providences further 
shape the peculiar course of each individual; and 
the abiding presence of his holy Spirit makes manifest 
every intrusion of any other spirit which seeks to beguile 
and to lead astray. The true sheep will carefully 
listen for the faintest accents of the voice of the 
Shepherd— i.e., he will treasure up his words in his 
heart; he will study his providences; and he will cultivate 
that communion and personal fellowship with 
the Lord which are his privilege. Those who thus 
abide in him can never go astray. 

"They can never, never lose their way." 

They may not have much learning, and, humanly 
speaking, would not be able to grapple with all the 
sophistries of error. But, being so well acquainted 
with the Master's voice, they quickly perceive that 
such voices are the voices of strangers, and they will 
not follow them; for they are loyal and obedient to 
the Shepherd only. 

In such an attitude of mind and heart is our only 
safety in the midst of all the difficulties and confusion 
of this evil day. And all such may confidently sing 
with the Psalmist— 

"The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. He 
maketh me to lie down [to rest— the rest of faith] in 
green pastures [with abundance of satisfying food]; 
he leadeth me beside the still waters [deep, refreshing 
truths]. He restoreth my soul [reclaims it from 
death]; he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness 
for his name's sake [because I am his child and bear 
his honored name]. Yea, though I walk through the 
valley of the shadow of death [The entire journey of 
life since the fall has been through a vale of tears, upon 
which rests the shadow of death], I will fear no evil; 
for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff, they comfort 



me. [Thy word and providences discipline and 
guide me in the way]." Our Shepherd's providence 
not only disciplines the true sheep, but protects them 
from the "wolves" and other foes. 

R3116 : page 366 

With the Prophet, we can also say, "Thou preparest 
a table before me in the presence of mine enemies [for 
even while beset by Satan and Sin, we are sustained 
by the Lord's abundant provision for every necessity]; 
thou anointestmy head with [the] oil [of joy], 
my cup [pleasure] runneth over [even while, as a pilgrim, 
I am beset with life's difficulties]." And, in 
view of the Lord's present and past leading, all, who 
continue to be truly his sheep, can certainly trust 
that— "Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me, 
all the days of my life; and I will dwell in the house of 
the Lord [will be recognized as a member of his 
household, as his child] forever." 

Let us seek to cultivate more and more the meek, 
docile and loyal character of the sheep, that so we may 
be abundantly blessed by the care of the good Shepherd. 
Such a disposition does not commend itself to 
the world— the wayward goat, the bold lion, or the 
stealthy bear, the subtle serpent and vicious vampire 
are more fitting emblems of their ideals, and are usually 
the emblems selected for their escutcheons. But 
let the world love its own, while we remember that 
we are not of the world, but are sent forth as sheep 
in the midst of wolves, and that our safety and spiritual 
prosperity depend, not upon our own wisdom and 
sagacity, but entirely upon our diligent hearkening to, 
and patient following of, the voice of the good Shepherd, 
who will very soon highly exalt his little flock 
and crown them with an exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory. 



R3116 : page 366 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Gratitude and love to a gracious God and to you, 
his servant, constrain me to write this note. I resigned 
the Southern Methodist pulpit in the town of 



this state. I resigned supposedly on account of my 
health, but really on account of my faith. I had not 
yet "added" courage to my faith (2 Pet. 1:5); was 
not yet really in the truth, but feeling for it. Keeping 
my "heretical" doubts to myself, I continued searching. 
Meanwhile, until last week, I have sustained 
supernumerary relations to the Conference which met 
last week, and, if they granted my request, which I 



suppose they did, John 8:32 is fulfilled in my experience. 
For the first time in my life "I stand erect 
and free." 

I was searching earnestly for the light in the city 
library in Denver, Colo., reading everything that promised 
to throw light on the hard problems of life and 
death, when my eye fell on your God-directed work, 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. I had heard of it and knew 
that it was much despised; nevertheless, I resolved 
to read it earnestly and with an open mind, for in my 
distress I had reached that point where I was willing 
to receive truth even from "Nazareth." I read all 

R3117 : page 366 

five volumes with my Bible always open and with 
ever-increasing delight. 

Again I thank you for pointing so constantly and 
faithfully to the "more sure word of prophecy;" truly 
it "shines as a light in a dark place." 

Enclosed find one dollar for the WATCH TOWER. 
I am working at my old trade, stone-cutting, and shall 
continue at it (D.V.). I should like to distribute 
some more tracts. Your brother, 

E. L. KENDRICK,-Missouri. 



page 366 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, 

DEAR BROTHER:— I have been reading your book, 
"THE PLAN OF THE AGES;" it is indeed a wonderful 
book, and I thank God it ever came to me. My birthday 
was the second day of August and my niece, a 
worldly woman, sent me as a present five of your 
books. She little knew what she was giving me. Oh, 
the joy and gladness it has brought into my life! I have 
been a believer and been looking for the return of my 
Lord for many years, longing and hoping to live until 
he came; but for some time it seemed to me our people 
(Second Adventist) presented no new light, and 
we seemed to be standing still. Now this great restitution 
hope has come to us, bringing such a feeling as 
lifts us (so it seems) nearer our God and makes so 
many dark sayings in his blessed Word clear and 
beautiful. I never loved him so much as now when I 
see how great is his plan of salvation. 

My husband and myself have read the first book 
three times, and also read the second, and now in the 
third. Sometimes it has seemed so strange for us to 
believe some of the things you write, for we have been 
taught so differently; yet by prayer we have thus far 
been able to accept the blessed light and feel we have 
entered into the joy of our Lord, believing he has 
come and raised the dead, or those of them who are 



to be his bride. 

We feel such gratitude to you, our brother, for 
the light we now have that we greatly desire to know 
you personally. Again thanking you for the good 
received from your writings, and praying God to bless 
and keep you, I am, Yours in sisterly love, 

MRS. A. S. BARNEY,-Rhode Island. 



R3117 : page 366 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I enclose you $ ; please send me one of those 

new reference Bibles, and the remainder please apply 
to the "Good Hopes" of myself and wife. I am sorry 
we cannot at this time send a larger expression of our 
"Good Hopes" for "the glad tidings of great joy 
which shall be to all people." We hope to supplement 
this offering shortly. 

And now I want to express to you and all those 
of the Bible House at Allegheny how we enjoyed the 
convention at Washington. It was the greatest privilege 
of our lives to meet with so many dear friends of 
like precious faith. It was truly a "time of refreshing 
from the presence of the Lord." Especially 
was I delighted to witness on this occasion the symbolic 
baptism of my wife into the death of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. We are now not only one in the flesh, 
but one in the spirit and body of Christ, and probationary 
members of the Church triumphant. We 
pray that we may pass our trial successfully and "rejoice 
in our sufferings and fill up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ in our flesh for his body's 

R3117 : page 367 

sake," and in so doing may finish our course with 

joy. 

For your benefit and encouragement I want to 
say, dear Bro. Russell, the literature you are sending 
forth as "meat in due season," is making the household 
of faith strong, yea, brave in the Lord, by truth. 
This morning I was hailed on the street by my former 
pastor, a D.D. (in whose presence two years ago I 
would have quailed). He introduced me to another 
D.D., and asked if I had any news. I said, "Yes, 
good news!" and drew from my pocket one of the 
discourses as I had taken it down at Washington. I 
said, "Look here,— in Acts 3:21 God has promised 
restitution of all things, and that all the holy prophets 
had spoken of it," and I showed him in their 
respective order from I Samuel to Malachi they all 
had spoken of it copiously, and that further God himself 
had made a covenant with Abraham as to this 
restitution and affirmed the same to Isaac and Jacob; 



and now that these patriarchs were dead, together 
with countless millions who had not received those 
blessings, said I, "the Lord has shown us in Jno. 5:28,29 
when and where to look for the solution of this 
matter." In repeating the last clause of the 29th 
verse he broke in and said "damnation." I said, 
"No, sir! 'by judgment,' and you know as well as 
I do that 'by judgment' is the correct rendering. 
Now, gentlemen, why don't you preach the gospel of 
our Lord Jesus Christ?" By this time Bro. H 



had Bro. C by the arm, pulling him down the 

street, and said to me, "Well, I reckon you will have 
to make the ministers preach it right." May God 
have mercy on the preachers who are promulgating 
false doctrine! Yours in Christian love, 
W. B. SUTTON,-Virginia. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I want, in a few words, to express my appreciation 
of the good things which we all received at the Washington 
convention. It was the grandest feast it has ever 
been my privilege to attend, and the memory of it will 
remain with me as long as I remain in this tabernacle. 
I wish to express my thanks both to the Washington 
brethren, who contributed so much to the welfare and 
enjoyment of visiting brethren, and also to yourself 
and coworkers for the part which you contributed 
unto edifying the "body of Christ;" but above all I 
wish to thank our dear Lord for his manifest presence 
and blessing. I believe it is impossible to estimate 
the good resulting from these conventions, in the way 
of spiritual blessings. Each person gets some new 
light on different features of the plan and purpose, 
and these are taken home and given to the Lord's 
truth-hungry people who could not attend; and the 
"unity of the spirit" is so manifest at these gatherings, 
that the "body" is more and more "knit together 
in love," while all realize the significance of 
Paul's statement, "Forsake not the assembling of 
yourselves together," as they otherwise would not. 
In my own case, I can truly say that I received such 
an uplift and blessing as it has never been my lot to 
experience before. Praise God for his goodness, 
blessing and love, as it is now manifested to his chosen 
people. May his favor and his spirit be continued to 
you, dear Bro. Russell, and to all the brothers and 
sisters everywhere, and may we all be kept by the 
power of God until we shall receive the "change" 
promised,— is my daily prayer. 

Sincerely, your brother and servant in the Lord, 
R. H. BARBER, -New York. 



page 367 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL, 

DEAR BROTHER:-Although I could not go to 
either one of the general conventions this year (and 
oh, how hard it was to receive as from the Lord that 
I could not go!), it is with rejoicing that I write to 
tell you how true we find it to be, that it is hard to 
estimate the value of the knowledge and spiritual uplift 
received at these conventions, carried to other hundreds 
—in every direction. Our little company here 
has received so much of the convention drippings that 
we almost feel as though we had, all of us, been on 
hand at those love feasts. It brings to mind what 
Isaiah says, "As the rain cometh down and the snow 
from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth 
the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it 
may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; 
so shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth." 
So also the convention blessing cometh down from 
heaven, and does not return void, but bringeth increase 
to the recipient, a rich store to him that passeth it on, 
and joy and strength to all who take it in. 

Praise be to our God and glory to our Lord, who 
so abundantly blesses us! Remember Sister K., our 
children and myself at the throne of grace, as we do 
you always. With much love, your brother, 
J. G. KUEHN,-Ohio. 



MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

Tomorrow will be the anniversary of the day 
when in Dallas you stood beside the pool in which I 
was buried in baptism with my Lord. At each recurring 
anniversary sweetest and most precious memories 
fill my heart to overflowing, and impel me to send to 
the WATCH TOWER missionary fund a thanksgiving 
offering for the same— as a tiny proof of my remembrance 
of the date. I enclose a money order. I would 
also like a few tracts for distribution. 

That God may forever have you in his tender 
care is the prayer of Your friend in him, 

MRS. EMMA PASCHAL,-Texas. 



R3117 : page 367 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am an old man 78 years of age, with a very limited 
education, but a subscriber to WATCH TOWER 
for two years and have MILLENNIAL DAWN. Pardon 
me for intruding on your precious time in telling you 
how I enjoy reading the DAWNS and TOWERS; and now 
after being a member of the M.E. church for 35 



years I have withdrawn from that church as I could 
not endorse its doctrines; am no member now, but 
trying to serve the Master as best I can. Pray for me. 
Yours truly, A. J. JONES,— Pennsylvania. 

[We trust, dear brother, that you may never withdraw 
from the true Church— "whose names are written 
in heaven."— Editor.! 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. DECEMBER 15, 1902. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 371 

The Reapers Not Yet Crying Out 371 

The Agrarians of Germany 372 

A Presbyterian Preacher Looking 
in the Right Direction 372 

What Rev. Hillis Sees 373 

Church Union in Canada 373 

Social Unrest in Russia 374 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society's 

Annual Report 374 

Rejoicing in Tribulation 379 

Requests for Pilgrim Visits in 1903 383 

Extent of Judas' Knowledge 383 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THE WATCH TOWER BIBLES. 



The friends have thus named the wide-margin Bibles with 
DAWN and TOWER references recently gotten out by Holman & 
Co. for us: and since the book needs a special and distinguishing 
name, we may as well let this one stand. 

Some of these Bibles, reserved for friends who hoped to send 
the money before the end of the year, are now released, and can 
go to whoever sends the payment; 124 bound in French Seal, 
divinity circuit, red under gold edges, express prepaid, for $2.00. 

We got out a special edition for foreign shipment, with the 
photo-illustrations of Palestine, etc., separate (so as to keep 
within the foreign-postal limits): these we have held until now 
for our friends in foreign lands, but henceforth they are open 
to general orders from any quarter. Price, same as above (in 
British currency, 9s.); 99 remain. 

No other Bible ever published contains such advantages as 
this one; and the above are all that remain of an edition of 
5,000. There will be no more; and, though open to all, we are 
anxious that these go to friends of the cause, who will value 
them on account of the special features, and make use of the 
same. No Bibles at the price— nor at any price— will compare 
with these. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



Remember, that we have these in good supply at 50c each- 
delivery free. Each Binder will hold two years' issues, and 
they are very convenient for easy reference and preserving the 
papers from injury and soiling. 



R3117 : page 371 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE REAPERS NOT YET CRYING OUT. 



IN VIEW of our interpretation of James 5:1-9* 
and in view, further, of the present prosperous 
times amongst farmers and others in the United 
States and Canada, some are inquiring when and how 
we should now expect the fulfilment of James' prophecy. 
We answer that we are not sorry the American 
farmers are not pinched, but prosperous. No one of 



noble heart could take delight at the distress of others. 
We account for the delay of the pinch and the cries, 
here, as follows:— 

(1) The Spanish war, the Boer war, the Philippine 
war, the China war and several small wars and 
preparations for war, in Abyssinia, Hayti, Colombia, 
Argentine, Peru, and Chili, and the immense naval expenditures 
of Japan, Great Britain, Germany and the 

United States, have put thousands of millions of dollars 
into circulation during the past five years; and 
the effect could not be other than to bring great prosperity 
in manufacturing lines. 

(2) The famines in India and Russia and China, 
and crop shortages in Europe and South America, and 
the drouth in Australia, have all conspired to make a 
great demand for all the cattle and crops of this country, 
and at good prices. 

(3) The deficiency of money (decreased by the 
demonetization of silver) would surely have hindered 
this wave of prosperity from rising as it has risen, 
were it not for the shrewdness of the American bankers 
who have much more than made up for the loss of 
silver by organizing immense corporations and trusts 
whose stocks, like railway shares, are given a money 
value in all banks. The bankers thus make interest on 
loans represented by those shares, and at the same 
time have a firmer inside hold upon all the industries 
of the world. It is to their interest to have just as 

little money afloat as possible— they can the more easily 

control the financial keys of the world's business. 

If there were no money, the bankers' credits would be 

the substitute. The manufacturer would then deposit 

deeds or mortgages or stocks with his banker and 

secure credit and be permitted to issue bank checks 

against that credit; and those bank checks, or representations 

of credit, would pass current instead of 

money, and the bankers would have the entire control 

of the credit and charge interest, or toll, on all 

the business of the earth. Conditions are approximating 

this at present in that probably nine-tenths of the 

world's business is done on interest-bearing credits, while 

actual money suffices merely for small retail transactions. 

But what is the difference so long as we have 
prosperity? The difference is that the treating of stock 
shares as money is bringing fabulous wealth to a numerous 
class; but since many of these stocks are over-valued, 
over-capitalized, it follows that as war-expenditures 
decrease a panic will occur the like of which 
the world has never known. "The mighty man shall 
weep then bitterly"— the rich shall "weep and howl." 
That will be a time of general loss of confidence when 
bankers' credits will be at their ebb. Under the new 
conditions, and with the money and the money-making 
property in the hands of the bankers, it would be unwise 
to attempt to outline or to particularize the character 
of events that will ultimately lead the reapers 



to cry out; but we have confidence in the correctness 
of the prediction and believe that the demonetizing of 
silver and the consequent decrease of the world's 
money will be seen to be at the bottom of that trouble, 
directly or indirectly precipitating it. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. IV., p.392. 
R3118 : page 372 

THE AGRARIANS OF GERMANY. 



Even at present prices of agricultural products, 
the farmers of Germany, contending with poorer soil 
and smaller farms, are "crying out" that they can no 
longer compete with American products, and demanding 
tariff protection. The Government (the Emperor) 
is not averse to the tariff, but fears that even a small 
rise in the price of food necessities would pinch the 
mechanics and laborers of the cities, and necessitate a 
raise of wages which, in turn, would further hinder the 
industries of Germany, which have been much depressed 
for over a year. The Agrarian party in the 
German Parliament has hitherto been the Government's 
standby; but now the Agrarians freely hint 
that if they do not get tariff protection they will oppose 
voting public moneys for the building of new 
warships, and otherwise endeavor to thwart the Emperor's 
will until the tariff is granted. 

The Emperor, who is thus without his regular 
supporters, sees the Socialist party increasing in numbers 
and influence yearly; and now notes the threats 
of the Agrarians, and that many of them favor affiliation 
with their former opponents (the Socialists). 
The Emperor is thus forced to conciliate more and 
more the third party, the Centrists (the Roman Catholic 
party), who are apparently ready and willing to 
trade every other measure in the interest of their 
church. Thus the Pope, through this party, is likely 
to dominate the Emperor very thoroughly: indeed 
under the circumstances it is no wonder the Emperor 
is reputed to have a leaning toward Catholicism. His 
first conviction is that he reigns by "divine right," 
"by the grace of God." His second conviction is 
that those who favor him must be right. 

Present conditions favor Catholicism in Germany 
more than at any time since the days of the Reformation; 
but we are not to look for a religious war; 
rather we may expect a greater equality of all systems, 
with Romanism taking a leading part. Let it 
not be forgotten that this religious fraternization, or 
federation, is to come before the worst of the trouble 



comes: and this evidently is several years future even 
in these days of rapid transformations and aggregations. 

A PRESBYTERIAN PREACHER LOOKING IN THE RIGHT 
DIRECTION. 



At the Presbyterian Synod's session in Joplin, 
Mo., Oct. 28th, Rev. C. C. Hemenway delivered an 
interesting discourse, reported in the Joplin Globe, as 
follows:— 

"Rev. Hemenway preached an eloquent and able 
sermon. The address was a plea for the appreciation 
of spiritual truth, a call to Christians to live more 
deeply in the heart of religious truth. The text was 
taken from Luke 18:8: 'Nevertheless, when the Son 
of Man cometh shall he find faith on the earth?' 

"The speaker said in beginning his address: At 
no time during the present generation has it been so 
easy to be a pessimist, so difficult to be an optimist. 
Whether the interests be political or industrial, sociological 
or spiritual, the same general conditions everywhere 
prevail,— a state of doubt and unrest and fear. 
For such a time assuredly was asked the ambiguous 
question of our Lord of his disciples: Nevertheless, 
when the Son of Man cometh, shall he find faith on 
earth? 

"I do not profess to be able to interpret with 
confidence this searching question of Jesus. I can not 
feel sure of his mind in this conversation. Was it a 
warning to his believers not be lacking in faith as a 
guard against worldly influences, the power of which 
we now perhaps can realize more fully than those 
to whom Jesus was speaking? Was it a declaration 
that the time would come when faith would become 
weak and small in the hearts and lives of men? Or 
was it the pleading voice of a loving Master who 
would win our loyalty by suggesting the possibility of 
our failing in devotion,— as once he said when men 
were deserting him, Will ye also go away? Disclaiming 
any dogmatic zeal in the interpretation of this 
difficult conclusion to a not less difficult parable I feel 
confident that the underlying thought of every possible 
interpretation of this sentence is peculiarly applicable 
to the times in which we now live. Whether it 
be a plea for faith, or a warning not to be wanting in 
faith, or an announcement of a loss of faith, in every 
case there are significant and responsive aspects and 
characteristics of the meaning to be found in the religious 
world today. Nevertheless, when the Son of 
Man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth? If the 
Son of Man should come to the world of this twentieth 
century would he find faith on the earth? If he 
were to visit the church universal, which bears his 
name throughout our land and the world, would he 



find faith on the earth? Answering neither for the 
optimist nor the pessimist, and turning from the theoretical 
to the practical, I ask your serious consideration 
of some of the aspects of modern social and religious 
life most seriously significant of this inquiry of Jesus. 

"Perhaps I can express my fundamental thought 
this evening most clearly by quoting from a report of 
a sermon by President Charles Cuthbert Hall in Highgate 
Congregational Church, London. He was speaking 
on 'The Appreciation of Spiritual Truth as a Primary 
Duty of the Church,' and was reported as saying, 
that the conventionalism of life today creates a strong 
temptation to be more interested in what we do than 
in what we believe, and to get away from the responsibility 
of thinking for ourselves. 'We need, he says, 
to live more deeply in the heart of religious truth, 
and to have a growing appreciation of the beauty and 
nobleness of the fundamental ideas of our religion.' 

"Is there not here a clear and profound statement 
of the religious condition of our time? Are we not 
more interested in what we do than what we believe; 
and have we a worthy appreciation of the beauty and 
nobleness of the fundamental ideas of our religion? 

"With all our zeal and all our activity,— building 

R3118 : page 373 

churches in beauty, like this in which we gather tonight, 
—pushing on the agencies of the church with 
treasuries unburdened with debt; revising and improving 
our creed statements,— with all our zeal and 
activity, are we searching deep into the nature of the 
things of the kingdom of God for a better understanding 
of the fundamental verities of our faith? While 
in science, in biology and chemistry and physics and 
electricity,— men are studying deep into the nature of 
material things, is not the church of God, in the main, 
dealing with superficials and satisfied to live on the 
surface of spiritual things? The call to the revision 
of our creed (a voice which I am not to condemn tonight), 
is a voice to which we may all, perhaps, respond 
Amen; but is the call to revision sounding through 
our great church, out of a new and profounder research 
into the eternal verities of our faith than the 
studies of an Edwards or a Calvin? or is the call 
rather out of a desire to adjust our creed to the times 
in which we live? 

"Far more important than the mere question of 
revision may be the inquiry as to its cause. Far more 
significant to you and to me may be the real spiritual 
condition of the church seeking a revision of its creed 
statements, than the mere question of a verbal statement 
to be desired. We shall never grow strong by 
mere excision or even by addition; but only by securing 
deeper and surer foundations. 

"Rev. Hemenway showed how and why the 



question of Jesus which formed his text, was addressed 
to our day and generation, and showed different 
reasons. First: Within the church: Instead of the 
wonders of creation, the consequence of the fall of 
man, or the mysteries of redemption exciting the interest 
or inquiry, the question of the inspiration, 
accuracy and authority of the Bible— in a word, the 
higher criticism— holds the attention. 

"Second: Pulpit themes; the speaker said, In 
studying the trend of the times, I have found that 
business men say the pulpit has no message for them. 

"Third: The ways of the church; Rev. Hemenway 
made an earnest plea for the old hymns, such as 
'My faith looks up to thee,' 'All hail the power of 
Jesus' name,' and others, as better than the popular 
gospel hymn. He said that much of the modern religious 
poetry is set to music that stirs the feet more 
than the soul. 

"Fourth: The neglect of parents to bring up their 
children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. 
One of the best evidences, Rev. Hemenway thinks, 
that parents do not teach their children religion as 
once they did, is that the candidates for the ministry 
in 1899 were 1433; in 1902 only 810. 

"For reasons without the church: The speaker 
did not attempt a sharp and close discrimination between 
the church and the world, but looked for the general 
evidences of the decadence of faith which, he said, 
appear almost as frequently in the lives of Christians as 
those not professing Christ. He gave as first among 
the causes of this: the character of the present strife 
for wealth. He said, While unscrupulous means for 
acquiring riches have been employed for ages, the 
power of passion for wealth over all is new and of 
our time. We need to turn from the subject of the 
saloon on the Sunday to that of the office on the Sunday. 
The second commandment means no more to 
the community in its struggle for wealth than the 
excise laws to the man of appetite. He said the motive 
for obtaining wealth has changed, and quoted: 

'Gold! Gold! Gold! Gold! 
Bright and yellow, hard and cold; 
Molten, carven, hammered, rolled; 
Heavy to get and light to hold; 
Hoarded, bartered, bought and sold; 
Stolen, borrowed, squandered, doled; 
Spurned by the young, but hugged by the old 
To the very verge of the churchyard mold; 
Price of many a crime untold; 
Gold! Gold! Gold! Gold!' 

R3119 : page 373 

"As a second reason outside the church, was given: 
The love of pleasure, ease and self-indulgence. 



"Third: Unrest under authority. Anarchy, said 
the speaker, flourishes in the home, the school and the 
church. 

"Fourth: The prevalence of suicide. 

"Fifth: The ready acceptance of the various 
forms of new thought." 

WHAT REV. HILLIS SEES. 



Rev. Hillis, successor to Henry Ward Beecher 
now sees some of the things pointed out in the 
WATCH TOWER for the past twenty-three years. The 
public press reports the following from his discourse 
of October 19th:- 

MILLIONAIRES RULE THE COUNTRY. 

"Just now our country is entering upon a crisis 
that is to strain its institutions to the last point before 
breaking. For a generation the tide of illiteracy, 
intellectual and moral, has been slowly rising, until 
the better social element is being submerged by the 
worse. This social deterioration has been progressive. 
A century ago the great figures in the community 
were the magistrate and the minister. In the middle 
of the last century the statesman and the politician 
were the contrasting figures, representing weight of 
intellect. Those were the days of Daniel Webster and 
Henry Clay. Then came an era, about five years ago, 
when the statesman was submerged by the 
multi-millionaire. 

"Wealth, riches, the love of gold and power, 
control our statesmen now. Individuals representing 
hundreds of millions cause the politician to pass under 
an eclipse. This Croesus who can own his private car, 
his private yacht, owns also his private Governor, his 
private Representative, and last summer his private 
Congress. These men, whose millions have enabled 
them to form the trusts, control our Congress and used 
this legislative body to pull their chestnuts out of the 
fire. 

"Men who would solemnly pledge themselves to 
give certain rights to Cuba were forbidden by their 
political masters to fulfil their obligation. Men have 
the authority today who don't have any offices. Men 
rule as Governor who haven't been elected. 

THE DANGER OF THE MOB. 

"The next stage is the multi-millionaire's submergence 
by the numbers of his workmen acting under 
the control of a single will. But the rule of the many 
because they have the votes needed by the Governor 



R3119 : page 374 

who seeks re-election, is a rule of peril that threatens 
every institution that we love. A mob is always controlled 
by the most ignorant and vicious element. Put 
a thousand men in a group; the one man who can control 
the thousand men in the mob is the man who can 
strike the chord to which all will respond. The man 
who has the last fact in the case is nature's uncrowned 
king, who alone has the right to rule. 

"Fortunately, in a democracy, when the people 
make a mistake, it is the people who suffer, so that 
the follies and sins of the Republic cure themselves, 
as Wendell Phillips once said, and this fact makes and 
keeps up optimists." 

A ripple of surprise went over his congregation 
when Dr. Hillis, discussing the percentage of great 
men in America who owe their splendid qualities to 
the clergymen in their ancestry, said: "Henry Clay, 
Wendell Phillips, Daniel Webster, Robert Ingersoll 
and Henry Ward Beecher, five great inspirational orators, 
got their early education and principles of life 
from the clergymen from whom they sprung." 

That Dr. Hillis should mention the names of Robert 
Ingersoll and Henry Ward Beecher in the same 
breath, speaking in the church that was occupied by 
the latter, caused expressions of indignation among 
his hearers. 

CHURCH UNION IN CANADA. 



The Methodist General Conference recently held 
in Winnipeg, Man., near the close of its session passed 
resolutions looking toward a union of all the "evangelical" 
denominations of Canada. It appointed an 
influential committee to confer first and specially with 
Presbyterians and Congregationalists. The Methodists 
of Canada number 847,765; the Presbyterians 
755,326; the Congregationalists 28,157. Commenting 
upon this the Outlook says:— 

"This comprehensive and far-reaching proposition 
was adopted with practical unanimity by the Conference, 
only two or three delegates voting against it. 
This forward movement acquires additional significance 
from the fact that the Methodist and Presbyterian 
churches in Canada are themselves the result of 
the integration of several minor divisions, which has 
been signally marked with the seal of the divine approval. 
It was further emphasized by the cordial 
greetings of representatives of the Presbyterian Church 
—the Rev. Dr. Bryce, moderator of its General Assembly, 
Prof. Kilpatrick, of Manitoba College, and the 
Rev. C. W. Gordon, better known as 'Ralph Connor,' 
author of 'The Sky Pilot,' and the 'The Man from 



Glengarry.' Union sentiment was strongly reciprocated 
also by the Rev. Messrs. Silcox and Hamilton, 
representatives of the Congregational Union." 
The Chicago Interior (Presbyterian) declares:— 
"Were the leading denominational body of the 
Presbyterian, Congregational or Methodist Churches 
in this country to appoint a committee on organic union 
with the other two, the news of it would be put 
by the daily papers in the earthquake column. Yet 
the Methodist General Conference in Canada has done 
precisely that— named a commission of its most prominent 
men to invite the Presbyterians and Congregationalists 
to come in and talk union. We should not, 
indeed, like to believe that there is any more actual 
antagonism among denominations in the Republic than 
in the Dominion; we are certainly learning here in 
the United States to be mighty good friends and 
mighty neighborly neighbors across the old sectarian 
chasms; but of union, other than within the lines of 
our different 'families' of churches, we have scarcely 
thought at all— it hardly seemed possible. But certainly 
these advancing Canadian folks are going to 
make us think about it, and we shall all be watching 
intently from this country to see how they succeed." 

SOCIAL UNREST IN RUSSIA. 



The struggle between the Russian agriculturists 
and the bureaucracy still continues. The members of 
the Zemstvos or local Councils ask for greater liberty 
of speech, and sometimes when this is refused resign 
in a body. They demand also, as a first instalment of 
reform, a revision of the system of taxation, which, 
they say, presses unduly upon the agriculturists. The 
reactionaries are furiously angry at the demand for 
more freedom of speech, and we can understand their 
fear of publicity if the horrible story told to the correspondent 
of the Times is as well founded as he believes. 
In one district of Kharkov some peasants 
were being tried for resisting authority, when their 
counsel asked permission to give evidence as to the 
conduct of the soldiers, who had not only flogged the 
peasants but outraged a great number of their women. 
It was pleaded that they had therefore been punished 
enough; but permission to give evidence was refused, 
and the peasants were sentenced to fines or short terms 
of imprisonment. There had been, in fact, a Dragonnade 
of the locality, and there is no redress.— London 
Spectator. 



R3119 : page 374 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

--ANNUAL REPORT-DEC. 1ST, 1901, TO DEC. 1ST, 1902. 

WE WELL KNOW how the dear friends of the 

Truth watch for these annual reports. Recognizing 

that the Lord of the harvest is using 

the TOWER office as a kind of headquarters for the reaping 

work now in progress this side the vail, they are 

deeply concerned, not only respecting their own services 

in their own quarters, but also respecting the 

entire field as seen from this vantage point. Believing 

that such an interest is pleasing to the Lord and 

profitable to his people, we shall do our best to satisfy 

it. 

(1) The general aspect of the work is favorable. 
The little gatherings for worship and study of the 
Word are more numerous and better attended than 

R3119 : page 375 

ever: and still better than this, the general spiritual 
condition of the flock is favorable; even the financial 
prosperity of the year— an insidious foe to spiritual 
development— has not prevented a great increase of 
love and zeal for the Lord and his Word and his brethren. 
We rejoice in this far more than in the items 
below, indicating the activity displayed by you all in 
the circulation of the harvest message: nevertheless, 
it should not be forgotten that the two are intimately 
related; for as it is the zeal that leads to the service, 
so also does service inspire fresh zeal in ourselves as 
well as in others. 

But while thus rejoicing, let us take heed: let us 
remember that our Adversary is still on the alert, and 
that so long as he is "the prince of this world" it will 
be an "evil world," an enemy's country to all true 
followers of the Lamb until we shall be "changed" or 
until Satan's rule shall be fully overthrown and our 
Immanuel shall have full sway. Our Lord, through 
his Word, forewarns us to expect that neither Satan 
nor the systems of men organized under his supervision, 
or more or less controlled by him, will yield 
peaceably to the new rule; but must be overthrown 
by Christ after a violent struggle;— during which 
Satan will be forced to appear "as an angel of light" 
in order to perpetuate the delusions wherewith he has 
so long deceived the whole world— putting light for 
darkness, and darkness for light.— Compare Rev. 20:3; 

R3120 : page 375 

16:13,14; 13:15; I Tim. 4:1; 2 Thess. 2:9-12. 

While we see good evidences pointing to continued 
prosperity for the Truth during the new year just 
opening, we note many evidences that it is likely to 



be a year of severe testing. These evidences are more 
general, as well as more particular, than heretofore; 
and it is our duty to give a note of warning to all the 
watchers— putting them on guard against our Adversary; 
for "we are not ignorant of his devices." (2 Cor. 2:11.) 
One of his old "devices" (new, however, 
to some) is his denial (through his agents— and he 
always secures and uses the best servants he can for 
his mouthpieces,— Rom. 6:16) of his own existence. 
He comes in a garment of "light;" saying, Your ideas 
of an old devil are all wrong— a part of the general 
delusion from which all the intelligent people of our 
day are getting free— Higher Critics, Evolutionists, 
Christian Scientists, and the educated world all now 
admit this, and you must not lag behind in the mire 
of error. Never mind the Bible's numerous references 
to a personal devil and a host of demons who occasionally 
were cast, by the Lord and his apostles, out 
of those "possessed." Take my word for it; and pay 
no attention to Jesus' declaration that I was "a murderer 
from the beginning and abode not in the truth;" 
nor to the Apostles' warning that I would deceive and 
palm myself off as a minister of the light, denying my 
former self and practices and, instead, working miracles 
to deceive, if it were possible, the very elect. 

Another device in line with the foregoing yet 
strictly new, is that Satan has become a worker of miracles. 
This is a token that his "house" is tottering 
to its fall— else it would not need support so opposed 
to the general policy of Satan— as our Lord declared, 
If Satan cast out Satan his house is divided against 
itself and cannot long stand. (Mark 3:23-26; Matt. 12:26.) 
He has long palmed himself off as a teacher 
—a light-bearer, clothed in light; but Satan in the 
role of faith-healer is a novelty belonging chiefly to 
our day— though, undoubtedly, he has had to do with 
the relic -miracles of Papacy for centuries. The worshiping 
of a relic -bone of St. Anne or of the "holy 
shroud" or of a "nail from the cross" served for less intelligent 
people in a less intelligent epoch; but now, and 
amongst more enlightened people, faith and prayer are 
more apt to deceive, and he is using and blessing these, 
and thus attracting the attention of people away from 
the Truth which is now dawning gradually upon nominal 
"Christendom." 

Do we deny that "faith cures" are performed by 
"Christian Scientists" and "Mormons" and "Spiritualists" 
and "Mesmerists" and "Hypnotists" and 
"Magnetists" and "Comeouters" and "Christian 
Allianceists" and "Elijahites"? Surely no one can 
deny that some cures are performed by all these systems; 
and just as surely none can deny that earnest, 
well-meaning people are to be found in all of these 
systems. Perhaps some of the "very elect" are in 
them and deluded by Satan's substitution of darkness 
for light; if so, we may be sure that the Lord will use 



some means for their deliverance;— we should be glad 
if he would so use this very item of warning. 

We cannot blame "the groaning creation" for 
desiring relief from pain and death; and we are glad 
that we can point them to the real relief which God 
has provided, so near at hand;— the Millennial Kingdom. 
We cannot wonder, however, if the poor world 
in gross darkness fails to see coming restitution clearly 
enough to trust in it and wait for it; but we should 
expect that the New Creation, begotten of the spirit, 
would see that the general blessing and removal of the 
curse is not due until the great Day of Atonement (the 
Gospel age) is fully ended and the Sons of God, the 
"very elect," are all glorified with their Lord and 
Head. These, the saints taught of God, should 
clearly see that now is not the time for restitution, 
but still the time for sacrificing; and accordingly 
should joyfully suffer with Christ as members of his 
body and not ask back the physical powers exchanged 
in consecration for spiritual hopes and promises. If 

R3120 : page 376 

our wily adversary could get us all to coveting and 
striving for physical healing and comfort, and to teaching 
such a gospel to others, it would please him and 
serve his purposes; for time and thought spent thus 
would be turned aside from spiritual interests and 
studies and efforts. Restitution hopes and efforts, 
which will be in order for the world very soon now, 
are surely not the hopes or ambitions of the Church 
called out of the world during this age to be "living 
sacrifices"— to lay down their lives and become "dead 
with him." 

It will be noted that we are not condemning those 
who in the various systems "perform many wonderful 
works," but not by divine power. (Matt. 7:22,23.) 
Nor are we blaming those who have sought and found 
relief— they only followed a natural course. And if 
they gave God thanks for the healing, they have the 
same blessing as though God had performed the cure. 
If sincere, however, to learn better will mean that they 
will not accept healings from such sources again. 
What we now desire to do is to save some from being 
ensnared by these false doctrines by pointing out that 
none of these channels of healing give evidence that 
they are such as God would probably choose. To our 
understanding, Satan uses faith-healings as bait to catch 
the Lord's people and turn them away from the Truth. 

"Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall 
make you free;" and "he that doeth truth cometh 
to the light," are our Lord's declarations. "Ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should 
overtake you as a thief;" is the Apostle Paul's 
prediction. (John 8:32; 3:21; I Thess. 5:4.) Excuse 
may well be made for those who lived and died 



before the dawning began; but for those now living 
and continually brought in contact with the light of 
present truth, what shall we conclude? We must conclude 
that if servants at all they are such as know not 
what their Lord doeth; such, therefore, as we should 
not regard either as favored sons or favored servants 
of God, as our Lord explains.— John 15:15. 

Viewed thus, all of these doers of "many wonderful 
works in Christ's name" (Matt. 7:22) lack the 
proper credentials, in that they do not have the Truth, 
which they surely would have if they were in the 
Lord's favor and confidence. Worse than this, the 
vast majority of them are Christless— deniers of the 
ransom, its necessity and its results— as well as blind 
to the light of present truth. The Elijahites are deceived 
into an anti-Christ position similar to that of 
Papacy; for while the latter's pontiff poses as Christ's 
representative and substitute in ruling authority, and 
misapplies prophecies of Christ's kingly power and 
authority to the popes,* the Elijahites similarly misapply 
to their leader the prophecies which refer to our 
Lord and the glorified Church, as the great "Prophet 
like unto Moses" (Acts 3:22,23), and the "Messenger 
of the Covenant," whose mission, in the flesh, 
failing of turning the hearts of fathers and children 
will result in the "smiting of the earth with a curse" 
—"a time of trouble such as was not since there was 
a nation. "+-Mal. 4:6; Dan. 12:1. 

The Christian Allianceists are thick in the medieval 
darkness, teaching eternal torment and various 
other blasphemies and falsehoods. The "Christian 
Scientists" repudiate all sin, and, hence, all redemption 
from sin, and thus plainly show that they have 
neither part nor lot with Christ or his message or power. 
The Spiritualists similarly deny the foundations 
of Biblical faith. 

The Mormons teach a transmigration of soul, and, 
hence, deny Adam as the head of the race; hence, deny 
the death sentence on all mankind through him; 
hence, cannot logically hold the Scriptural theory that 
all die in Adam's sentence and were redeemed by 
Christ's sacrifice. 

What reason have we to expect that the power of 
healing manifested in these variously blinded peoples 
is of Christ? None whatever. Indeed, they each 
brand the other as deluded servants of Satan, and we 
see no reason to doubt that this is true of them all to 
a greater or less extent. The Lord instructs us to put 
this test, saying: "The secret of the Lord is with them 
that fear him, and he will show them his covenant." 
(Psa. 25:14.) Do any of these miracle-workers see 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
the divine plan and covenant? Surely not, else they 
would be with us heart and voice, declaring the "good 
tidings of great joy which shall be to all people."— 
Luke 2:10. 



The signs by which the Gospel age was introduced 
to fleshly Israel were such as would appeal to sincere 
natural men,— physical blessings typical of greater 
things in the Kingdom. The signs with which the new 
dispensation now appeals to spiritual Israelites are 
spiritual signs, or proofs— the opening of the eyes and 
ears of our hearts to discern in God's plan wonderful 
things which the natural man cannot appreciate. Let 
those whose chief desire is for physical blessings and 
healings take these; Satan will be pleased thus to turn 
them aside;— to turn their faces from the direction of 
the rising Sun of Righteousness and the great and perpetual 
blessings which God proposes, to transient expedients 
and creature consolations, encouraging the 
thoughts that such physical gains are evidences of 
godliness or evidences of divine favor. The New 
Creatures in Christ will follow the footsteps of self-sacrifice 



*See Millennial Dawn, Vol. II., pp. 292-308. 
+Millennial Dawn, Vol. II., chap. 8. 

R3121 : page 377 

and rejoice in the evidences of God's favor 
which the Scriptures warrant. It is our understanding 
that these delusions will be so strong as to deceive 
all except the elect, who will be kept by their clearer 
knowledge of the divine plan. It is our duty to sound 
the alarm, the warning, the caution, even though we 
know that some will, nevertheless, be led away from 
their own steadfastness. Our warning is that the coming 
year means much of trial and testing along these 
lines and that zeal in studying and in serving the truth 
is the only position of safety for any of us. The question 
of the Apostle is apropos, "Who shall be able to 
stand?" Let all who have tasted that the Lord is 
gracious,— all to whom he has shown his covenant, 
stand shoulder to shoulder with each other and with 
the Lord, in defense of the Truth and in aid of one 
another. Thus standing, the opening year will surely 
result favorably to us. 

THE CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT. 

This is an important branch of the service— our 
"Correspondence School." The BIBLE is our text 
book, the DAWNS and TOWERS are our comments, explanations, 
etc., and our mail department enables us 
to point out and emphasize misunderstood parts of 
the instruction. We believe, however, that the references 
and indexes in the new "Watch Tower Bibles" 
will decrease the written communications by enabling 
students to find answers to their queries in DAWNS and 
TOWERS. During the present year we received 42,375 



letters and cards, and sent out 40,601. 

We are always glad of your letters; many a time 
their kind, encouraging words have come like a cup of 
cold water in a dry and thirsty land. Some, indeed, 
are filled with acrimony, and would cause us pain and 
discouragement did not the Lord's grace and truth 
sustain us and show us that Satan and ignorance are 
the real assailants and that the vail of ignorance and 
power of Satan will soon be cast aside and trampled 
upon.— Rom. 16:20. 

THE COLPORTEURING DEPARTMENT. 

The postal ruling which seemed likely to greatly 
interrupt the work has really proved a blessing: it led 
us to renewed efforts to reduce the cost of the clothbound 
DAWNS, which efforts were very successful. 
And these, in turn, are so much more attractive that 
the general sales of DAWNS this year are above our 
highest previous standard— over 93,000 copies of Vol. 
I. alone, and of all volumes, over 128,000. The total 
sales of booklets for the year are nearly 56,000. The 
zeal for colporteuring is increasing, and we hear from 
many who are seeking to adjust their affairs so as to 
be ready to engage in this evangelistic service by 
spring. If these hopes are realized, it will increase 
the above large figures nearly one-half. Our printers 
are increasing their facilities to keep pace with the 
demand. We know of no field of service yielding better 
results than this one; besides, many of these books, 
little cared for now, will, doubtless, be a helping hand 
for many in the time of trouble. 

THE TRACT DEPARTMENT. 

The showing here is equally good;— evidencing 
great zeal for the Master and his Word amongst TOWER 
readers, some of whom circulate the message at 
depots, some on trains and ferryboats and street cars; 
some privately and some by mail. The blessings are 
surely as great to those who give as to those who receive 
them. Total distributed during the year, 
1,895,435. 

The Volunteer work with the WATCH TOWER is 
a part of the same tract work and it alone amounted 
to 1,512,538, or a total of both of nearly three and 
a half million pieces. This would represent 122,432,732 
tract pages. This is a grand showing, in which 
we may all rejoice. 

Is it any wonder that those who attest their loyalty 
to the Lord and his message thus publicly should have 
a special blessing at his hand in return? No; it is in 
full accord with the Lord's general dealings. Them 
who honor him he will honor; them who confess him 
he will own and confess; they who water others shall 
themselves be watered. Not only are those congregations 



which have done volunteering most persistently, 
in the most robust condition, but those brethren 
and sisters who have courageously shown their colors 
are amongst the most clear and most staunch in the 
truth. How glad all will be when in the future they 
look back and note the little services and sacrifices 
they were privileged to make, as an expression to their 
Lord of their love for him and for his brethren! 

The Lord willing, we will have some fresh Volunteer 
matter for next year— ready in the spring. 
We suggest that the various "Captains" send in reports 
for the year, to January 1, as soon as possible; 
and that enlistments for next year be recorded and a 
new election of Captains take place as soon as possible. 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE DEPARTMENT. 

This work is still growing, and we are continually 
seeing new evidences that the Lord is owning and 
blessing it to the spiritual welfare of his dear flock. 
The announcements of routes, etc., in each issue 
of the TOWER tends to quicken the general interest, 
too: the solitary ones can now not only think of and 
mentally fellowship with the Allegheny Church and 
at the One Day Conventions, but also in spirit, travel 
with each of the dear Pilgrims and gather with the 

R3121 : page 378 

various bands of hope and love in sundry quarters. 

During the past year the "Pilgrim" service of 
the Society has been administered through twenty-one 
brethren, who have visited 1208 places, held 1335 public 
meetings and 2057 parlor meetings, covering a total 
of 117,746 miles. This record includes the Editor's 
One Day Conventions and General Conventions. The 
interest in the "Pilgrim" meetings is steadily increasing, 
and many of the friends are learning to cooperate 
with us by appointing some one of their number to 
send us their request for visits, with particulars, which 
we now request, for 1903, on page 383 of this issue. 
In a couple of instances the local leader has seemed a 
little jealous of the "Pilgrims," and fearful that their 
superior knowledge or ability or influence would discount 
his own and undermine it. This is wrong 
every way: vainglory has no proper place in the 
hearts of the Lord's true people; and it should be 
mortified. The "Pilgrims" are humble and earnest, 
and clear in the truth— on the fundamentals, at least 
—otherwise they could not represent this Society or 
travel under its auspices. They will never be found 
trespassing on the rights of the congregations visited; 
but, on the contrary, conservators of the peace and 
liberty of all. Welcome them as Ambassadors of the 
Great King. 

Remember that these services are entirely free, 



traveling expenses and all; and that no collections 

are ever taken up by them. The Society meets every 

expense— except food and lodging, which the friends 

at each place are always glad to provide. Your donations 

to the fund, and ours, are the Lord's provision, 

by which, in this manner, much good is, we believe, 

being accomplished. We again repeat, as last year, 

our suggestion that one half or more of the sessions 

be Parlor Meetings,— specially for the interested. 

THE CONVENTIONS OF THE YEAR. 

The Conventions— Annual and One-Day— are evidently 
entrenching themselves in the esteem of those 
who love the truth, and who love to "speak often one 
to another." The Lord still hearkens, too, and still 
pours out blessings as of yore— abundant and spiritual 
blessings. (Mai. 3:16,17.) These gatherings are 
expensive, both as to time and traveling expense, and, 
therefore, all cannot enjoy their privileges: however, 
all do share their blessings; for we have good evidence 
that those attending carry back blessings to those at 
home. We will D.V. continue these during the year 
1903. Locations have not yet been decided upon: 
these will be announced in due season in the TOWER. 

THE COST OF THIS FINANCIALLY. 



After reviewing the figures foregoing, and rendering 
thanks to God for the privilege enjoyed in the 
service by so many of us— including all who have 
shared in any degree in this wide circulation of the 
good tidings— we naturally ask, What has all this cost, 
in money, additional to the free labor bestowed by so 
many? You will be surprised that it could be done for 
so modest a sum. You would be astounded if you 
could compare these figures and results with those of 
other Tract Societies. 

Receipts. 

From Good Hopes and all other sources $28,284.80 

Expenditures. 

For Pilgrim expenses $ 4,621.08 

" Publishing matter, 

circulated free 13,983.51 

" Expense, Insurance, etc., 

acct 5,742.10 

$24,346.69 



Surplus $3,938.11 



We request that all who in any manner have 
co-labored with us to the attainment of these results 
—either by contributing money or by circulating the 
literature, or both— will, after reading and digesting 
this Report, join with us in a prayer of thanksgiving 
to our Lord, the giver of every good, for the privileges 
enjoyed in his service. 

REPORT OF BRITISH BRANCH. 



We give Bro. Hemery's very interesting and satisfactory 
report below, merely remarking that its 
items are all included in the foregoing. 

LONDON, NOV. 14, 1902. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have much pleasure in sending you the enclosed 
report of the British Branch operations, and I am sure 
it will give pleasure to you also. From a perusal of 
the statement of Tracts circulated you will find that 
there is quite an increase on the figures of last year; 
and the same will be noticed from the figures relating 
to the DAWNS, nearly 2,000 more of these having been 
sold than were sold last year. I am sure you will be 
glad to note this increased activity on the part of the 
brethren here. The circulation of the DAWNS has increased 
despite the fact that the Colporteurs are less in 
number than last year. Much has been done through 
the year by those who have been able to devote only 
a little time to the work; sometimes this has meant 
that part of a holiday has been given to it; sometimes 
that the home work or home life has been arranged 
that time might be obtained. Much still remains to 

R3122: page 378 

be done, and the time is short. Many of the large 
towns of England are practically untouched, either 
with Volunteer literature or DAWNS. We continually 
pray the Lord of the Harvest that he will send more 
labourers into the vineyard. 

The Volunteer work, and the general distribution 
of tracts, has been eagerly pushed forward by the 
brethren, and, for their encouragement, we would say 
that the work is having an effect in gathering the 
Lord's "Jewels." You will see, too, that the donations 
to the Tract Fund show a considerable increase on the 
previous year, nearly L100 more being received than 
last year. I have already reported concerning some 
of these donations. 

Besides the above increases, there is, as you will 
have noticed, a marked increase in the number of 
TOWER subscribers. As may be expected all this increase 
has not come from the immediate neighborhood 



of meeting places; the Truth is asserting itself here 

R3122: page 379 

and there, gathering to it those whose hearts are so 
disposed. In Ireland, too, much literature has been 
scattered, chiefly in Dublin and Belfast. In the latter 
place a considerable amount of Colporteur work has 
been done. Our hearts are glad because of all the 
favor of God, and because the knowledge of him is 
increasing. For all the goodness that has been shown 
we are deeply thankful. 

The Pilgrim visit of Bro. Hope Hay was very 
much enjoyed by all the friends. I am sure I speak 
for all when I say we should much appreciate a sight 
of yourself amongst us. We remember your promise 
to come on the first opportunity. 

If I may add a personal word, I would say how 
much I appreciate the privilege of working with, and 
in any way serving, the Lord's people. 

The opportunities for service in this country are 
very many: the "harvest" is indeed "great," and 
the labourers are few. We hope for great things. In 
the meantime "we thank God, and take courage." 

I am, dear brother, 

Yours in the Lord, J. HEMERY. 

Tract Fund receipts and expenditures of the 
British Branch of the Society from Nov. 1, 1901, to 
Nov. 1, 1902:- 

Expenditures. L s d 

Deficit from last year 537 4 11 

Paper, printing, postage, etc., on matter 

circulated free 222 14 6 

"Pilgrim" expenses 50 15 

Total 810 14 5 

Receipts from Great Britain 268 15 9 

Deficit 541 18 8 

Letters received 3,448 

" sent out 4,329 

Total DAWNS sold 17,668 

" Booklets sold 2,516 

Tracts and Towers circulated free 670,200 

Representing tract pages 23,131,440 



R3122: page 379 



REJOICING IN TRIBULATION. 

--ACTS 16:22-34-JANUARY4.- 

"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved." 

THE International Lessons change with the New 

Year from the Old Testament to the New, taking 

up the theme where we left it six months 

ago. That series of lessons noted (1) Christ as the 

central figure of Christianity; (2) the Holy Spirit as 

the motive power of Christianity; (3) the gradual development 

of the Church from its birth at Pentecost; 

(4) missionary work by Paul and Barnabas; (5) 

Paul's second missionary tour, with Silas and others 

as his companions, and by them the first entrance of the 

Gospel into Europe. We now take up the subject at 

this point. The first city in Macedonia— the first city, 

therefore, in Europe— to hear the Gospel message, was 

Philippi. One of the Apostle Paul's epistles, addressed 

to the church there established, is known to us as the 

"Epistle to the Philippians." 

At Philippi the Apostle and his companions, in 
seeking for those who reverenced the Lord, and hence 
most likely to have hearing ears for the Gospel, found 
a little group who met by the riverside for worship. 
Lydia, one of the number, became prominent for her 
thorough acceptance of the Gospel message, and her 
zeal in entertaining the Apostle and his company, and 
in forwarding, as best she could, the interests of the 
cause. The meetings were held outside the city, doubtless, 
on a similar pretext to that which, until recent 
years, excluded the worship of Protestants in the city 
of Rome, compelling them to go outside the city if 
they would hold any gatherings for worship. Philippi 
had its approved religious system, and would grant 
liberty for meetings to no other. 

It was while the apostles were day by day passing 
from Lydia's home to the place of worship outside the 
city gate that they were met repeatedly by a young 
woman known in that city as a Pythoness, or Sybil (a 
sooth-sayer or truth-teller or fortune-teller; a foreteller 
of future events, or prophetess). She was evidently 
well known to all the people, and the exercise of her 
profession brought large income to a joint-stock company 
which owned her as its slave. As the evangelists 
passed daily she called out after them, "These men 
are the servants of the most high God, which show unto 
us the way of salvation." These words, though true 
enough, coming from such a source, and possibly in a 
jesting voice, might be understood by those who heard 
them to be sarcasm, ridicule, and, therefore, a hindrance 
to the Lord's work; or even if uttered in serious 
tones their coming from such an unsanctified quarter 
would probably preclude their having any favorable influence 
with those of such cast of mind and heart as might 



otherwise have a hearing ear for the Gospel of Christ. 
This continued many days, the Apostle gradually becoming 
more and more grieved by it— probably because 
it was hindering his mission, and perhaps, also, because 
he was grieved to see a fellow-creature thus made a 
tool of by the fallen angels, the wicked spirits which 
controlled her. Similarly our Lord refused to recognize 
the testimony of the evil spirit who acknowledged 
him, saying, "I know thee who thou art, the Holy 
One of God," and had compassion upon the one who 
had the evil spirit, and delivered him.— Mark 1:24; 
Luke 4:34. 

Present-day higher critics and lower critics are disposed 
to dispute that there are evil spirits, and that 
human beings ever are or ever were possessed by demons. 
Such incline to suppose that either deception or 
insanity was mistaken by the Lord and the apostles in 
these cases of obsession. However, to those who have 
learned to respect the Word of God there is no room for 
questioning the accounts. Our Lord commanded evil 
spirits to come out of possessed ones, and they obeyed 
him; and in this case the Apostle Paul invoked the 
same divine power for the healing of this young woman 
—for her deliverance from the evil spirit being which 

R3122: page 380 

had obtained possession of her and made her its slave, 
speaking through her, and otherwise using her mouth, 
ears, etc., as channels of communication. These fallen 
angels adapt themselves to the varying conditions of 
humanity in all parts of the world, and in connection 
with all the various systems of religion, all of which we 
may properly accredit, more or less directly, to the 
great Adversary of the truth, who worketh by and 
through those who will submit themselves.* 

As this young woman was a money-winner for the 
people who owned her, we can imagine what consternation 
was aroused amongst them when they found that 
not only was their source of gain for the future gone, 
but also that the large amount of money invested in 
this slave was lost (for such spirit-possessed ones had a 
high market value): they became desperately angry. 
Nothing will so greatly move men as love or selfishness; 
and under present conditions selfishness moves the vast 
majority, and with intense power. They had no hope 
of getting the evil spirit back into the woman; they 
must have revenge upon those who had financially 
ruined them. There is much of this spirit abroad in 
the world today: so long as the truth and the Lord's 
servants quietly go their way the world will generally 
be too busy with its affairs to molest them; but so soon 
as they perceive that truth and righteousness are inimical 
to their earthly interests and prospects their opposition 
becomes intense. Nor should we consider it to be 
the chief business of the Lord's people to stir up the animosity 



of the world and to bring persecution upon 
themselves. As a rule it is best that we leave the 
world to watch its own affairs, while we preach the 
Gospel, not using it as a sledge-hammer, to break men's 
hearts, but as the message of peace and love and blessing 
and joy to those whose hearts under divine providence 
have been already broken; and who have ears 
to hear the message of the grace of God. Very generally 
the apostles pursued as smooth a course as principle 
would permit, and in this instance very evidently 
Paul acted under special guidance of the Lord. The 
Apostle's general instruction is, "So far as lieth in you, 
live peaceably with all men"— do not go out of your 
way to stir up trouble, but if the Lord in his providence 
allows it to arise, be courageous and full of faith in him 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism? Proofs That 
It Is Demonism. 

R3123 : page 380 

who has permitted it, that he will overrule it for good. 

The owners of the Pythoness evidently had influence, 
and succeeded quickly in arousing a mob determined 
to have revenge against Paul and Silas. Of 
course they did not attempt this by telling the truth. 
They did not say, We were using a poor slave girl, possessed 
of an evil spirit, for our financial profit, and 
these men have restored her mind, her will— released 
her from mental enslavement to saneness of mind. 
No; like all who are engaged in a bad cause, they ignored 
the truth of the matter, and raised spurious 
charges— that the prisoners were teaching a religion 
contrary to the laws of Rome, and likely thus to raise 
sedition. We see that this was contrary to the truth, 
for the Lord's servants went, according to law, outside 
the city gates for their worship. However, under the 
circumstances the false charge, without proofs, was 
sufficient to bring down upon the Lord's representatives 
the severest penalties their judges could inflict: their 
clothing was torn from them, and the command was 
given that they should be beaten with rods and imprisoned. 
The customary sentence of the time was, "Go, 
victors! Tear off their garments! Scourge them!" 
This was one of the three times Paul was thus beaten. 
(2 Cor. 1 1:25.) He referred to it in his letter to the 
Thessalonians, declaring that he was "shamefully" 
treated at Philippi.— I Thess. 2:2. 

The prison was constructed with outer cells, which 
were more or less accessible to the light and air, and 
with an inner or central dungeon for the most vicious 
criminals. It was into the latter that Paul and Silas 
were thrust, and their feet made fast in the stocks, 
which often were so constructed as to separate the limbs 



widely and to make any movement very painful. It 
was under these unfavorable circumstances, with their 
backs bleeding and raw from the scourging, that reflecting 
upon the wonders of the divine plan, and their own 
association with that plan, these faithful brethren were 
so filled with the spirit of rejoicing that they gave vent 
to their feelings in hymn-prayers of thankfulness for 
their privilege of suffering in connection with the Lord's 
service, of enduring tribulation for righteousness' sake. 

How remarkable it must seem to the worldly, who 
have never tasted of the joys of the Lord, that these 
men could thus rejoice in tribulation— rejoice that they 
were counted worthy to suffer afflictions for the cause 
of Christ! How little the world knows of the peace of 
God which passeth all understanding, that rules in the 
hearts of the Lord's people who have grown in his grace 
and heart-likeness! How little can they appreciate 
the fact expressed by our Lord when he said, "Peace 
I leave with you; my peace I give unto you; not as 
the world giveth give I unto you. Let not your heart 
be troubled, neither let it be afraid." And again, 
through the Apostle, "We glory in tribulation, also; 
knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience 
experience; and experience hope; and hope 
maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed 
abroad in our hearts." (John 14:27; Rom. 5:3-5.) 
And as these faithful servants of the Lord could rejoice 
in whatever experiences God permitted to come to them 
in the discharge of duty, so may we remember that 
ours is the same God, that he changes not; that he is 
equally able and equally willing today to grant the sunshine 
of his favor to those who trust him and seek to 
walk in his ways. It is the reverse condition that the 
followers of Christ need to dread, need to fear, as expressed 
by the poet, 

"Oh, let no earthborn cloud arise 

To hide thee from thy servant's eyes!" 

In a general sense, the entire Gospel age is represented 
as being a night, in which sin and distress prevail, 
and, as the Prophet has declared, "Weeping may 
endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning"— 
when the Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing 
in his beams, to scatter all the miasm of sin and death! 
But even in this night-time the Lord's people do not 
need to sorrow as others, who have no hope. On the 
contrary, to his people, "He giveth songs in the night." 
(Job 35:10.) While they are watching, hoping, praying, 
for the glorious morning of deliverance, their trust 
in the Lord is as an anchor to their souls within the 
vail. How could such children of the great King go 
mourning all their days? Surely especially now, as 

R3123 : page 381 

the Millennial morning is dawning, we can say, "He 
hath put a new song into our mouths, even the loving 



kindness of our God!" He has given his people the 
blessed privilege of singing the new song of Moses and 
the Lamb, that others cannot sing— at least not yet. 
These who sing and make melody in their hearts unto 
the Lord will surely also show forth the praises of him 
who hath called them out of darkness into his marvelous 
light— theirs will be the psalm of life, manifesting 
in looks and words and tones and sentiments the love 
of God received into good and honest hearts. 

Since as Christians we have learned that it is our 
privilege to be always rejoicing— to rejoice evermore 
and in everything give thanks— we need not, like the 
world, wait for special manifestations of divine favor 
to call forth our praise, our homage of heart and our 
grateful obedience to the Lord. Rather, learning that 
divine providence is in all of our affairs, ready to shape 
them for our good, we may rejoice "whatever lot we 
see, since 'tis God's hand that leadeth us." Some one 
has well said:— 

"If we are not ready to praise God where we are, 
and with our conditions and circumstances as they are, 
we should not be likely to praise him if we were differently 
circumstanced and our conditions just that which 
now seems to us most desirable. Daniel could sleep 
better in the den of lions than Darius in the royal palace; 
he who could not find rest in a lion's den, when 
that was the place for him, could not gain rest by a mere 
removal to a palace. It is the man's self which must be 
changed, not his circumstances or his possessions, in order 
to his having a heart overflowing with joy and praise." 

When, in 1695, Madame Guyon was imprisoned 
in the Castle of Vincennes, she sang praises to the Lord, 
composing one of her own hymns, as follows: 

"A little bird I am, 

Shut from the fields and air; 
And in my songs I sit and sing 

To him who placed me there: 
Well pleased a prisoner thus to be, 

Because, my God, it pleaseth thee. 

"My cage confines me round, 

Abroad I cannot fly; 
But though my wing is closely bound, 

My heart's at liberty; 
My prison walls can not control 

The flight, the freedom, of the soul." 

The shaking of the prison, the loosing of the chains, 
the opening of the doors, the waking of the jailer, his 
dismay and intended suicide, fearing the ignominy 
which would attach to him from the escape of the prisoners, 
Paul's call to him to do himself no harm, assuring 
him that the prisoners were all safe, constitute together 
a thrilling episode, more remarkable to the jailer 
than to anyone else. Doubtless he had heard something 



respecting these men, so different from the ordinary 

criminals with which he had to do. Doubtless, he 

had been impressed with their unresisting attitude; 

their Christlike demeanor even under severe provocation; 

their moderate submission even to their severe 

treatment at his hands. In any event he seems to 

have felt a heart-hunger for fellowship with his Creator 

such as these discredited men under his care enjoyed. 

Quite probably he had already been reading the Gospel 

of Christ in the features and conduct of his prisoners, 

whose living epistles were always open to be known 

and read by those about them. Had there not been 

some such preliminary instruction of his heart, we can 

scarcely suppose that he would so quickly have resolved 

to walk in the footsteps of the prisoners— that their 

God should be his God, and their salvation which was 

able to make them joyful in tribulation, should, if possible, 

be his salvation. And this was his inquiry: 

"What must I do to be saved?"— saved from sin, 

saved from its penalty,— death, saved from its degrading 

influence, saved from its unrest of heart and mind, 

saved to the same peace and joy and comfort and consolation 

which his prisoners exemplified. 

We are not surprised at the reply given by the 
Lord's servants; we are not surprised that they did 
not say, Go to the confessional, get the priest to sprinkle 
holy water upon you, pay him to say masses for 
your sins, and join the Catholic Church. Neither are 
we surprised that the message was not that he must 
feel his guilt a long while, and pray to the Lord a good 
while, and seek forgiveness at a mourner's bench night 
after night, and join a Methodist or Presbyterian or 
other human system. How evident it is that these 
servants of the true Gospel and builders of the true 
Church were not Catholics, nor Presbyterians, nor 
Methodists; and that they neither founded these sects 
nor taught along their lines; and that they would no 
more affiliate with or encourage their methods today 
than they would then have done. 

The answer to the jailer is one which commends 
itself to the Christian mind as being the proper one- 
no more, no less: he should believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ as his Redeemer, as the one who had died on his 
behalf, through whose stripes he might be healed, 
saved and through whose sacrifice he might rejoice in 
at-one-ment with God; and having thus believed with 
all his heart, whether it required a moment or an hour 
to explain and to understand these simple first principles 
of the Gospel, his next step was to consecrate himself, 
to be baptized into death with his Redeemer, and 
to symbolize this consecration into death by a baptism 
in water. And he was encouraged to hope, not only 
for his personal salvation, but that his family might 
be sharers with him. We may reasonably suppose 
that this conversation about his salvation progressed 
while he was ministering to the evangelists— washing 



R3124: page 381 

their wounds, seeking to make them comfortable and 
providing them food. We may also reasonably suppose 
that with many more words than are here presented 
the Apostle set before the jailer and his assembled 
family the simple story of the love of God manifested 
in the gift of his Son; and of the love of Christ manifested 
in his sacrifice on our behalf; and the evidence 
of the acceptableness of that sacrifice, as testified to by 
our Lord's resurrection and by his sending of the holy 
spirit upon the infant Church; and the subsequent 
message now going forth to whomsoever had an ear to 
hear, that there is salvation in him and in no other. 

There is a lesson here for us in regard to the promulgation 
of God's message. We are not to use words 
of man's wisdom; not to attempt to philosophize and 
to show our learning; nor are we to say, Now, do not 
be in too much haste; there is plenty of time, and 
after we are comfortably fixed we will have all day tomorrow 
to talk this matter over. We are to remember 
the declaration of the wise man, "A word in season, 
how good it is!" We are to remember, when talking 

R3124: page 382 

with those who have an ear to hear and are inquiring 

the way to the Lord, that there are great crises in the 

lives of men, momentous occasions, in which one word 

may be more valuable, more potent, than would be a 

hundred words or a thousand words at another time, 

under different circumstances; and we are to be instant 

in the Lord's service, whether seasonable or unseasonable 

to ourselves,— gladly ready to lay down our lives 

for the brethren. The disposition of Paul and Silas to 

preach Christ to the jailer regardless of their own convenience 

and comfort and need of rest was in perfect 

accord with the joy of the Lord which filled their hearts 

and led them to sing. Dissatisfied Christians, disposed 

to grumble, would be inclined neither to sing praises 

under such circumstances, nor to preach the Gospel to 

a poor inquiring fellow on so out-of-season an occasion. 

We are to distinguish, however, between out-of-season 

to ourselves and out-of-season to others; and to be willing 

to serve others at any time, however out-of-season 

to ourselves, if it be in season and opportune for them. 

We are not to intrude even the Gospel itself at inopportune 

times, however convenient the occasion may be 

to ourselves. 

Let us learn from this brief statement of the Gospel 
discourse by the Apostle the wisdom of simplicity 
and directness. The Apostle might have preached a 
great deal about the Jewish Law, and about the Jewish 
failure to keep the Law. He might have discussed the 
various philosophies of the false religions; and all of 



these might be proper at the right time, but now was 
not the time suited for these, and hence he confined 
his remarks particularly to the general statement that 
Christ was the Messiah, that he had redeemed the 
world, that he must be laid hold on by faith, and that 
to all who thus took hold on him he became the power 
of God and the wisdom of God. 

The next morning the rulers, learning something 
of the circumstances of the night, ordered the release 
of Paul and Silas; but the Apostle sought to forward 
the interests of the cause he served by returning word 
that he was a Roman citizen, and that Roman law 
had been violated in three particulars in his case: 
(1) That they had "beaten" him; (2) that this had 
been done "publicly;" (3) that it was specially 
reprehensible in that he had not been legally 
"condemned." 

These charges against the rulers might have gone hard 
with them; hence, it is not to be wondered at that they 
came to the prison, as the Apostle requested, and brought 
their prisoners forth publicly, thus giving evidence to 
the people that they conceded that an injustice had 
been done them on the previous night. It was agreed 
that the Lord's representatives should leave the place, 
and evidently this was as wise a thing as could have 
been done, at the time, for the publicity given to the 
Apostles and their teaching would now have opportunity 
to work, and the new disciples might have a 
better chance for presenting the truth quietly, in the absence 
of their leaders, against whom strong enmity had 
been aroused on account of the healing of the woman. 
From here the servants of the Lord went to Thessalonica, 
and undaunted by their experiences (indeed, rejoicing 
in them) they boldly spoke the word of grace to 
such as would hear them there. 

"Many men of many minds," writes the poet; 
hence it is not surprising that some with too little reverence 
and too much self-consciousness are disposed to 
criticize the Apostle's course in claiming Roman citizenship 
here and on another occasion. We should 
approach such criticism from the standpoint of reverence, 
recognizing the apostles as specially chosen 
and specially inspired of the Lord and specially guided 
of him and fit to be our exemplars in all matters (Matt. 18:18) 
unless (as in Gal. 2:1 1) the criticism of their 
conduct or words is found in the Scriptures themselves. 
Unquestionably it was proper for the Apostle to appeal 
to his Roman citizenship as a means to secure justice, 
not injustice. 

Similarly we may properly appeal to every item of 
the human laws under which we may be living that 
would protect us in our just rights; but we may not go 
beyond this and denounce the laws or violate them. 
Our Lord's admonition was in line with such submission 
to the ordinances or laws of men, in respect to our 
earthly affairs; and he explains,— If any man sue thee 



at the law and take away thy coat resist not, but even 

let him take thy cloak also. If, however, any man attempts 

to rob us of our coat without due process of law 

we are not bound to yield except it seem to be the better 

policy. In all civilized lands we would have the 

right to call on the law to protect us from violence. 

Such a course would not mean an acknowledgment 
that we are citizens of this world and renouncers of our 
heavenly citizenship— even as the Apostle's course did 
not mean this. It would mean merely that as strangers 
and pilgrims, we are required to pay taxes for the 
support of law and order, and that worldly people recognize 
our rights to certain protection in the laws which 
they framed. 

Similarly the Apostle at times referred to himself 
as a Jew— not as denying his Christianity, but as one 
now might say,— I am a German, or an American, thus 
to appeal not to a religious prejudice, but to a national 
sympathy, which, if men's hearts were right, would 
not need to be appealed to, because it would be quite 
sufficient to say,— I am a fellow man. The Apostle 
on one occasion, perceiving that his enemies were 
chiefly Pharisees, cried out, "I am a Pharisee, the son 
of a Pharisee! For the hope of the resurrection I am 
called in question!" To imagine a similar case now, 
suppose that Christians were practically of two parties, 
one professing faith in the resurrection of the dead, and 
the other denying a resurrection and future life; suppose 
the latter were called "Evolutionists," and the 
former "the Faithful," and that some of us were misunderstood 
and caught by a mob, and that we perceived 
that a goodly number of our assailants were of "the 
Faithfuls," and that we were to cry out, "I am one of 
the Faithful' and the son of a 'Faithful!' It is because 
I believe in the resurrection of the dead that I 
am now being molested!" Surely there would be 
nothing amiss in such a position. And this was exactly 
Paul's case;— the name Pharisee stood for faith in 
God and in a future life by a resurrection and for obedience 
to the Law and, in general, full loyalty to God. 
The word Pharisee signifies— wholly separated to God; 
and only that the word has since come to be proverbial 
for hypocrite any of the Lord's people could still say, 
I am a Pharisee— I am one of those wholly separated 
to God. 



R3124: page 383 

REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS IN 1903. 

THE following information is very important in 
connection with arrangements for "Pilgrim" 
services. There is no charge for these services, 
nor for the traveling expenses; nor are collections 



ever to be taken up. We expect that all friends of 
the truth will be glad to entertain the "Pilgrims" 
during their brief stays, with "such things as ye 
have;" but where circumstances do not permit this, 
the "Pilgrims" are prepared to pay their way. If you 
desire to be remembered by us when we lay out the 
routes for these "Pilgrims," please answer the following 
questions— on a postal card or on separate paper 
from your letter. You need not repeat the questions, 
but merely number the answers, thus: No. 1— Yes 
(or No). No. 2— Twice a week— Sunday and Wednesday 
(or whatever may be the truth). No. 3— 
Sunday at 3 p.m. at Bible House, 610 Arch Street; 
Wednesday 8 p.m., same place (or whatever may be 
the facts of your case). And thus with each question. 

Such as neglect answering these questions, or so 
many of them as they can answer, must not be surprised 
if no meetings are arranged for them, or at most 
for one day. The information aids us greatly in 
arranging the "Pilgrim" routes. 

ANSWER AS MANY AS POSSIBLE OF THESE QUERIES: 

(1) Are regular meetings now held in your vicinity? 

(2) How frequently? 

(3) Give addresses of meeting places and hours. 

(4) What is the present average attendance? 

(5) At what date are leaders or elders chosen? 

(6) Give full name and address of regularly elected 
elders,— that arrangements for Pilgrim visits 

may be committed to them. 

(7) Is request for a Pilgrim visit the publicly expressed 
wish of those who usually attend meetings? 

(8) To whom should the Pilgrim be referred for 
entertainment? 

(9) Will suitable places be secured for parlor meetings? 

(10) Can suitable room for a public meeting be secured? 

(1 1) If no regularly chosen elders, give at least one 
address in full, besides your own. 

(12) Give your own name and address in full (state if 
colored) and any other information likely to be 
useful. 

(13) If not on the railroad give name of proper station 
and your distance from it, and the direction. 

State also if a conveyance would meet the Pilgrim 
at station and return him to it. 



R3126 : page 383 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION ANSWERED. 
THE EXTENT OF JUDAS' KNOWLEDGE. 



Question.— The Psalms, quoted from in the New 
Testament, seem to show clearly that destruction is 
Judas' end,— but can we decide that the scribes and 
Pharisees of our Lord's time came under the two Scriptures 
that specially bear on the case, I Tim. 2:3-6, with 
the will of God that all should come to an "Epignosin" 
of the truth, and Heb. 6:4-6 that the ones it is impossible 
to renew, are those who have once been enlightened, 
tasted the heavenly gift— become partakers of 
holy spirit— tasted the good word of God, and powers 
of the coming age? Did they reach those conditions? 
I think not. 

Answer.— All will agree that no matter how positive 
a word may be used respecting the bringing of 
mankind to knowledge before judgment, general knowledge 
is not meant. To assume that general knowledge 
of the sciences, or even of the science of religion is 
necessary to a trial for eternal life, would be to assume 
that God had not given to father Adam a full, proper 
or just trial for eternal life;— and from such a proposition 
we would all dissent, for we know that he was 
justly tried and justly condemned. His knowledge will 
help us to understand what degree or kind of knowledge 
his children must have, before they can come under 
the responsibility of the second trial secured by the 
ransom for all. Father Adam's knowledge consisted 
in a discernment of the right and the wrong of the 
question before him— and no more knowledge than this 
was necessary. It was immaterial whether he thought 
of God as Trinity or Unity; whether he believed in 
heaven and hell, etc., or not; whether he knew about 
the sun, moon and stars, and the laws governing their 
motions, or not. He knew what was necessary for him 
to know; namely, (1) that God had a right to command 
his obedience, and (2) that God had commanded 
him not to eat of that fruit, and had attached thereto 
some penalty. It did not matter whether he knew 
exactly all that the penalty implied or not. He knew 
that to eat would be transgression— sin. 

So, we take it, is the responsibility of all mankind, 
as soon as they come mentally in contact with "the 
light of the world." We cannot conceive how Judas 
could be ignorant of the wrong which he committed, 
after his three years of experience with the Master, and 
in the use of the power of the holy spirit communicated 
to him. It seems to us unnecessary that he should 
know either about the planetary movements, or about 
all the particulars of the divine plan: he knew of the 
holy and pure character of our Redeemer; and of his 
self-sacrificing service of Jehovah and the people; and 
it seems to us he must have known beyond question 
that his conduct was treason to God and to righteousness; 
and to every principle of goodness reprobate. 
We reason that if Adam's knowledge and transgression 
were justly punished with death, Judas' knowledge and 



sin could bring nothing short of the Second Death. 
However, we leave the matter; any who see it differently 
are entitled to hold their opinions. 

Respecting the scribes and Pharisees: Their conduct 
seems indeed flagrant; we would find it impossible 
to imagine that they felt within themselves that they 
were doing the right thing in crucifying the spotless 
Lamb of God. Nevertheless, our Lord did not say of 
them that it had been better for them not to have been 
born; he merely said, "How can ye escape the condemnation 
of Gehenna?"— the Second Death. This 
leaves us abundant room to suppose that they may yet 
have opportunity to escape that condemnation; but it 
also suggests to us the probability that some of them 
will not escape the Second Death— that some of them 
had so perverted and seared their consciences with pride 
and wilfulness and love of evil that even the blessings 
of the Millennial Age would fail to dissolve the callousness 
of their hearts. 



BIBLES, TESTAMENTS, STUDENTS' HELPS, Etc. 
SUPPLIES AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES. 



Our Society does not supply Bibles free, but it justifies the 
Bible feature of its name by supplying Bibles, Testaments and 
Bible Study Helps at wholesale rates. Additionally we give our 
readers the benefit of our experience and judgment respecting 
which Bibles are the best value at the wholesale rate. When 
ordering large-size Bibles always name your express office and company, 
as well as post office. Letters containing money or stamps 
accompanying order should always be registered. 



BAGSTER TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

CONTAINING ALL THE IMPROVEMENTS-LARGE TYPE (LONG PRIMER). 
-SIZE, 5-5/8 X 8-5/8 INCHES. 

No. 8701 French Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold $1.15 

No. 8709 Egyptian Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold, 

Leather Lined 1.65 

No. 8721 Norse Morocco, Silk Sewed, ditto 2.75 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired .25 

THE CHEAPEST TEACHERS' BIBLE IN THE WORLD. 

MINION TYPE EDITION. 

No. 8301 French Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold 75 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired, .25 



HOLM AN TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

PICTORIAL EDITION. 

COMBINES ALL THE "HELPS" FEATURES, 

ALSO EIGHTY SPLENDID FULL-PAGE PHOTO-VIEWS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

BOURGEOIS TYPE-5-1/4 x 7-3/4 INCHES. 

No. 4810 French Seal, Red under Gold $1.35 

No. 8816 ditto, ditto, Linen Lined 1.85 

No. 8838 Alaska Seal, Calfskin Lined to Edge, Silk Sewed, 

Red under Gold Edges, Divinity Circuit 2.45 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired .25 



COMBINATION TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

No. N.A. French Seal, Divinity Circuit $1.10 

No. N.B. do do Linen Lined 1.25 

No. N.C. do do Leather Lined 1.55 

All Red under Gold Edges. 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired .25 



VARIORUM TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

We can supply any of these at publishers' list prices less 
25 per cent, discount. 



OXFORD INDIA-PAPER BIBLES. 

The merits of these wonderful productions of the bookmaker's 
skilful art are so well known as to render detailed 
comment unnecessary. By special arrangement we can save 
our friends one-third of the list price on these Bibles, and have 
selected the styles which in our opinion, are most desirable. 
All but No. 01 157x contain References, and are Silk Sewed. 
No. 03554 is Self-Pronouncing. All are bound with Divinity 
Circuit, are Leather Lined, have Red under Gold Edges and 
Round Corners. The type increases in size as follows: Pearl, 
Ruby, Emerald, Minion, Bourgeois and Long Primer. Nos. 
03464x and 0358 lx contain Concordance and Maps, and Nos. 
0863x and 0865-l/2x contain full Teachers' Helps. Thumb Index 
on any of these, 25c extra. 

No. 03009x Pearl Type, Persian Levant, postpaid $2.25 

No. 01157x Ruby Type, French Morocco, postpaid 1.45 

No. 03114x do Persian Levant, Postpaid 2.50 

No. 03229x do do postpaid 2.65 



No. 03265x Emerald Type, Levant Morocco, postpaid 3.25 

No. 03464x Minion Type, Persian Levant, postpaid 3.80 

No. 03554x Bourgeois Type, Alaska Seal, postpaid 4.20 

No. 03581x Long Primer Type, Persian Levant, postpaid 4.67 

No. 0863x do do Alaska Seal, postpaid 5.21 

No. 0865-1/2 do do Levant, postpaid 6.55 



THE LINEAR TEACHERS' BIBLE. 

Hitherto this Bible has been sold by "Subscription Agents" 
only. Its special feature, differentiating it from other "Teachers' 
Bibles," is that it shows the readings of the Common and 
Revised Versions side by side in the same line. 

(Those requesting it will be supplied a publishers' price 
list, showing the special feature.) 

No. 350 French Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold, 
Edges, list price $6, our price $2.10 

No. 355 French Morocco, Divinity Circuit, Red Leather 
Lined, list price $8, our price 3.15 

No. 360 Levant Morocco, Divinity Circuit, Red Kid Lined, 

list price $10, our price 4.20 

Thumb Index, if desired, 25c extra; Postage 25 

Other Desirable Bibles, New Testaments, Etc. 



The Students' Hand Bible. 

No. 04403 Minion type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Selected Helps, including Concordance $ .75 

Post extra 20 

Oxford Self-pronouncing Teachers' Bible. 

No. 0823 Bourgeois type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit 

Round corners, Red under Gold Edge 1.25 

Postage 25 

This is a wonderful book for the price, and its 
self-pronouncing feature is on a new plan 
preferred by some. 

Lap Bibles for the Aged.— No References. 

These contain Family Registers. 

No. 01600 Small Pica Type, Cloth, Red Edges $1.00 

Post extra 25 

No. 01603 Small Pica Type, French Seal, Limp 1.35 

Post extra 25 

No. 01605 Small Pica Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit 1.95 

Post extra, 25 

Ditto New Testaments for Aged. 



No. 212 Small Pica Type, Roan Square Corners 35 

Post extra 12 

No. 283 Same as No. 212 with Psalms added 45 

Post extra, 15 

Pocket Bible with References. 

No. 03008 Pearl Type, Fr. Seal, Divinity Circuit 60 

Post extra, 07 

Pocket Bibles Without References. 

No. 01 103 Diamond Type, India Paper, Divinity Circuit, 

Red under Gold Edges $1.00 .03 

No. 178 Pearl Type, Cloth, Red Edges 18 .07 

No. 010 Pearl Type, French Seal, Red under Gold 55 .05 

No. 013 Pearl Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Red under Gold Edges 55 .05 

No. 038 Pearl Type, Padded, Red under Gold 55 .05 

No. 035 Pearl Type, Padded and Clasp, Red under 

Gold Edges 60 .05 

No. 1150 Ruby Type, French Seal, Red under Gold 45 .07 

No. 01 153 Ruby Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Red under Gold Edges 60 .07 

No. 01327 Minion Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit 

Red under Gold Edges 75 .12 

No. 01329 Minion Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Leather lined 1.10 .12 

No. 215 Nonpareil Type, French Morocco, Divinity Circuit, 

Red under Gold Edges 80 .12 

No. 602 Thin Vest Pocket Bible, Persian Morocco, 

Limp, Round Corners, Red under Gold 

Edges 1.50 

No. 2002 Ditto— Divinity Circuit, Leather Lined, 

Silk Sewed, References 1.85 

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE. 

OTHER DESIRABLE BIBLES, TESTAMENTS, ETC. 

Child's Bibles, Profusely Illustrated. 

No. 252 Ruby Type, Fr. Seal, Limp $ .80 post extra, .10 

No. 145 Ruby Type, Fr. Divinity Circ 1.00 post extra, .10 

Pocket New Testaments. 

No. 801 Ruby Type, Limp Cloth 05 post extra, .02 

No. 030 Ruby Type, French Seal 17 post extra, .02 

No. 033 Ruby Type, Fr. Seal, Div. Circuit 25 post extra, .02 

No. 0130 Same as No. 030 with Psalms added 25 post extra, .03 

No. 0133 Same as No. 033 with Psalms added 35 post extra, .03 

No. 287 Brevier Type, Roan, Gilt Edge, 

Psalms 35 post extra, .05 

No. 010 Diamond Type (very small), Limp 



Morocco, Red under Gold Edges 35 post extra, .01 

No. 014 Diamond Type (very small), Fr'ch 
Morocco, Divinity Circuit, 
Leather Lined, etc 80 post extra, .01 

Self -pronouncing Family Bibles. 

At one-half list prices. Publishers' catalogue sent on 
application. 

"Bible Talks in Simple Language." 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and 
seems remarkably free from the bad theology so common in 
this class of books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday 
Bible lesson with their children, and this book furnishes 
interesting topics, to which may be added as much concordant 
"present truth" as the age of the children will justify. Parents 
are responsible for their children's training in theology as well 
as morals. This will assist you in the discharge of this duty, 
and thus be a blessing to yourself as well as to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special 
price 75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

"Daily Food." 

Two texts and a verse for every day in the year. Have one 
on your breakfast table with the natural food. Appoint one of 
the family reader, and call for questions and comments. Feed 
the soul as well as the body. Small, neat, cloth bound, gilt 
edges. 15 cents, 2 for 25 cents, including postage. 



Concordances and Other Bible Study Helps. 



First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

MILLENNIAL DAWN SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this 

journal for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following 

publications by other presses, which we supply at specially 

low prices because of the assistance they will lend to the study 

of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the order in 

which they seem to us to be desirable aids,— putting the concordances 

last, though they are not by any means least 

important. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

This very valuable work, published under the author's copyright 



by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, until now (A.D. 

1902), has been sold by them at $4 in cloth and $5 in half 

leather binding. For several years a friend, an earnest Bible 

student, desirous of assisting the readers of our Society's publications, 

has supplied them through us at a greatly reduced 

price; now he has purchased the copyuright and plates from the 

Fowler & Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as a 

gift, under our assurance that the gift will be used for the furthering 

of the Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction 

of price as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have 

this help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage 
and one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. 
On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red 
under gold edges, silk sewed leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— 
includes postage and one year's subscription to Z.W.T. The 
morocco bound edition will not be ready for some time, but 
orders may be sent in now, for later delivery. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT. 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As 
footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from 
the Common Version. This is a very valuable little work, published 
in Europe, which we specially import for the benefit of 
our readers. Price 40c, including postage. 

THE NEW ROTHERHAM TRANSLATION OF THE NEW 
TESTAMENT. 

Mr. Rotherham's previous translation was good, but so far 
as we are able to judge, from a hasty examination, this one is 
better. Our price, in cloth binding, postage included, is $1.50. 

THE SYRIAC-PESHITO NEW TESTAMENT -MURDOCH'S. 

This, too, is a valuable work, and an aid in critical study. 
It is translated from the Syriac instead of from the Greek. It is 
claimed by some that it was the language in which our Lord 
and the apostles spoke and wrote, and that the Greek was 
translated from this. Our price, in half leather binding, postage 
included, $1.50. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a 
valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special 
price, in leather binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

REVISED VERSION TESTAMENTS. 

In cloth binding, pocket size, postage included 20 



REVISED VERSION BIBLES. 

No. 040 Pearl Type, Cloth binding 45, postage extra, .10 

No. 060 Minion Type, do 75, postage extra, .20 

AMERICAN COMMITTEE'S REVISED (OXFORD) BIBLE. 

No. 03570 Bourgeois, Cloth, References $1.00, postage, .25 

No. 03752 Ditto, in Morocco, Div. Circuit 1.90, postage, .25 

AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE. 

No. 260 Long Primer, Cloth, References 1.35, postage, .30 

No. 275 Long Primer, Fr. Seal, References 2.50, postage, .30 

No. 160 Bourgeois, Cloth, References 90, postage, .20 

No. 172 Bourgeois, Fr. Seal, References 1.75, postage, .20 

PROF. YOUNG'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD AND NEW 
TESTAMENT. 

Many regard this as a valuable aid; but we do not specially 
recommend it as such, as some of its peculiarities are liable to 
mislead those who have no conception of the Hebrew idiom. 
In cloth binding, including postage, $4. This is the regular retail 
price, and the publishers do not permit us to make any reduction. 
We are at liberty, however, to prepay the postage 
free and to give as a premium two volumes of the DAWN series 
in cloth binding. 

THE ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in 
cloth binding, $5, including postage. We are not permitted by 
the publishers to cut this price; but may and do give postage 
free and give besides a premium of any three volumes of the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN series in cloth binding with each 
Concordance. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

In English Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work, and useful in critical study, 
but scarcely so good for the average student, we think, as Prof. 
Young's work. Price, in cloth binding, $6; half leather, $8; 
full leather, $10. We will pay mail or express charges on these, 
and in addition give as a premium any three volumes of the 
DAWN series in cloth binding, with each Concordance. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have 
either one of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth 
binding, $1, postage included. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY. 



This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's 
work. It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, 
$1.30, including postage. 

--WHEN ORDERING ALWAYS NAME YOUR EXPRESS OFFICE 
AND COMPANY AS WELL AS POST OFFICE. - 

ADDRESS ORDERS WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY, BIBLE HOUSE, ALLEGHENY, PA. 

For Prices in Great Britain, Address us at 
131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 



YOUR "GOOD HOPES" 1903. 



[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested 
in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 



during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 

to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 

the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance 

judge or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 

me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand 

the sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 

upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 

than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 

well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 

of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Millennial Dawn in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O.T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

"Bible House," Allegheny, Pa. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 



WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 
-ON GOOD HOPES ACCOUNT. - 



The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the Watch Tower to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 



accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give 
us such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from 
their donations. Give full addresses, and write very plainly 
please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



For several years we have been supplying our readers 
with handsome text and motto cards for the walls of their 
homes. Their influence is excellent; for they continually 
and cheerfully catch the eye and remind the heart of our 
great favors present and to come, based upon the exceeding 
great and precious promises of our Father's Word. We 
commend these as helps in the "narrow way,"— helps in 
character-building . 

We aim to have a good supply of these very choice cards constantly 
on hand, and for particular description of some (not all) 
of the styles would refer you to our illustrated list, which will 
be sent on request. We still recommend the dollar packages 
as the most satisfactory way, all things considered, of acquiring 
these texts. They are sent carriage paid for $1.16, by prepaid 
express whenever feasible. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



These are published quarterly, copies being sent to all subscribers. 
Other copies, for distribution among friends, from 
house to house, for enclosure in letters, and in general for use 
in such ways as seem judicious, are supplied freely, the expense 
entailed by the great demand for them being borne by the 
Tract Fund of voluntary contributions. Write for the tracts as 
you feel able to use them, even if not so well able to contribute 
toward the expense; some who are not able, and do contribute, 
do not have opportunities personally to use all that their 
contributions pay for, so that the matter is equalized, 
and all may have a part in this service of disseminating 
the truth. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE. 



We are convinced that the Watch Tower lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content that 
the name of any should be missing. We believe that all such 
will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow way" by 
its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding them 
afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh and the 



devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 

Hitherto we have required that all desiring the Watch Tower 
on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make personal 
application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in present truth, 
and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may necessitate. 
Any getting it on credit may at any future time request 
that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. We 
desire that as nearly as possible the Watch Tower lists shall 
represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
co-operation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
17,000; but it should be at least 25,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS. 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take this 
opportunity to remark that we will be glad to hear promptly 
from such as desire the visits of the Watch Tower continued. 
This applies to all who get it on the Lord's Poor list as well 
as to those who pay. When names are dropped and afterward 
renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. 



