Argentina
ARGENTINA is not difficult to locate on a map of the Americas. It shares with its western neighbor, Chile, the distinction of being one of the two American countries to reach farthest southward toward the Antarctic. It stretches some 3,694 kilometers (close to 2,300 miles) from north to south, and has within its boundaries a notable variety of climate, topography and vegetation.
Prairie land, called “pampas,” dominates the center of Argentina. This is where the “gauchos” long displayed their expert horsemanship as they tended the vast herds of beef cattle. In the far northwest there is high desert mesa land. To the northeast, where visitors gasp at the grandeur of Iguassu Falls, there is humid jungle. Southward one passes through the lowlands of Entre Ríos (literally, “between the rivers” Paraná and Uruguay) into rolling fertile farmlands. And south of the pampas the arid land called Patagonia stretches from the Colorado River to the Straits of Magellan, a region that has proved highly suitable for sheep raising.
Northward along the cordillera many lakes are encountered. Here, too, is San Carlos de Bariloche, center of the region that has been called “the Switzerland of South America.” Farther north is Mendoza and its neighbor province of San Juan, Argentina’s land of fruit and wine.
Such a land, with all its beauty in variety, could and did attract a multitude of immigrants from many countries of Europe, so much so that by 1970 Argentina had become home to 23,364,431 persons. From such a burgeoning population Jehovah God would not and did not withhold his proclamation of peace, the good news of his kingdom by Christ Jesus. In 1924 His tidings of good things in store began to be preached in this vast national territory.
SMALL BEGINNINGS
Juan Muñiz, a loyal Christian and active Witness, had much to do with those beginnings and was closely identified with the Kingdom interests in Argentina right up to the day of his death, September 10, 1967. Throughout those forty-three years he devoted his time, energies and means to the spread of true worship. According to his own account (see The Watchtower, 1964, pages 761-764), he first gained an appreciation of Bible truth in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, where he had a store. That was in 1916. The following year he started declaring the “good news” and was baptized. In 1920 he sold his business so as to be able to devote all his time to preaching.
J. F. Rutherford, then president of the Watch Tower Society, asked him to go to Spain and look after the preaching work there. Due to his being continually followed by the police, he was not able to do much in Spain, so Brother Rutherford assigned him in 1924 to care for the Kingdom work in Argentina. There was already a man in Argentina who had received literature from the United States, so Brother Muñiz contacted him and got him started in the Kingdom work in the territory of Misiones far to the north. (See map at page 49.) This man was Brother Kammerman.
There was already a large German-speaking population in the country. This prompted Brother Muñiz to ask President Rutherford for the help of brothers who could speak German. Thus it came about that in 1925 Carlos Ott, a German pioneer, was assigned.
Brother Eduardo Adamson, who for many years worked alongside Brother Muñiz in the field ministry and in the Watch Tower Society’s branch office, tells of the fine example set by Brothers Muñiz and Ott in their unswerving devotion to Jehovah. He also relates: “Since Brother Muñiz received no help from anyone but needed financial help, he wrote the Society in Brooklyn requesting aid and it was duly wired to him. This would be his last request for help, since he was determined to make a go of it without financial assistance from outside the country. He lived up to this determination, even though it meant working long hours at night repairing watches, clocks or sewing machines.”
Greater Buenos Aires at that time had less than 2,000,000 inhabitants. This was the logical starting place for organized activity, forming a hub from which the Kingdom work would spread to the remotest parts of the country, as well as to Uruguay, Paraguay and Chile. Brother Ott tells us how the work was done: “We would get up at 4 a.m. and call at the houses street by street, leaving tracts under the doors, particularly the tract Where Are the Dead? Later the same day we would visit the same homes with such publications as The Photo-Drama of Creation, The Divine Plan of the Ages, The Harp of God, and the booklet Can the Living Talk with the Dead?, this latter one being specially appropriate due to the prevalence of spiritism in Buenos Aires.”
Tracts were handed to people attending meetings of the various Evangelical cults as they filed out of their respective meeting houses. Brother Ott recalls how “one of those Protestant preachers came out and told Brother Muñiz we had no right to be there​—that he and his church were there first. Brother Muñiz retorted: ‘Well, in that case, the Catholics were here before you; and the Indians were here before the Catholics! So you have no right either!’” As a result of that tract work one Evangelical group became a group of real Bible Students, many of whom proved to be faithful servants of Jehovah in after years.
Another means of reaching the public was the radio, and before 1928 Brother Muñiz was using this medium. Information was provided by the Brooklyn office, and later Luz y Verdad, the Spanish edition of The Golden Age (now Awake!), carried material specially adapted for reading over the radio. Recordings of Brother Rutherford’s talks were also used. In the 1930’s radio stations in Buenos Aires, Bahía Blanca and Córdoba were used, and thereby many persons were drawn to the organization. But in the early 1940’s Brother Muñiz wrote the radio station that we were discontinuing this method of preaching because of the censorship. It so happened that there was a priest in the office of the censors.
PREACHING TO ALL KINDS OF PEOPLE
In 1925 Brother Ott began preaching to the German-speaking population. He would visit German schools and obtain the addresses of the German families. Many of those people came to an appreciation of the Bible truths through his activity. “In two months,” he reports, “some 300 addresses were obtained; much literature was placed and many subscriptions for the German edition of The Golden Age were obtained. Even many German-speaking Jews took literature.” Some Germans had already learned about Jehovah’s purposes before coming to Argentina, and some of these were activated or reactivated when contacted by Brother Muñiz or Brother Ott; among them Carlos Schwalm from East Prussia and the Krugers from South Africa; two other Germans who learned the Kingdom message here in Argentina were Brothers Ricardo Traub and Paul Hinderlich.
Because of the European background of so many of Argentina’s population there has always been a friendly attitude toward those coming from other lands. Of course, those early publishers of the Kingdom did meet up with some very fanatical Catholics​—Argentina, you see, claims to be 88 percent Catholic. But Brother Ott reports: “Although this is a Catholic country, the clergy have not always been held in high esteem. I remember during the presidency of Alvear (Radical Party president, 1922-1928), the children playing in the streets of Buenos Aires would shout ‘Touch wood!’ when a priest came in sight. This was their way of saying that a priest brought bad luck, and that to have good luck one must touch wood.”
Brother Ott also explained why there was so much complacency among the people of this country: “The Argentines had not suffered the terrible World War, so they could very easily feel and say that such calamities could never happen to them. During the Spanish civil war the general comment here was: ‘Let the Spaniards kill one another off​—it is no concern of ours!’ They were sure that they would never witness such suffering.”
With the exception of some interest Brother Muñiz found in Paraná, Santa Fe and Rosario on his return trip from Paraguay in 1925, and the work by Brother Kammerman in Misiones Province, the preaching and literature distribution were concentrated on Buenos Aires and surrounding towns. There the branch office was established in 1926 with Brother Muñiz as branch servant.
In 1929 Brother Muñiz sent Brother Traub to take care of the Kingdom work in Chile. En route to this assignment Brother Traub stopped for a short time in Mendoza and did some preaching. Thus it was that the Hermán Seegelken family learned about the Kingdom hope. It appears that Hermán had long been aware of the hypocrisy in both the Catholic and the Protestant churches, so he eagerly accepted the message of the Kingdom. As a result, all eight of his children were given a good foundation of Bible knowledge. Their uncle, Lucidio Quintana, who so often had said that the Seegelkens were crazy due to their new religion, later accepted that “crazy” religion too. He was overseer of the congregation and a pioneer minister for many years, faithfully serving to the time of his death. Thus the group in Mendoza began with the Seegelkens, the Truneckas, and a few others.
The decade of the 1920’s was drawing to a close and the nucleus of the theocratic organization had been formed. According to the information that we have at hand, there was one regular pioneer in the country in 1925 and 2,681 pieces of literature were placed. By 1928 there were three pioneers and thirty-one congregation publishers reporting activity. Now a great field was to open up, far beyond the cosmopolitan city of Buenos Aires​—a territory of 2,776,655 square kilometers (about 1,073,226 square miles), the second-largest country of the South American continent!
PIONEERING ALONG THE RAILROAD
Despite the vastness of the territory and the fewness of workers, a foundation had been laid years before that would prove to be a valuable asset in the expansion of the work, particularly in the 1930’s. This foundation consisted in the laying of railroad tracks over a network of more than 40,000 kilometers (24,860 miles), giving Argentina the most complete railroad coverage in Latin America. As far back as 1857 the first train had operated on a short line out of Buenos Aires, and in the following years the network constantly grew. These railroad lines served a threefold purpose for our brothers, namely, for transportation for themselves, as supply line to keep them stocked with literature, and as territory, as we will soon see. The thirties would prove to be exciting years of theocratic expansion.
Brother Adamson explains it this way: “The pioneer work was done in a peculiar fashion in those early years of the work. Due to the geographical and commercial arrangement of the country, most of the railroads spread out from Buenos Aires to all the different parts of the country. So pioneer territories followed these railway lines, there being at the time few other means of communication. Pioneers were assigned long sections of the lines, and had to cover all the towns and cities of that section, or, perhaps, of the entire line, sometimes finishing up many hundreds of miles away from the start of their work. Travel was in second-class coaches with hard wooden benches, if money was available, or on flatcars of freight trains, taking all their belongings with them: a carton of literature, a suitcase, and perhaps a bicycle.
“Their portion was not an easy one, so our hearts went out to them, and many of the friends did their best to help them out financially and with clothes. I will never forget how we felt when one of these pioneers was murdered in the city of Santa Rosa, La Pampa Province. Brother Rossi had preached to a man who then excused himself and went indoors as if to look for some money to contribute for the literature. He came out with a gun. Brother Rossi tried to get away, but was shot in the back.”
A subscription for the Golden Age magazine in German placed by Brother Ott brought joy to José Reindl. He read that the Light book was available in German. “And so it was that I had my first contact with the Society in Argentina,” says Brother Reindl. “I went to Brother Muñiz’ home at 1653 Bonpland Street to get the book,” continues Brother Reindl. “He invited me to the meetings, and in 1930 I became one of Jehovah’s witnesses. I lived with Brother Muñiz after I left home. I went out in the service for the first time, and when the next Memorial was held, I was baptized. In the beginning of 1933 I was sent to Mendoza as a colporteur or full-time distributor of the Kingdom message and to assist the group of interested ones that Brother Traub had formed when he was en route to Chile. One of the publishers that Brother Traub had taken out in the service was María Rosa Seegelken; she was eighteen years old at that time. Two years later we were married, and the next day she joined me in the colporteur service.”
Brother Reindl vividly recalls that pioneer assignment in 1935: “The Society assigned us the Western railroad line which began in San Rafael, Mendoza Province, and ended in Suipacha, Buenos Aires Province. The line covered more than 1,000 kilometers (over 620 miles) in a straight line across the middle section of Argentina, and it took in little towns as far as La Pampa. It was the first time that any preaching had been done in the area; the people didn’t even know what a Bible was, so it wasn’t easy. We were full-time ministers, special pioneers in every sense, but at that time there were no money allowances and we had to live on our literature placements. But we were happy that we had a share in the expansion of the work in those places where now excellent congregations have been established. It took us a whole year to work all this railroad line.
“I remember working a farm in the middle of the country and there a bull chased us, but we placed a book with a married couple. Many years later we had the pleasure of seeing this couple, and the sister said: ‘You don’t remember us, do you?’ Then we remembered that this was the couple who had lived away out in the country from the small town of Mercedes, Buenos Aires. Now they are publishers, and the joy of seeing them convinced us that it had been worth while to put up with that first year in our pioneer assignment. No, it hadn’t been easy to arrive at a town, not have anywhere to sleep or a thing to eat. And how many times we were obliged to sleep on the station floor or in a shed with just some papers as our mattress and blankets! But as a young man of twenty-three and as a bride of twenty we learned to get along on what we had; we continue on as pioneers even now as we enter our sixties.
“The work was mainly that of sowing, the purpose being to cover each town thoroughly with literature, and then take the train on to the next town or stop. I remember one time when we hadn’t been able to place much literature; it was a small settlement and the people were very prejudiced. There was a railroad station, police station, general store, a goat pen and a few houses. We didn’t have money enough to go on to the next stop! Jehovah did not abandon us; a good-hearted man at the ticket window, upon seeing that we didn’t have enough to pay for our tickets, gave the tickets to us anyway! Arriving at the next town, Alberdi, at midnight, we had no place to sleep, no money, and we hadn’t eaten anything; then a hailstorm hit​—certainly not a bright picture! We spent the night in a shed, awaiting the morning so that we could start witnessing in order to place something and so have something to eat. Placements did not come easy, because this was the decade of the 1930’s, and in some parts of Argentina there was much poverty.”
Having reached the “end of their line,” literally, in Buenos Aires, the Reindls returned to Mendoza. Brother Trunecka had directed the group in Brother Reindl’s absence, and the Seegelken family had continued to contribute toward the growth. Mary Seegelken remembers “the Watchtower study that lasted two hours and also the hot chocolate and cookies that were served after each meeting in the Trunecka home.” She adds: “According to my mother, I went out preaching, so to speak, before I was born! In 1932 my mother and others from Mendoza went preaching in Luján de Cuyo, a town some eighteen kilometers, somewhat over eleven miles, from Mendoza. They walked a great deal that day and Mother returned quite tired​—after all, she wasn’t alone, she was carrying me, and in a very few months I was born. I recall how nineteen years later I walked this same road to Luján de Cuyo to conduct a study with a woman and her daughter, both of whom are faithful ministers to this day.”
Sometime after their return to Mendoza, Sister Reindl gave birth to a son. Brother Reindl is happy to tell us that “our son Jorge was brought up in the truth, served as a pioneer, a circuit servant, and now that he has made us grandparents, he is an overseer in one of the congregations in Greater Buenos Aires.” Three months after Jorge was born, the Reindls were assigned to San Juan, a province bordering Mendoza. The child took very ill, and the doctors said that he would have to be fed with only burro milk. Sister Reindl recalls: “Soon someone came to our door wanting to sell a female burro​—this was like an answer to a prayer!” From San Juan they later traveled to La Rioja and Catamarca; some sowing was done, but the work was made practically impossible due to frequent police interference. While in Catamarca, Brother Armando Menazzi’s group from Córdoba passed through en route to the North. The Society now assigned the Reindls to Santa Fe. Here they met the Angel Castagnola family and a study was started. Brother Reindl tells us what happened next: “From Santa Fe we went to Paraná. But we just couldn’t live on what we placed​—we needed clothing and our little boy needed proper food and care. So, with regrets, we returned to Mendoza, leaving the pioneer service for four years.”
A WITNESS TO GREEKS AND OTHERS
Early in 1930, a Greek came to an appreciation of the Bible’s message​—Nicolás Argyrós. He tells us of his joy and of telling what he learned to others: “In January 1930, I was given three booklets, Prosperity Sure, The Peoples’ Friend, and Freedom for the Peoples, written by J. F. Rutherford. This was the first time that I had read literature that appealed to me as being ‘the Truth.’ On the back of the booklets there was a list of books and booklets, so I sent for them. Twenty-nine days later the literature arrived. The first I read was the booklet Hell, What Is It? Who Are There? Can They Get Out? I looked all through the booklet to find sinners on the grill, as was customary in other religious books, but I found nothing of this. Imagine my surprise when I learned that hellfire was a religious lie invented to frighten the people just as it had frightened me when I was just fifteen years old! I was alone tending sheep, and in a dream the Devil ran after me with a pitchfork, just as he is described by false religion! I awakened trembling. The arguments presented in the booklets were reasonable and convincing. At once I requested more literature.
“About that same time I noticed an advertisement in a Greek newspaper published in Buenos Aires telling of Bible classes on Sundays at 3:30 p.m.; the address given was 1653 Bonpland Street. At 3 p.m. the next Sunday I was on the corner waiting, and when I saw others enter, I entered and greeted everyone in Greek, since I thought the meeting was in Greek. No one returned my greeting, but the one who directed the meeting (a study of the book The Divine Plan of the Ages) smiled at me as he passed by. I sat down in the back row; another man sat down beside me. I didn’t understand 5 percent of what was said. All I had was the Greek newspaper with the ad in it. When the meeting ended and the man beside me found out that I was also Greek, he gave me his address.” Brother Argyrós says that he bought a Greek Bible that very night, and after that he went to his Greek friend’s house every night. “He was very well-versed in the Bible, and with God’s Word he lopped off all my Greek Orthodox beliefs. The priests, whom I had esteemed so much, he called ‘sons of Satan,’ saying they formed part of the unholy alliance! I read the Hell booklet over again, and Where Are the Dead? On the third visit to my countryman’s house, I was convinced that I was on the right track. I asked him what I must do to be well pleasing to Jehovah. He told me to go out and preach to others what I had learned from the literature.” Brother Argyrós lost no time in heeding that good advice.
He recalls: “The next Sunday I started preaching in Berisso, Buenos Aires Province. Many Greeks lived there, and during our visits we obtained 600 addresses of other Greeks from an employee in a bank where these Greeks deposited their money. The brothers in the United States encouraged us to organize a Greek-speaking meeting, so we rented a hall in Malabia Street and these meetings continued for one year. At times as many as twenty persons met together. From the United States we received 1,000 books and booklets, so I started calling on all those addresses I had obtained. I visited all the Greeks living in the Buenos Aires area, as well as those living in Montevideo, Uruguay.” But he tells us that he wasn’t content “doing so little”; he still had some addresses to look up in Rosario and Santa Fe; from there he planned to take a cargo ship bound for his native island in Greece, where he thought he would have a larger field for preaching the good news.
In Santa Fe, Brother Argyrós found Brother Felix Remón, who had become an active Kingdom publisher in Buenos Aires and then was sent later to the Rosario-Santa Fe area by Brother Muñiz. Some fifteen persons met together in the carpenter shop of Brother Castagnola at that time. Brother Remón invited Brother Argyrós to stay with him, the arrangement being that they take weekly turns doing the cooking. While Brother Remón would be out preaching, Brother Argyrós worked as a photographer. This would never do for one with a true missionary spirit! “I felt uncomfortable,” he says, “and I wanted to go out preaching, but the only thing I knew to say in Spanish as I offered the books was that they tell about God’s kingdom. I was still waiting for the opportunity to leave for Greece, but as the days passed my Spanish began to improve. At night I would tell my experiences to Brother Remón, and he would teach me the texts I should use in each sentence; this was a big help, so I finally decided against going to Greece.”
Brother Argyrós’ decision to remain in Argentina was to have far-reaching effects in the expansion of the good news in the northern half of Argentina. From 1932 onward his travels in sowing the seed of Bible truth were to take in fourteen of the twenty-two provinces that make up the Republic of Argentina. Let’s join him now and share some of the joys and privations of his ministry.
“In 1932 I arrived in Córdoba and rented a room in Salta Street. From there I began to work the city; I covered it twice in the two years I was there. Those who manifested interest would order all the new literature, and some visited me at my home, among these, a judge, C. de los Ríos. He would come and spend many hours with me and I would answer his questions, using the Greek Bible as my dictionary since I didn’t have a Greek-Spanish dictionary. I contacted Natalio Dessilani and Armando Menazzi, who were among the first publishers there; Armando Menazzi later became a pioneer. At that time we thought that Armageddon was imminent and so I did all that I could to place literature everywhere. There were those who said, as some still say today, ‘Why place literature when the people don’t pay any attention to it?’ But Brother Rutherford said: ‘You place the literature and leave the results in Jehovah’s hands!’
“Twenty boxes of literature were on hand; I took ten of them and set out for Tucumán. There, after some time, I came down with malaria. I didn’t have money to go to a doctor. As soon as I was able, I left for Catamarca and La Rioja, working the capital cities and some towns. The reports in those days were of 200, 220, and 240 hours a month; the most I reported was in April 1933​—that month I reported 300 hours of activity.
“Then I went on to San Juan, where I found much interest; the one who showed most interest was José Cercós. The morning I found him, I felt so depressed that I thought I’d go home. But as I continued to walk I remembered the words of Revelation 21:8, and I didn’t want to be accused of being a coward. With that José Cercós came walking toward me; I stopped him and offered him the book Government with the booklet What Is Truth? inside. He was a Methodist and said: ‘Just what am I going to learn from this booklet? I’ve been reading the Bible for twenty years!’ I quoted 1 Thessalonians 5:21 and he took the booklet. That very night he came to my place to tell me he had found the booklet very interesting, and he took the books The Harp of God and Vindication, and some magazines. During my stay in San Juan, he came to my house every night. A short time before I contacted him, the minister of his church had gone to Mendoza to get married, and when he returned to San Juan a special group was commissioned to take up a collection for a wedding gift. When they arrived at Cercós’ grocery store, he firmly and emphatically stated: ‘Cercós is not giving another cent to men who are riding the beast!’ (See Revelation 17:3.) You can imagine how surprised the delegation was at hearing these words from the lips of one who such a short time before had been one of the most zealous members of the church!”
CRISSCROSSING ARGENTINA WITH THE GOOD NEWS
To follow Brother Argyrós’ travels as he crisscrossed in his self-assigned territory is to learn well the map of northern Argentina. Leaving San Juan, he spent a month with the group in Mendoza, then on to San Luis and Villa Mercedes, where he contacted the Juan Balcarce and Estrada families​—later, Ofelia Estrada was to be the first Argentine sister to attend Gilead School. After working other towns in San Luis Province, Brother Argyrós came to San Rafael, Mendoza. Turning south to La Pampa Province, he remarks that in Intendente Alvear he found the Society’s literature; Brother Leonardo Vandefeldi, a Dutch pioneer, had passed through that section. So our traveler turned around and took the train back to Córdoba Province, and from there he went on to cities in Santa Fe Province. Dante Dobboletta had a business in Las Rosas, Santa Fe, and one day an employee told him that a ‘Bible man’ had called; he at once sent someone out on the street to find Brother Argyrós and bring him back to the store as he wanted more information like that he had found in booklets already obtained. Brother Dobboletta later became a pioneer and is now serving with his wife in the circuit work. Finishing his work in Santa Fe Province, Brother Argyrós crossed the Paraná River, continuing northward through Entre Ríos Province to the capital of Corrientes and then to Resistencia, Chaco. In Villa Angela, Chaco, a man by the name of Juan Murillo was contacted; much to Brother Argyrós’ surprise, this man’s name was on the pioneer list four months later.
In Charata, Chaco, Brother Argyrós tells of the happy encounter with Brother Menazzi and the brothers from Córdoba: “They were coming in their bus en route to Formosa. We crossed the Bermejo River by raft, and then worked the city of Formosa. The group returned to Córdoba while I traveled northwest as far as Yacuiba, Bolivia. Returning southward, I came through Jujuy and Salta Provinces, then crossed southeast to Roque Saenz Peña, Chaco. Along the way I worked not only the towns but also the small settlements in all these provinces.” Now south again to Santa Fe Province where the cities of Rafaela, Casilda, Firmat, and Venado Tuerto received his attention.
Brother Argyrós’ adaptability and willingness to put up with come-what-may, his personal sacrifice​—everything for the sake of the good news: this stands out as we review his reminiscences of his forty years of pioneer service.
“During my travels the difficulties were many: Arriving at night in towns where there were no lights, it was rare to find lodgings; the problem of getting used to the language; and the lack of funds. The first years of pioneering I was able to keep myself with money I had saved from my secular work. So, those first few years I dressed well, and when I entered the towns the children would go running to tell their mothers that the doctor had come! When I arrived at the door, the women would timidly open, but after hearing the message they would lose their shyness. Later, during some ten years of witnessing in country towns, I wore bombachas, the typical attire of the countrymen, and I found that I was accepted more readily.
“At times persons who for the first time met me would invite me to spend the night. Other times I slept out in the open, once in a jungle full of thorns​—I didn’t see them because it was so dark. But Jehovah rewarded me the following day. I was witnessing in a little town, and in the afternoon I found a married couple who listened to the message and invited me to return there to spend the night. When I finished witnessing I returned. After supper they invited some neighbors in to listen to this strange message of Jehovah’s witnesses. I talked with them till around midnight. Then the lady of the house showed me to my room; it had a bed with embroidered sheets on it! When I arose the next morning my hostess said, ‘My husband and I were worried that you wouldn’t be able to sleep well in a strange bed.’ I assured her that I had slept very well indeed. I was thinking, ‘If you only knew where I had slept a couple of nights before!’
“One night I slept with a burro! It was in a little town with just one small boardinghouse with one room to let, and it was occupied. It was a rainy night when one wanted to be under shelter. So I said to the man that it was not a night to be out in the elements; he replied that the only place he had was the barn where he kept the animals and he led me there. He fixed me a bed on one side; on the other side was the mother burro and her little one​—the division was made by boards to block off the forage from the animals. Well, I slept like a king! The next day I was to leave at 6 a.m. for San Cristobal. I didn’t need an alarm clock: my ‘host,’ the burro, began to bray! Difficulties can be so delightful!”
But there were the not-so-delightful experiences: “Arriving early in Eusebia, I asked if there was a boardinghouse; I was told that there was, so I continued working, covering the town. When I was ready to eat and rest I found that the boardinghouse was closed. There was nothing else to do but spend the night under the stars. It was the beginning of fall, but it wasn’t cold, and I went a short way out of town and lay down. No, I didn’t have anything to eat, but I didn’t feel hungry. My stomach was well-trained; I could eat at anytime, or, if I had nothing I didn’t mind. This is a habit I formed in Tucumán in 1935. For three straight months during the sugarcane harvest I would leave early in the morning, returning late at night, many times without having eaten anything in between. When I went to sleep there in Eusebia, there were all kinds of mosquitoes. I cut a branch, thinking that I could drive them off, but the more I waved the branch the more they attacked me! I decided to walk to the train station, thinking that I would find the waiting room open; despite the fact that trains frequently passed, it was closed. Then I found a large canvas that was used for drying grain; with this I covered myself and spent the rest of the night.”
True, the railroad was a great asset to the early pioneers, but there were times when the more primitive means of travel had to be employed. Brother Argyrós can tell us about it: “The longest walk I had was from Villa Valeria, Córdoba, to Cañada Verde, a distance of some seventy-five kilometers, or close to forty-seven miles; I left at 1 p.m. and arrived the next day at 3 p.m. Another unforgettable walk was from Laprida to Loreto in the province of Santiago del Estero​—a distance of thirty-five kilometers. It was Carnaval day, and I left around 12 noon and arrived about 11 that night. On this route there is neither water nor settlements. I was thirsty; it had rained and there were puddles of water along the side of the road, but the water was hot due to the blazing sun, so I couldn’t drink it. Here there are quebracho forests so dense that if you enter you can’t see daylight. So I left the road and entered the wooded area hoping to find a puddle of water in the shade. When I spotted one I happily went toward it, but as I got nearer I saw that a crocodile had beat me to it! When the crocodile became aware of my presence he went off, churning up the water as he went. I went back to the road and continued walking. A few kilometers later I met a Santiagueño (a native of that province) who was tending a herd of goats. Seeing that he had a barrel of water, I asked for a drink, and the good man let me drink as much as I wished! When I finished drinking, he appeared with a large tin can full of prickly pears; he set them before me and told me to eat as many as I wished. When I felt satisfied, I made him a gift of some booklets, then continued on my way.”
Extensive was the sowing work done by Brother Argyrós and great was his undertaking​—and what had the training been? As he says: “No one brought me the truth, no one made a back-call on me or gave me a sermon. What I mean to say is that I am sort of a self-made publisher.”
EARLY PIONEER EXPERIENCES
About the same time that Brother Argyrós began his preaching activity in the northern sector of the country, a Polish man, Juan Rebacz, became a Witness, and in 1932 he entered the pioneer work along with another Polish brother, Pablo Pawlosek. Brother Rebacz gives us some very fine information as to how he and his companions carried on the work at that time in the southern part of Argentina.
After some preliminary training in house-to-house witnessing in Greater Buenos Aires, Brother Rebacz tells what followed: “Brother Muñiz assigned me to work with Brothers Onésimo Gavrov and Pablo Pawlosek, who were already in Río Negro Province. The three of us had much joy and good success in the work, thanks to Jehovah. A short time later Brother Basilio Miedziak joined us, and we received instructions to take different routes, in groups of two. Brothers Gavrov and Miedziak took the coastal route between Bahía Blanca and Mar del Plata, while Brother Pawlosek and I took the inland route via Tres Arroyos to Mar del Plata. We had excellent results; I remember that some months we placed as many as 600 pieces of literature. We would start early in the morning in the rural zones, and when the people got up to start their day’s activity, there we were to start ours!
“Brother Pawlosek and I were good companions and we enjoyed our ministry very much. We arrived in Mar del Plata in May 1934, and from there we would go by train to other towns, returning by foot, each one taking a different road. We always carried a lot of literature, and usually we placed it all. At that time there wasn’t much trouble with the authorities; at times we were taken in due to false charges by the clergy that we were undercover agents for the Communists. Upon investigation, the police would find that this was not true, and would let us go at once.”
Later in 1934, Brother Rebacz was assigned to carry on the work in the interior of Paraguay. Due to difficulties encountered there during the Chaco War (a border dispute between Paraguay and Bolivia), he crossed back into Argentina for a short time, concentrating his work in the Corrientes-Resistencia area. As soon as the war ended, he resumed his activity in Paraguay. Several years later, his health adversely affected by the tropical climate of Paraguay, he returned to Argentina, beginning his work in the northeast sector. His account follows:
“I started to work in Posadas, Misiones, then Corrientes and other important cities in Corrientes and Entre Ríos Provinces, arriving in Paraná late in 1938; I continued to cities in the interior of Entre Ríos Province that had never been worked before. Results were good and the work went along peaceably. But then the second world war broke out, and the clergy and the Catholic Action would accuse me of being a Communist. In almost all of the cities I was taken to the police station several times. In Concepción del Uruguay, Entre Ríos Province, I was taken in several times, and finally thrown out of town. Sister Fanny Plouchou, who lived there, continued to work the part that had not yet been done. After this I was assigned the route from San Pedro, Buenos Aires, to Santiago del Estero. When I got as far as Rafaela, Santa Fe Province, I took seriously ill and the doctors advised me that I would need extensive treatment. It was arranged that I receive this treatment in Concepción del Uruguay, so I returned and settled in the same city I had been thrown out of several months before!”
Our interest now returns to the center of Argentina and the important commercial and cultural city of Córdoba, its university being the second-oldest in the southern hemisphere. It is also a renowned stronghold of Catholicism, being called the ‘Rome’ of Argentina. Brother Argyrós’ activity stimulated the interest of Armando Menazzi and Natalio Dessilani. Brother Menazzi had much to do with the expansion of the work in the northern part of the country, while Brother Dessilani continued telling the good news in the Córdoba area. Let’s return to 1932-1933 and follow their accounts.
Armando Menazzi was from a very Catholic family but he was finding ‘the shepherds of the flock’ false. He had his own well-equipped auto mechanic shop when he read his first booklets, What Is Hell? and Where Are the Dead? The corner grocery store owner, Natalio Dessilani, had already read some of the literature, and had written for more. Both men decided that what they had read was in accord with God’s Word, so they wrote for more Bibles and literature. Due to this order, Brother Muñiz came personally to see what was happening. The first talk was given in the office of Brother Menazzi’s shop with eight persons present.
Brother Argyrós’ zeal and conviction inspired Brother Menazzi to sell his shop and dedicate his time to the pioneer service. Brother Dessilani also sold his grocery store​—but not before scoffers had chalked on the door, ‘The Grocery Store of the Prophet.’ He sought employment elsewhere, as he too wanted more time to devote to the preaching activity. Brother Menazzi tells us that with the money from the sale of the business plus the sale of another property, “I could pay for radio time for some talks Brother Muñiz sent us. I also rented a small apartment and there we began holding the first meetings.” Brother Dessilani awakened the interest of one of his fellow employees, Horacio Sabatini, who, in turn, talked with his brother, Arístides, and all his family. Brother Dessilani tells us of the back-call on this family: “At once they started with a deluge of questions, and in order to answer all of these, Brother Menazzi and I stayed about four hours that night. At last they were convinced that they had found the true ‘Way.’ A few days later they offered their house for the meetings, and this was right downtown.” In 1938, Natalio Dessilani’s brother, Emilio, talked to a work companion, Alfredo Torcigliani. He attended a talk given by Brother Muñiz and was convinced by the explanation given of the Lord’s Prayer.
MOTORIZING KINGDOM ACTIVITIES
A rapid expansion of the Kingdom proclamation was the desire of these brothers, and by the 1940’s their efforts were motorized. Brother Horacio Sabatini aided in buying an old car that Brother Menazzi was able to fix up; later a smaller Chevrolet was purchased, and with the two cars they witnessed to the towns out from Córdoba. To save on gasoline, the larger car would tow the smaller one to the territory, and Brother Menazzi says that they had a system of bells between the two cars as signals for starting and stopping. “Later,” Brother Menazzi relates, “we sold the cars and bought an old bus. With the help of the brothers, we fixed it up in such a way that the seats could be converted into six beds inside, and on the roof we had four folding beds under a canvas. In this way ten publishers could travel with living quarters.” This began a vigorous work of expanding the good news in northern Argentina.
At first the trips would last a week, then fifteen days, then for a month at a time. After each trip the bus would return to Córdoba to be checked and repaired, while the brothers would prepare themselves for the next venture, and different brothers and sisters would be given the opportunity to go along. The final trip lasted for three months and was truly an odyssey! All told, till the sale of the bus in 1944, Brother Menazzi and the Córdoba group visited some ten or more provinces, witnessing from house to house in the cities, and visiting the scattered farms and settlements in the rural areas. The procedure in each town or city was the same, as Brother Menazzi informs us: “We would go first to the local police station and inform them of our mission and I would have them sign in a notebook as proof of the fact that I had appeared before them. This would help to avoid arguments later on with the police who might try to interfere; and, in each town, the chief of police would see that the police in the neighboring towns had given permission, so to speak, and so we were allowed to work.” On these trips, much literature was placed with the people, but he adds that “it was a work of informing the people, sowing the seed, since we only occasionally returned to visit someone who showed exceptional interest.”
Life on the bus and the experiences enjoyed form an unforgettable chapter in the lives of the brothers who made up this group. Brother Menazzi gives us a lively description: “We were well organized and, just like a beehive, each one had his assigned work​—one would cook, others would clean up, others would take care of the beds, and still others would do the shopping. We would witness till late afternoon, and sometimes we had to look for the publishers with the spotlight of the bus. We would park the bus in some out-of-the-way spot, preferably beside the cemetery where no one would bother us. At night, after eating our supper and straightening up, we would tell our experiences​—tired, but happy! We were, or learned to be, economical and to eat everything.” Brother Torcigliani fills us in on what that menu of everything included: “We hunted and fished for our food​—everything went into the pot—​frogs, mountain rabbits, chuña (of the stork family), doves, parrots, quail, vizcacha (of the rodent family), hares, armadillos, and land turtles that we made into soup. And we exchanged literature for goats, chickens, roosters, suckling pigs, eggs, vegetables, bananas and all kinds of fruit. As you can see, we never went hungry!”
During Brother Menazzi’s absence from Córdoba, Brother Natalio Dessilani continued to work in the city with a constantly growing group of publishers. “By 1944 the congregation had grown so that there was no longer room in our hall in town, but we didn’t have anywhere else to go. Brother Menazzi talked to an aunt of his who was favorable to the work, and she donated a lot she had on Roma Street. It was now decided that we should sell the bus​—scarcity of gasoline at that time meant that we couldn’t use the bus very much—​the money being used toward the construction of a much-needed Kingdom Hall.”
SPREAD OF TRUTH FROM SAN JUAN
The seed sown by Brother Argyrós in San Juan in 1936 was likewise bearing fruit. Brother José Cercós and a few others were actively sharing the message. In 1940 Brother Cercós contacted the Rodriguez family, who had previously been witnessed to by the Reindls. The Children book was placed and a back-call was made with a phonograph to play some records that gave a further witness. The results were gratifying. Salvador Rodriguez will tell us just what happened: “That night José Cercós spent some two hours or more with us. My father had been reading the Bible for some ten years, but without any explanation, so he accepted the Kingdom truths at once and with great joy. The brother told him that in order to be one of Jehovah’s witnesses he would have to stop smoking, and get rid of all those ‘ridiculous dolls,’ as he called the Catholic images my mother had. At once my father took the cigar out of his mouth, and, together with the ones he had in his pocket, tore them up in the presence of the brother. The following Sunday my father went to the hall with some of the older children, and upon returning he gathered up all the images, stacked them together in the patio, and then set fire to them all​—without paying the least bit of attention to the frantic pleas of my mother that God was going to punish him for what he was doing!
“The following week the announcement for service was made, so on the designated day my father, my older brother and I were on the spot a half hour before the announced time. We had never seen witnessing done, so each of us went with another publisher to the first door. At the second door we were asked to give the testimony. All we could do was repeat a few of the expressions just used by the publisher at the first door, such as, ‘We have brought you the message of the good news of the Kingdom,’ and then present the booklets.
“Soon our mother became interested, and although she did not know how to read, she listened very attentively and repeated what she heard. Soon she was contacting interested persons with whom we children could conduct studies. In less than two months all seven of us were regularly publishing. We were baptized in 1941 when Brother Muñiz visited us; two months later, when Brother Trunecka came from Mendoza, some fifteen were baptized in a water hole on our farm. In those days publishers who had difficulty expressing themselves used a printed testimony card, and we generally worked country territory where the people were more approachable.
“In the country where no territory boundaries existed, we would take one departamento (county) at a time and try to cover it thoroughly, going out early and returning to San Juan at nightfall. At mealtime we would exchange literature for a plate of food.”
Our brother recalls the time he and his brother had a territory in the mountains. One day their father called them to get up and have breakfast; afterward they walked thirty blocks to the train depot, only to be told that the train wouldn’t arrive for four hours yet, since it was just 1 a.m.! When the train did arrive, and the boys came to the indicated stop, it was still dark; and they had eleven kilometers or some seven miles to walk to reach their territory. “We finished witnessing in that town before noon, so we went on to the next town, nine kilometers away and all uphill walking. We finished this town too; now we had twenty kilometers to walk back to the train station​—but we had lightened our load, having placed twenty books and eighty booklets! We arrived at the station just as the headlight of the train was visible; it was now 9 p.m. Two hours later we arrived in San Juan; how joyful we felt as we walked the thirty blocks home!”
In 1944 an earthquake leveled the city of San Juan; there were some thirty publishers at the time, but not one was injured. The following day, brothers from Mendoza came with provisions. Brother Rodriguez tells us of witnessing after the earthquake: “Some of the people told us that we were to blame for the earthquake and they ran us off. Others listened attentively and said, ‘How true your Bible teachings are!’ As a result, many accepted the truth and became publishers. At this time we met in a small hall that the brothers had built.”
The faith and zeal of the first publishers were a constant example for all, and Brother Rodriguez comments on Brother Cercós at eighty-one years of age: “He continued to work as a pioneer, walking up to sixty blocks in order to make his magazine deliveries. He maintained an average of more than seventy hours a month and conducted seven studies. And it was upon returning home from one of his studies that he slipped and fell on the sidewalk, breaking his hip. This left him an invalid and he cried because he couldn’t care for his studies and back-calls. But he felt comforted when we would visit him and tell him about our activity in the territory.”
WITNESSING FAR TO THE SOUTH
Meantime, what was happening in the South? Brothers Gavrov and Miedziak were traveling in that area​—our information indicating that they had reached as far south as Tierra del Fuego, then north through the Patagonia to Río Negro Province. And, also in the 1930’s, Carlos Firnkorn in Colonia Sarmiento, Chubut Province, had become a Witness and had sold his sheep ranch in order to spend more time preaching to others. In his case it could be said that it was a matter of leaving one kind of sheep in order to care for another kind​—a more important kind of ‘sheep’!
In 1934, Francisco Callejo, a railroad employee, living in Allen, Río Negro Province, had his first contact with publishers of the Kingdom. He recalls that “a man with a little case came to the station to ask about the size of the town, and so forth.” The leaflet that this man left, together with some booklets left with some of his friends, impressed Francisco Callejo very much, for he had read a great deal, always searching for knowledge that would satisfy his longing for Bible truth. When he finished reading the booklets The Crisis, Where Are the Dead?, Keys of Heaven, Heaven and Purgatory, Universal War Near and others, together with the Bible, he was convinced that his search had been rewarded. Immediately he wanted to share his knowledge with others, but he had no contact till the following year when he was transferred to Ingeniero Huergo. “There I met a Polish shoemaker, Pablo Teisar, who was a Watchtower subscriber; he gave me the address of Brother Muñiz. I immediately wrote requesting the subscription for both magazines, the Bible, and the books The Harp of God, Deliverance, Government, and Prophecy.
“The magazines told so much about the activity and experiences of publishers in so many parts of the earth, I felt and understood the necessity of taking an active part.” He wrote to Brother Muñiz expressing this desire; the reply was that the same brothers who had visited the province in 1934, Brothers Gavrov and Miedziak, were again due to visit. Brother Callejo describes his feelings then: “I awaited their arrival with intense longing, and when they didn’t come, I wrote again reiterating my desire to share in the preaching. The answer was that the brothers were now in the Río Negro valley and that they would soon arrive. I went to the house of the Polish shoemaker every day, for I knew that they would go there first. I felt sad and deceived for they seemed to delay so long. Finally I went to visit Pedro Teisar one morning, and there they were! How great was my joy to be with them at last! I took them to my home and they supplied me with more literature, and briefly told me how to talk to the people and offer the books and booklets.” This was in the year 1936.
This brief ‘training’ was sufficient; on his first free day from work, Brother Callejo began to publish the good news. Although he found persons completely hostile to the Kingdom message, his zeal was not dampened, and he continued ‘loosening the hard soil’ for future expansion. As he would place his literature supply, he would report this to the Buenos Aires office and request more. He tells us how he used his secular work to advance the Kingdom interests in the Río Negro and Neuquén Provinces: “I was transferred to Cervantes, Río Negro; I preached there, and on my day off I went on the local train to General Roca. I placed my first subscription with a farmer, Antonio Vicente Inestal, in Mainque, and he became the first publisher as a result of my preaching.
“In 1939 I was transferred to Neuquén, where I live to this day. And here I started in train service; as a result of this I took advantage of part of my long layovers in each city to witness. In this way I was able to cover the area from Choele Choel to Zapala (which is the division point)​—a run of some 400 kilometers. And from Neuquén I covered the territory of Cipolletti, Allen and up to the Dique de Riego (irrigation dam of the zone), thus covering Cinco Saltos, and Barda del Medio. I did all of this on my days off each week and during my annual vacation. By the year 1941 we were meeting together for study in Neuquén, and interested ones from Cipolletti also attended. Later, Brother Carlos Firnkorn, who had been working in Chubut, was assigned to Neuquén, and this was a great help.”
Yes, the activity was truly increasing! Let’s take a look at the 1938 report: 128 publishers of the good news and 4 congregations; the publishers devoted 44,712 hours, placed 131,375 pieces of literature and obtained 238 subscriptions. Back-calls to the number of 375 were made, and a total of 138 persons attended the Memorial.
The sowing work was reaching out to the very limits of Argentina, and upon this soil future expansion in the form of congregations, circuits and districts would spring.
In 1942, two young men of Welsh parentage, Gwaenydd Hughes and Ieuan Davies, came to a knowledge of the truth in Chubut Province. Both came from Bible-reading families that belonged to the Independent Welsh Evangelical Church. Gwaenydd Hughes recalls that in the 1930’s someone had offered him literature, and in 1938 his father had subscribed for The Watchtower (then, La Torre del Vigía) from a man named Firnkorn in Sarmiento, Chubut​—and it was told that this man ‘had sold his sheep and gone out preaching a new religion.’ The city of Sarmiento is over 400 kilometers or close to 250 miles south of Rawson, but in 1942 Brother Muñiz wrote to Brother Firnkorn instructing him to go to Rawson for a few weeks. So it was, in the words of Brother Hughes, “Firnkorn came to buy milk from me. He was preaching the end of the world. He then offered me some literature​—this made me think he was just a bookseller, but I accepted the Enemies book. I read it thoroughly in three nights, and I remember that when I finished I was thoroughly convinced that this was the right explanation of the Bible. Now I had to look for Firnkorn. He was living in a little hut on the ‘wrong’ side of town in the neighboring city of Trelew. He offered me The Watchtower, which was now called La Atalaya in Spanish; this confused me because there was an Adventist publication El Atalaya. Brother Firnkorn assured me that The Watchtower was not an Adventist publication.”
Nearby Brother Basilio Miedziak had passed through distributing literature in Comodoro Rivadavia, Trelew, Guiman, and surrounding areas. Ieuan Davies comments: “This pioneer worked like a bull on the loose; that is to say, he called on every house within sight along his way. He placed seven booklets with a farmer who was a neighbor of ours, a fellow Welshman. He wasn’t interested in the booklets, so he gave them to me in appreciation of the fact that I had helped him milk his cows one Sunday morning when he had overslept and didn’t want to get to the chapel late since he was a deacon. When I arrived home and realized that these were religious booklets, I wasn’t very enthusiastic, but I did begin to read Health and Life. Our Bible was in the Welsh language, so I borrowed a Spanish Bible in order to make sure that what the booklets said was exactly as in the Bible. I soon realized that this was the truth and my spiritual hunger was greater than when I began. The booklets advertised some books, giving the United States and Mexico addresses of the Society, so I sent to Mexico for the books. Some two months passed before I received the books due to the fact that my request had been forwarded to the Buenos Aires office. Now that I knew that there were Jehovah’s witnesses in Buenos Aires, I ordered five other books, and subscribed for The Watchtower.”
Brother Muñiz sent Ieuan Davies’ name to Brother Firnkorn, and Gwaenydd Hughes offered to help locate the interested person, since there were many Davieses in this area. Upon learning that Brother Firnkorn was conducting meetings in Trelew, the young man Davies agreed to accompany his friend, Hughes, the following Sunday. He describes this: “Upon arriving at the meeting place, we found it to be a little hut about to cave in​—and I believe that it did when the next storm hit. Both Hughes and I had dressed in the best clothes we had​—suit, white shirt, tie, and so forth —​but when we entered we found everyone dressed in the typical country garb and even the brother conducting was not dressed in accord with the occasion. This did surprise me, but it did not cool off my enthusiasm. After several meetings, the brother said that he would be away and that one of us should conduct the meetings in his absence. As the elder of the two, Hughes was chosen.”
OPPORTUNITIES FOR YOUNG MEN
Later that year Brother Muñiz had a stopover in Trelew on his return from Comodoro Rivadavia, and since he heard there was interest here, he took advantage of the layover to give a talk. “We were so interested that he extended his stay three more days, giving talks of two or three hours each night,” Brother Hughes says. “These talks held my attention so much that although I could hear my horse gnawing at the bit and trying to break away, I couldn’t afford to miss one word of the Bible talk​—I would rather lose the horse! So when the talk ended, I was without my horse​—it was midnight and there was no time to look for it. The following days I had to work, and at night I didn’t want to miss the talks​—so I just gave the horse up for lost.” Brother Hughes adds that the horse did show up several days later.
Upon his return to Buenos Aires, Brother Muñiz wrote something like this to Brother Firnkorn: ‘If this young man Davies is not the one who supports his family and if he wants to, he can come to the branch as there is need for young men like him.’ So the last of December 1942 Ieuan Davies traveled to Buenos Aires; he was baptized in February 1943.
Gwaenydd Hughes was also busy arranging his affairs so that he could devote himself exclusively to the work. At the same time he was reading all the publications of the Society. By March 1943 he was ready to leave home. He tells us: “I went to Bahía Blanca, where Brother Schwalm conducted a group, and there I was baptized. Brother Schwalm left for Buenos Aires and I was put in charge of the work. I trembled with fear, and the only thing I could think was: ‘the workers must truly be few if they have to use me,’ but I was willing to be used. Another pioneer joined me, and, using Bahía Blanca as headquarters, we worked out to towns in La Pampa Province, as well as the south of Buenos Aires Province, including some Jewish colonies.
“Toward the end of 1943 Brother Muñiz came to Bahía Blanca and talked to me about my going to Paraguay to take charge of the work there. Since I didn’t say anything, he later said, ‘You haven’t answered me yet,’ to which I replied, ‘What am I supposed to say? It goes without saying that I am willing to serve wherever I am sent!’” Brother Davies was sent from Buenos Aires to take care of the group in Bahía Blanca, and he fondly recalls his reunion with Brother Hughes: “The night I arrived in Bahía Blanca, Hughes and I didn’t sleep at all; we spent the whole night going over all the happenings that had taken place in so short a time, and we gave thanks that God had rescued us from this old system of things.”
The sowing work of the twenties and thirties covered the far stretches of Argentine territory with hundreds of thousands of pieces of literature, not to mention an untold number of tracts. Many were the interested persons who had obtained literature and who were sharing their knowledge with others, but at first without contact with the Society’s branch organization.
Back in the hub of activity, Buenos Aires, the small nucleus was constantly growing. As could be expected the expansion brought changes, as well as growing pains. A stimulus for the work in Argentina was the visit in 1932 of Brother Roberto Montero, who served in Mexico. He was sent by Brother Rutherford to introduce the campaign with the new magazine Luz y Verdad (The Golden Age in Spanish). Many subscriptions were obtained, as the magazine was most interesting and inexpensive. And, about the time of Brother Montero’s visit, the Society bought a house at 4555 Cramer Street that would serve as a branch office and literature depot. This continued to serve as the Bethel home until the present property at Honduras 5646 was purchased in 1940. Since the branch office then was on the outskirts and out of the way for many of the brothers, Brother Miguel Razquin sent his wife, Juanita, to look for a more centrally located meeting place; the hall settled upon was at 1544 Fitzroy Street, just a couple of blocks from the present branch.
To accommodate the growing group, the owner of the house soon had to tear down a partition and open up another room for the meetings. Again Sister Razquin went looking, at her husband’s insistence, he being an invalid. A vacant house that had been used in a wholesale wine business was found and the owner was willing to sell, taking the Cramer Street house in part payment together with 27,000 pesos to be paid over an extended period at 7 percent interest (it was paid off in less than two years). Brother Muñiz thought the property too expensive, but Brother Razquin, as his wife tells it, “was a strong-willed Basque, and he convinced Brother Muñiz that the Honduras Street property was best suited for our needs​—more centrally located, near the post office, and so forth. In 1940 the bill of sale was signed here on my dining-room table.”
The brothers tore down the old warehouse section that had been used to store wine, and under the direction of an outside contractor, the new building went up. This hall is 10 meters by 20 meters (about 33 feet by 66 feet) and can seat over 350 people comfortably. This was used as a Kingdom Hall up until 1950; later it was used for offices, printery, dispatch and literature depot. In 1941 a little room on the roof was built for Brother Muñiz, the materials and labor being paid for by Brothers Razquin, Schwalm and Martonfi. Despite the modern extensions to the branch office, this room still remains.
The first ‘pains’ in the development of the work in Argentina came in the early thirties: personality clashes and creature worship were evident. When the ‘new name’ Jehovah’s witnesses was adopted and the ‘elective elder’ system was discarded, some fell away and left the organization. At one time signatures were obtained requesting Brother Rutherford to remove Brother Muñiz as branch servant. Some who had signed did later return, recognizing the appointments of the theocratic organization. The Mendoza and Rosario groups suffered similar setbacks at different times.
Again in the early forties unrest became evident, but this time it was different​—it was a restlessness due to the desire to see more progress and a distribution of responsibilities. Brother Adamson recalls those tense moments: “Brother Muñiz was approached by Brother Schwalm, then a Bethel member, with the request that an attempt be made to reorganize the congregation in Buenos Aires for better care of the work. Brother Muñiz did not understand the spirit behind this move at first, he thinking that it was rebellion. So he called for all the brothers to remain after the Watchtower study and he had me get on the platform with a pad and pen to record everything that was considered.” In time the great area cared for by the Buenos Aires congregation was divided into seven different sections, each section to have a brother to direct the work in that territory.
By the 1940’s, then, we can visualize how the work was being done: stalwart and zealous brothers and sisters going out into the far reaches of Argentina, concentrating their efforts in the placing of Bible literature, while other isolated persons would write to the branch office for literature to distribute in the zones where they lived. In the cities where a congregation or group was established, regular witnessing was done, mainly offering books and booklets, and with the use of the testimony card. The phonograph was used in some cities in the back-call work, but not in the house-to-house witnessing. From 1942 on, the Informant was received, indicating the campaigns and the literature to be used.
From the pioneers, isolated publishers, and those associated with the few congregations, reports would come into the Buenos Aires office. Brother Muñiz would compile a list with the names of each one of these, where each was working, and what each had done during the month, and this sheet was sent out to all.
From his arrival in Argentina onward, Brother Muñiz gave Bible talks in Buenos Aires and other cities where interest was found, as well as in the neighboring countries under his care. The Watchtower study was introduced very early and would last two hours or more. Irma Albricot describes those early studies: “A week in advance Brother Muñiz assigned one or two paragraphs to each brother in order for each one to prepare a question for the paragraph assigned; then before the study, the questions were placed on the speaker’s stand, someone arranged them in numerical order, and then Brother Muñiz would read them​—if he could understand the writing (at that time no one had a typewriter)—​and members of the audience could volunteer to answer. All Bible texts were looked up and read, as well as texts that Brother Muñiz added, and so the study continued, without a fixed time, until it ended.” The Buenos Aires Sunday meetings were attended by brothers and interested persons from the Greater Buenos Aires area. On a weekday evening, usually Tuesday, the brothers appointed would attend the outlying zone assigned to each one, and here a congregation book study would be held.
Another weekly meeting was held in Buenos Aires on Thursdays, and was called “del comentario”​—literally meaning, “from the comment,” and referring to the comment for each day listed in the Yearbook. Brother Muñiz presided at this meeting, translating from the English Yearbook the day’s text, the comment and some experiences, plus his own comments.
FIRST GENERAL ASSEMBLY
If the two decades from 1924 to 1944 had witnessed much sowing work, the late forties would bring even greater increases. This would call for better organization of the work. Many brothers realized this and felt a need​—but, what were they to do? Brother Ott recalls how he and Brother Schwalm often commented while they worked together in the branch: “Brother Knorr travels everywhere​—why don’t they send him to Argentina once?”
The long-desired visit came in 1945, and along with it changes that laid the basis for real theocratic organization and expansion. Brothers Knorr and Franz landed in Buenos Aires on February 28, 1945, en route from Chile on their first South American tour. At that time there were 19 companies or congregations in the country and 320 publishers. The April 15, 1945, Watchtower gives some account of the occasion:
“Saturday, March 3, marked the opening of the first general assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in Argentina. About 395 were present at the time of the address of welcome by the branch servant. Then the American brothers were introduced, and Brother Knorr stepped to the platform amid applause. The audience represented the fruitage of about twenty years of activity here of Jehovah’s witnesses, starting from a very small beginning indeed. It seemed most fitting to deliver to the assembly a straight service and organization talk, and this Brother Knorr did, through his companion interpreter Brother Franz. Toward the beginning, when he called for a show of hands as to how many present had been Roman Catholics before devoting themselves to Jehovah God, the hands of practically all present went up.
“Brother Knorr then stressed the importance of the weekly Watchtower study in the congregations, and then of the weekly service meeting of at least an hour’s length, at a time convenient for the majority of the brothers. When requested, all the conventioners stretched forth their hands as desiring that such a service meeting, properly arranged and making use of a monthly service chart and of demonstrations by capable publishers and of other service discussions, be established in their respective congregations. They received in an appreciative spirit Brother Knorr’s admonition, repeatedly made, that the key position in the congregation is that of being a publisher in the field, and that each and all of them have the responsibility of serving as such. They were deeply stirred by the exhortation to make back-calls and to start book studies. They greeted the announcement of the Society’s publication of a new book in Spanish, ‘The Truth Shall Make You Free,’ with hearty applause.
“The evening sessions were opened with the presentation of the subject ‘Seek Ye First the Kingdom,’ in Spanish, by two Argentine brothers. After this Brother Knorr and his interpreter took the floor, this time to speak particularly in behalf of the pioneer service in this part of South America. The requirements of the regular pioneers and of the special publishers were plainly set forth, and the invitation was extended for all those interested in entering these branches of the service to meet him after the dismissal.
“Sunday, March 4, at 8 a.m. a baptismal address was given, and thereafter eight candidates were immersed in water. Events then moved in steady succession. At 9 a.m. all the servants in attendance, namely, fifty-five, met in special session with Brother Knorr, and he consumed more than two hours in answering their questions as respects field service and Watchtower and book studies. Immediately thereafter the German-speaking brothers assembled, and the new ‘servant to the brethren’ (now ‘circuit servant’) addressed them, particularly for the sake of some few conventioners who understood only German and who were therefore not getting direct benefit from the sessions in Spanish. These dear ones rejoiced to learn, in their own tongue, something of what had been said thus far at the assembly.
“No public meeting had been advertised for Sunday afternoon. Argentina is declared under a state of siege, and hence such a meeting is not permitted. Nevertheless, many interested persons showed up for the afternoon meeting, and the attendance rose to 476. For two hours they sat and listened intently as Brother Knorr, interpreted by Brother Franz, delivered the message on ‘Jehovah’s Universal Sovereignty Vindicated.’ A wall map, specially drawn, helped them to visualize more fully the speech. . . . The speech led up dramatically to the announcement of the new Spanish booklet Religion Reaps the Whirlwind and at this the brothers greatly rejoiced.
“Most of the brothers were privileged to remain for the assembly’s closing sessions, beginning at 7 p.m. First there was a presentation, in Spanish, on the subject ‘The King’s Marriage Feast.’ . . . Then Brother Knorr again took the floor, with one of the young local brothers as his interpreter. He related to the assembly about the conventions and his privileges of ministry on his trip thus far. . . . It made the hearts of the brothers overflow with joy when he made known that a special Argentine Informant would begin to be published monthly and the newly appointed ‘servant to the brethren’ would start serving all congregations; and also that shortly the Course in Theocratic Ministry, in Spanish, would be introduced in all congregations.
“A fervent song of thanksgiving to Jehovah through Christ Jesus, and then a prayer, closed the assembly, well on toward 10 p.m. Truly the brothers felt it had been good for them to attend this general assembly.”
Just how much the Argentine brothers had “rejoiced at the spiritual provision, especially in the way of practical service instructions,” we can appreciate by their own expressions:
“Curiosity gripped me,” recalls Francisco Alvarez. “What was an assembly? What would be said? Of course, I had some idea, having seen the photograph that hung on the wall of the Kingdom Hall of an assembly that was held in the year 1928 in the United States, and one could see Brother Rutherford and also the then young Brother Knorr who would soon be visiting us. This first assembly is something that even now I cannot forget even though I was just sixteen years old at the time. The assembly reaffirmed my faith and zeal toward the worship of Jehovah, and my absolute certainty that He is using this people, his witnesses.”
“On this occasion I got acquainted with the organization and met brothers from many parts of the country,” writes Francisco Callejo. “I couldn’t obtain permission from work, but I left anyway. Up until now I had only read about assemblies; now that I had the opportunity to attend one it was unthinkable that I should not go! So after nine years of witnessing as an isolated publisher, I was able to learn firsthand how the organization functions, and while at this assembly I was baptized.”
Irma Albricot can’t forget Brother Knorr’s talk on pioneer service: “Up until this time, when pioneering was talked about we only envisioned mature male brothers with their suitcases going out into inhospitable zones. Brother Knorr helped us to see why more younger brothers and sisters should respond to the call and set their sights on greater training at Gilead School. His talk moved to action several of us, and the 1st of April we began our new work.” It might be added that Irma Albricot later attended Gilead, and to this day continues in full-time service with her husband, Mario Segal, a circuit servant.
IMPROVEMENTS IN THE MINISTRY
Brother Ott tells us of how “Brother Knorr emphatically indicated that the Watchtower study should last just one hour. Brothers Muñiz and Menazzi were strongly convinced that this was impossible.” But Brother Davies reports: “When I returned to Bahía Blanca I put into practice the suggestions of Brother Knorr and I saw that he was right: the Watchtower lesson can be studied in one hour, reading the paragraphs too.”
The results were indeed far-reaching, and one brother sums it up this way: “Despite the fact that many did not have an optimistic outlook, it was exciting to see at once spiritual progress. There was greater participation in the meetings, more comments, it was more lively​—it was different! Now that my heart didn’t jump out of me when I dared to answer a question, I felt more confidence; now all were answering and our progress was manifesting itself in many aspects: a better vocabulary, better pronunciation, more knowledge, and what made us the happiest, knowing that our praises to Jehovah God were going to be of the best kind, as he deserves.”
The Theocratic Ministry School was another innovation greatly needed and Brother Ott was most enthusiastic over the prospects. However, Brother Muñiz was not of the same mind. “He said that when he came into the organization all these things did not exist,” recalls Brother Ott, “so the school was not for him. He told me that I could start the school if I wanted to. This I did, and later I gave Brother Muñiz an assignment for a seven-minute talk. ‘What can I say in just seven minutes?’ he asked. He did accept the assignment, but, needless to say, ran overtime.”
Another happy outgrowth of that 1945 visit by Brother Knorr is described by the one who lived it, Gwaenydd Hughes: “I came back to Argentina from Paraguay for the visit of Brother Knorr, and since I thought it would be a short visit, I left all my belongings in Asunción. Little did I dream of what was ahead of me and the great blessings I was to receive! One day Brother Knorr called me aside privately and asked me if I would like to go to Gilead and for me to think it over. What was I to say? The language would be no problem, for I knew English well; but the Gilead course​—I knew nothing about that. When pressed for an answer, I said that I didn’t know what to say, as I knew nothing about what was involved in the Gilead course, but that I was willing to go if he thought I could qualify. I remember Brother Knorr’s expression: ‘Come, then.’ Later he added: ‘If you go to Gilead, they need you here in Argentina.’ ‘But, what about the work in Paraguay?’ I asked. Brother Knorr’s answer was, ‘The Lord will take care of that!’
“The very next month after Brother Knorr’s visit, on April 12, Sister Ofelia Estrada and I were bound for the United States​—the first Argentines to attend Gilead School, and among the first foreign students to attend.”
At this time Brother José Bahner, who had come from Germany, was serving as the first “servant to the brethren” (now “circuit servant”) in Argentina. Prior to this he and his wife, together with Brother and Sister Niklash, had pioneered in the Santa Fe, Rosario and Paraná area. Brother Knorr’s visit had revolutionized the work and this meant reorganization in the congregations, new service forms and new instructions; the work of teaching the brothers and lovingly helping them to come into line with the forward-moving organization would be the expected role of the “servant to the brethren.” It is regrettable that this was not always the role fulfilled by the newly appointed brother.
Brother Armando Menazzi, who had so much to do with publishing the good news in northern Argentina, recalls this sad and disheartening experience: “My wife and I were assigned as special pioneers in Córdoba. About this time a brother in the faith, José Bahner, came to Córdoba; he was sharp and up-to-date on the new rules and regulations that I didn’t know anything about. So little by little he shoved me aside and caused me to lose my privileges in the direction of the work in Córdoba, making it hard for me to continue as a special pioneer in Córdoba, pointing at me as the one responsible for not having applied the new instructions, and so forth. Now a very critical period in my life began: Having put my all in the progress of the work, and now feeling out of the picture, I felt mentally exhausted and suffered from insomnia. After several sleepless days and nights, I became delirious and was sent to a sanatorium where I was submitted to electric shock treatments. Satan took advantage of the opportunity to sift me like wheat, but two days later I began to feel better, and again felt the impulse to go forward. After our first daughter was born, we left for unassigned territory in San Francisco, Córdoba.” Brother Menazzi’s statement that ‘Satan took advantage of the opportunity’ is attested to by other brothers from the Córdoba area who mention that there was an evident attempt on the part of the demons to disrupt the unity and progress of the congregation.
Brother Knorr had encouraged the division of the existing congregation in Buenos Aires, with the certainty that this would enable more persons to be reached in the preaching activity, and, at the same time, the interested ones would be helped and instructed efficiently. This was done, the new congregations being formed from the groups that had previously met together as midweek book study groups. Soon the Córdoba congregation too was divided for the first time, each division proving to be a stepping-stone to still greater increases. The figures show eight congregations in 1940, and fifty-eight congregations by 1950.
That many brothers took to heart Brother Knorr’s invitation to take up the pioneer service is evidenced by the figures: In 1940 there were twenty pioneers in the entire country; by 1950 this number had grown to seventy-four​—thirteen special pioneers and sixty-one regular or general pioneers. Brother Rodolfo Bock tells us: “My wife and I were determined to become pioneers and we began to get our affairs in order. In October of 1945 I handed in my resignation at my secular work. The manager, a son of the owner of the factory, told me that it wasn’t practical to leave my job; he recalled the progress I had made and spoke of future advancement and promotions. But when he saw that my decision was made, he was very friendly and said that they had all been pleased with my conduct and work during these ten years, and that if things didn’t go well in my new activity, I should remember that the factory doors would always be open to me. All the office force went together to buy me a gift, and to show my appreciation I presented each one with a copy of the book ‘The Truth Shall Make You Free.’ All were pleased to accept it.”
Greater emphasis was given to the back-call and Bible study work. “The Truth Shall Make You Free” with the question booklet was the chief instrument used in this activity. One pioneer writes: “Studies in this publication lasted at least one year if conducted regularly. Such false beliefs as the immortal soul, hellfire and trinity were strongly entrenched in most of the people and it took much tact and patience to get them to understand and accept the truth. As our home Bible studies increased, our meeting attendance at the Kingdom Hall also increased, and little by little the number of publishers did too. Scheduling all our studies took effort, and some had to be conducted late at night.”
Another activity engaged in by the brothers was magazine street work. Brother Alvarez tells us that on “the important streets and avenues of the city of Buenos Aires, and in other cities where there were congregations, The Watchtower and Consolation (later, Awake!) became well known to the Argentine public, and many people came to know the truth by means of this activity. I enjoyed this service in the downtown avenues when I would get off from my secular work; there I was identified by former school companions whom I hadn’t seen since our school days and to whom I had the excellent opportunity to give a witness regarding the truth of God’s Word.” Sister Mary Seegelken tells an experience from Mendoza: “We did magazine street work not only on the main street of Mendoza, Avenida San Martín, but also in the plaza of Godoy Cruz where many people would go for a walk on Sunday afternoons. My sister Elba and I usually stood near each other. One day a young schoolteacher walked up to us and said, ‘Poor things, these two blondes selling magazines!’ He took the two magazines, and today this former schoolteacher, Brother Pedro Maza, is a district servant and had the privilege of attending the ten-month course of Gilead.” Magazine street work had to be discontinued in 1950 when the work of Jehovah’s witnesses was outlawed.
HELPS TOWARD A PRODUCTIVE MINISTRY
As a result of the introduction of the Course in Theocratic Ministry, more brothers prepared and delivered public talks; their impressions interest us: “A big stimulus to meeting attendance was the arrangement for public meetings using the outlines that the Society provided on pertinent subjects,” writes Brother Bock. “I was obliged to take part in this public speaking inasmuch as I was congregation servant in Rosario and we weren’t to wait for the circuit servant’s visit in order to get our public meeting campaign under way. So we learned to give public talks; I started first and then Brother Niklash joined me. We felt a very pleasing satisfaction for this additional privilege of service, and especially so when we noted the appreciation on the part of the brothers and interested persons. The attendance at the Kingdom Hall increased noticeably. Later on, in accord with the counsel from the Society, we gave talks all over, in the homes of the brothers where this was possible; thus many more could attend talks in different parts of this large city. We announced these talks with handbills.” For the majority of the brothers, giving a public talk was indeed a crucial test, and more than one “hoped that no one would come on that fateful day, when I stood up whiter than snow behind the speaker’s stand.” Another brother recalls: “I have had very little schooling, so when I had my first one-hour talk, en route to the hall I hoped that a bus would run over me​—such was the fear I had! But since then I have given many talks, and each time improving. Without effort, nothing is gained.”
In late 1946, Brother Hughes returned from the United States. After an initial visit to Paraguay, representing Brother Knorr, he began his circuit work in the northern part of Argentina. Now circuit assemblies were arranged, the first of which was held in May 1947 in Córdoba, Brother Muñiz serving the assembly in the capacity of district servant. In June an assembly was held in the south, in Bahía Blanca; here Brother Hughes served as district servant. At this assembly Brother Hughes performed his first baptism, and in the very pool where he himself had been baptized just four years before. “It was after the Bahía Blanca assembly,” relates Brother Hughes, “that I visited my home in Chubut for the first time since I left there four and a half years before. I was invited to give a talk in the Welsh Church, and I delivered it in the Welsh tongue. Sad to say, despite the work done by the early pioneers and many since then, the work has not found fertile soil among the Welsh people. I recall offering some of the Society’s literature to one of my Welsh relatives; he exclaimed: ‘Why, I thought that this religion didn’t exist anymore​—I thought it folded up in 1914!’”
Those early circuit assemblies took on the nature of national assemblies, since brothers from all parts of Argentina would attend. Irma Albricot explains: “At that time the railroad made a considerable discount for groups of over ten persons, so more than once, one or two entire coaches were filled with brothers. We banished monotony on the trip with songs and experiences, and so the assembly really began on the train. When we arrived at the assembly city, a brother would meet the train with a list of addresses of hotels, prices, and so forth, and we would choose the one that was within our budget. Then each one, or in small groups, would make arrangements for eating during the days of the assembly, since there was no cafeteria.”
The circuit assembly program continued, with assemblies planned for city after city. Each assembly was a ‘first’ in the city where it was held, and the brothers everywhere responded with overflowing joy and enthusiasm. Mary Seegelken comments on the first Mendoza assembly: “We worked very hard in the rooming department, since brothers would be coming from Buenos Aires, Córdoba, Santa Fe and other provinces. Just a few days before the assembly was to begin, the buses went on strike, so we had to walk until we found rooms for all. We thanked Jehovah that we found a new hotel, not yet inaugurated, and the owner gave us reasonable rates, so our problem was solved. This assembly was a real joy.”
In October of 1948 six Gilead graduates arrived in Buenos Aires: Charles and Lorene Eisenhower, Viola Eisenhower, Helen Nichols, Helen Wilson and Roberta Miller. Five had graduated from the first class of Gilead and all had served in Cuba as missionaries before being assigned to Argentina. Most of these missionaries are still in full-time service in Argentina.
Buenos Aires, as seen through the eyes of newly arrived missionary Helen Nichols, interests us: “From the day we landed we could see that this assignment would be different. How I was impressed by the pretty, fat, rosy-cheeked babies dressed from head to foot in cozy wool! It wasn’t long before we noticed how the laborers who worked on the streets or in construction would stop to fix their noon meal alongside the street. Beefsteak broiled over a charcoal fire, a loaf of French bread and a bottle of wine made up the fare. Everyone seemed to have plenty to eat, plenty to wear and whatever diversion he wished. This note of prosperity made me realize that we would have to be alert to convince people of the importance of the Kingdom message​—they would have to be shown that the blessings of the Kingdom are greater than anything they already had or knew.” The missionaries also found that the “siesta hour” generally extends until 3 p.m., and the evening meal is served between 9 p.m. and 10 p.m., so this required adjusting their schedules to that of the householders.
THE 1949 ASSEMBLY
In April 1949 Brother Knorr and Brother Henschel visited Argentina and an assembly was arranged for in a very fine hall, Les Ambassadeurs. Shortly before the assembly was to open, the branch was informed that the police permission to hold the assembly had been revoked. The matter was taken to a prominent attorney, who, in turn, went to see the police. They told him to go to the Ministry of Foreign Relations and Cults. The brothers were told by the police that they could hold their assembly in their own hall where regular meetings were held during the week and on Sunday. At no time in the eight years that the hall on Honduras Street had been used had the brothers encountered any difficulties. There the assembly began on Friday evening, April 8, with some 672 persons in attendance. Saturday morning a baptism was held, 76 candidates being baptized in La Plata River. By Sunday afternoon some 1,200 were present; the hall was more than packed, the patio was filled to the gate, and there were hundreds on the terrace roof. Loudspeakers served the entire audience. Brother Knorr began his scheduled address, “It Is Later Than You Think,” with Brother Hughes serving as interpreter. At 4:40 p.m. a policeman and a man in civilian clothes pushed through the crowd to the platform and said that the lecture must cease immediately; soon there were a dozen policemen outside the building, and thirty more who arrived in an open police wagon. They drew their guns and carried tear-gas bombs! Some 200 of the brothers, including Brothers Knorr, Hughes and Muñiz, were taken to the police station. Helen Nichols mentions, “This was my first time in jail, and Brother Knorr’s too!” Most of the brothers were taken to the police station in the wagon, thirty at a time.
Finally the police realized that this surely would be an unending task; then, too, the police wagon ran out of gas. So the remainder of the brothers were kept inside the hall, under police guard. Those taken to the police station were held in a large open courtyard where they were forced to remain standing for hours. It was cold and damp, and most had not eaten anything since noon, while some hadn’t eaten since breakfast. After all had been booked and put through the routine, they were finally released in the early hours of Monday morning. Neither the lawyer nor the brothers were ever given a satisfactory answer as to why the meeting was stopped, but a most interesting detail stands out. The chief of police who took Brother Muñiz to the police station stopped at the Catholic church on the way. He said he wanted to go and see the padre. Ten minutes later he returned and took Brother Muñiz on to the police station to book him.
Brother Henschel was across the street from the Kingdom Hall taking pictures when the trouble started, and so was able to size up the situation. Later he talked to Brother Knorr by telephone and received instructions to go on to Asunción, Paraguay, the next day, as per schedule, should Brother Knorr not be released in time. When Brother Knorr arrived at the hotel, Brother Henschel was sleeping; when he got up and opened the door he asked Brother Knorr how things were. Brother Knorr answered, “It is later than you think.” It was 5 a.m. There was just time to pack, eat some breakfast and get down to the hydroplane port where he and Brother Henschel, together with Brother Hughes, enplaned on schedule for the journey to Paraguay.
But why this interference at the Buenos Aires assembly and at several of the circuit assemblies? After many months of effort La Torre de Vigía had been recognized by the government as a religious organization back in 1948. Members were elected for this legal organization, with Brother Muñiz as president. In 1946 the Perón government, under influence of the Roman Catholic Church, had formed a department of cults or religion inside the Ministry of Foreign Relations. The purpose was to require all religious groups except the Catholic Church to get registered. Congress at that time did not pass the measure. However, in 1949 the bill was again presented, and due to the pressure of Catholic influences it was accepted. It was now required that all religions register with the Department of Cults of the Ministry of Foreign Relations. That is when the publishers of the Kingdom began to have troubles.
Finally the work of Jehovah’s witnesses was officially proscribed in August 1950. As quoted from Resolution 351 of the Ministry’s decree, its reason is declared to be that “the organization [of Jehovah’s witnesses] is against the consecrated principles of the Magna Charta, diffusing doctrines against the Armed Forces and the respect that should be given to the national symbol.” Time and again Jehovah’s witnesses through their representative within the country have requested recognition so they might freely preach the good news of the Kingdom, as guaranteed by the Argentine constitution, but thus far without avail.
Bans, proscriptions and persecution are not new to Jehovah’s servants. How these obstacles were met and how the work has been carried on in Argentina under these conditions form an important and interesting chapter in the development of the work here. Just before the proscription of the work, fifteen Argentine brothers departed for the international assembly in New York; while there, they heard the news that the work had been officially banned. How would they witness in Argentina and what would be the real condition of the work when they returned? Brother Hughes was a delegate to that assembly and he tells us his personal experience.
PREACHING DESPITE PROBLEMS
“While in New York, Brother Knorr appointed me as branch servant for Argentina. However, when I first returned to Buenos Aires, it was necessary to find the branch. Oh, yes, the property at 5646 Honduras was still there; since this was in the name of Brother Muñiz, there was no problem. But the records and all that goes to make up a branch office were scattered here and there in the brothers’ homes. For a time it was necessary for a brother to travel all over the country at the end of each month to get the reports from each congregation or group; other brothers came personally to Buenos Aires to bring their reports. Then after compiling the report, the branch servant or another would travel over to Uruguay to mail the report to Brooklyn. You can imagine what a task it was to compile each month’s report.”
The decade from 1940 to 1950 had proved to be thrilling, with growth and innovations in the theocratic structure. How joyful the brothers felt as they viewed the results as given in the 1950 annual report: 58 congregations, 13 special pioneers, 61 regular pioneers, and 1,218 congregation publishers! Due to difficulty in importing literature, only 60,870 books and booklets were placed, but they made 112,693 back-calls and conducted 973 home Bible studies. Magazine work was fruitful, and they had obtained 3,495 new subscriptions and placed 153,320 individual copies of the magazines. At the Memorial that year there were 1,747 persons in attendance; and during the year 979 public talks had been given.
The prime concern of the brothers was: would the work continue to flourish under the ban? One thing in our favor was that even though we worked under restricted conditions, the magazines and other literature came into the country by mail to the homes of different brothers. Let’s ask Brother Hughes how the work fared under the ban. “One outstanding fact remains: the official ban on the work resulted in the greatest blessing for the expansion of the work. The small groups, or service centers, flourished and grew strong, and this set the basis for the formation of so many congregations later on.”
The Society saw the need for more visits by the circuit servants to all the congregations in the country, for the purpose of instructing the brothers how to carry on the work. Brother Eisenhower, who was serving as a circuit servant in the northern part of the country from 1949 on, tells of his visit to the congregation in Rosario. Here it was demonstrated how the preaching could be done without presenting the Watchtower magazine or the Society’s literature. Brother Eisenhower and his wife went from house to house with the individual publishers. They used just the Bible, reading three or four Bible texts in the form of a sermon. The servants in the congregation and other publishers were shown how this was to be done and they, in turn, were able to teach others. Brother Eisenhower tells us that “when we found people who were desirous of knowing more about God and His kingdom and the new system of things, we would take their name and address and make arrangements to return to bring them Bible literature and at the same time start a Bible study.” In just two weeks’ time Brother Eisenhower covered his circuit, visiting all the congregations. He reports that the brothers were very enthusiastic over this way of telling the good news of the Kingdom.
Meetings were conducted in groups of six, eight, ten or twelve persons. The circuit servant would visit these groups, spending three days in each: Sunday, Monday and Tuesday in one group; Thursday through Saturday in another. In this way he would give his service talk in each group and also, where possible, he would give a public talk. The work progressed and new groups and larger groups were organized.
In January 1951, Brother Rogelio Del Pino, with his wife Dora, was assigned to circuit work. Brother Del Pino recalls their visits to the different congregations within the Federal Capital and surrounding areas: “It was an interesting work and was carried on with wisdom and courage. Although we didn’t suffer red-hot persecution, nonetheless we were under ban and did not enjoy complete freedom. We were always aware of this fact, and it guided our activity and movements. The branch office provided accurate counsel and suggestions that, when faithfully followed, kept us from getting into more serious trouble and kept the work pulsating and alive. When greater freedom came, we emerged well organized and the work had not suffered in any great degree. Caution was exercised, but the ‘sheep’ were never abandoned. The branch always kept us supplied with the latest instructions, and the circuit servant carried on his work of visiting and feeding the congregations in the same way he does today. Just one thing was different: the places where these meetings were held. It was a small living room, a dining room or a kitchen​—we never had enough seating, even though we sat on the beds, or on a table, or on a sewing machine. Great was the responsibility of the conductors of these groups.”
On the responsibility of conducting such a group, Brother Fernando Fanin, who embraced the truth in Córdoba in 1947, gives us a close-up look: “In these small groups personal attention could be given to the brothers and interested persons to a greater degree than had it been a large congregation. This care and constant association resulted in a family spirit among us and this encouraged spiritual growth. In addition, those of us who were assigned to care for these groups had the opportunity to grow up spiritually since we had the responsibility of conducting the meetings and doing the work of each servant, just as if we had been overseers of a congregation. We conducted the Watchtower study, acted as school servant, and conducted the service meeting.” We can appreciate how these little groups were closely knit together for the zealous advancement of the work.
Since it was impossible to meet together in larger meetings, such as circuit and district assemblies, small meetings were organized in the country, often out in the woods. Brother Eisenhower tells how the congregation servants, assistant congregation servants, and the Bible study servants, together with book study conductors, would be invited to these one-day assemblies. “It was like a picnic or family reunion, and proved very beneficial and helpful to the brothers to keep the work moving along in the country.”
Helen Wilson, one of the missionaries serving in Buenos Aires in those years, tells of her joy: “My partner, Helen Nichols, and I were invited to be at one of these one-day assemblies, since we were temporary study conductors. How we enjoyed it! It was so encouraging to meet with brothers other than those in our little group. Many times we do not appreciate assemblies so much when they are free and open. The cafeteria arrangement was different than at any assembly I had ever attended: the meal consisted of a whole lamb stuck on stakes at an angle and roasted over the hot coals. When the asado was ready, we all gathered around, each one serving himself from the same cutting board and from the big dishes of salad​—having everything in common.”
Even in these smaller meetings, trouble was sometimes encountered. In Córdoba a meeting was arranged for on the farm of one of the brothers. The police found out about it, and came and dissolved the meeting, taking Brothers Natalio Dessilani, Ermelindo Goffi, and Charles Eisenhower to the local police station and holding them for twenty-four hours. After this they were released and warned not to hold any more illegal meetings.
At times the question comes up as to how the newer, immature ones could accept the message and begin to preach it, knowing they were subject to being detained by the police. Nevertheless, almost all of those who came into association were courageous in the service and in no way were frightened by what could happen to them. One young publisher said that he had accepted the Kingdom message because he knew that he would have to fight. In time this brother, Amado Ceirano, became a pioneer, then a circuit servant and a district servant. Brother Fanin tells of taking a newly interested person out in the door-to-door work for the first time: “We called at a home where a congressman of the governing party lived. He listened and invited us to come in. I was happy for I thought perhaps he was interested. But once we were inside he said that we should prepare ourselves to go to prison because he had prepared a law measure to present to Congress whereby Jehovah’s witnesses would be exterminated, and that such measure would soon be approved. With that he tried to phone the police, while I took out the Bible and read to him Daniel 2:44 and Psalm 2. Due to being so upset he didn’t dial the right number so couldn’t communicate with the police. After reading the texts, I said to the publisher, ‘Let’s get out of here!’ How would my young companion react to all of this? I was quite surprised to see that when we arrived at the next door, she went ahead unabashed and rang the bell, not at all afraid. Soon after that Myriam Ossman dedicated her life to Jehovah and entered the ranks of the full-time publishers.”
ARGENTINA ENJOYS NATIONWIDE ASSEMBLY
These were the conditions under which the brothers in Argentina were working at the time of Brother Knorr’s next visit, in December 1953. While he was winging his way across the Andes range from Santiago, Chile, to Mendoza, Argentina, many of the Mendoza friends were already at the assembly point. From there they could see the plane from Chile as it descended from the tops of the Andes and went out of sight toward the Mendoza airport. Brother Eisenhower, now the branch servant, and his wife met Brother Knorr and together they traveled to the fruit orchard of the Giandinotto family. There was still time before the scheduled talk, so Brother Giandinotto invited Brother Knorr and a few others to the cherry orchard​—there he had reserved a whole branch just chock-full of big ripe red and yellow cherries. Surrounded by grape arbors and fruit trees​—what an ideal spot for Brother Knorr’s talk! Following the talk they enjoyed a lunch that included ripe and green olives and plenty of fruit, all raised on this brother’s place. Then came the ride back to the city, where the night was spent in the Seegelken home; at this same time, two of the Seegelken children, German and Mary, were students in Gilead’s twenty-second class.
If the first day of this tour was beautiful and memorable, the days to follow were no less so. The Watchtower gives us the firsthand account: “After a night’s rest and awakening at 5 a.m. a party of five was ready to go by taxi to another assembly 178 kilometers north of Mendoza along the foothills of the cordillera, San Juan. The group went through the city and headed for the mountains, driving into a narrow valley with towering jagged rocky hills on both sides of the road. There, just behind this first row of mountains, the ascending and curling smoke at the foot of the mountains indicated the prearranged picnic place. The fast-rushing creek nearby made a cheerful noise of welcome to all. . . . and the oncoming crowd began to salute everyone with a hearty handshake. In no time the group was assembled near a clearing along the stream and the talk was on, with the trees providing a roof over a crowd of 135 brothers. It was well after high noon when the meeting was closed with prayer. It was time to eat and the asado was soon under way.
“Hot coals and sizzling beef​—what an aroma! This is typical of Argentina and the gaucho thrives on this food. Anyone could! . . . the asador calls out, ‘Está lista’ (‘It is ready’). It means few minutes can be lost, for the meat is at the right point to eat.
“With forks the huge pieces of meat were carried from the grates a few feet away to the clean-topped metal ‘table.’ Never mind the plates! . . . it is most delicious and more fun to eat the asado with the fingers, as the people of Argentina do it. There is one fork for all in the big tin platter that contains a mixed salad of onions, lettuce and tomatoes. It is a wonderful combination with the meat.”
Now the drive back to Mendoza, after a personal farewell to everyone. The next morning it was up early for the three travelers, Brother Knorr and Brother and Sister Eisenhower, as they were to fly to Córdoba, a distance of 700 kilometers. Arrangements had been made for Brother Martín Barrena from Buenos Aires to meet them at this point and drive them from place to place for the rest of their long trip. In Córdoba brothers from four congregations had arranged a meeting out of town of the Goffi family’s farm. Two and a half hours were spent in counseling. There were no seating accommodations, so all stood. Afterward, the brothers here had many questions, and a few who could speak some English were able to converse with Brother Knorr. The brothers were reluctant to let the visitors go, but finally the good-byes were said and the car pulled away for the three-hour ride to San Francisco.
As the car approached the place of meeting, everything was very quiet​—only one brother sat on the sidewalk awaiting the arrival of the visitors to show them the meeting place. Inside some thirty-five were waiting to hear Brother Knorr. That night the travelers slept in Santa Fe; the next morning they crossed the Paraná River by launch, then directly to the meeting place. Returning later to Santa Fe, Brother Knorr visited four groups in this city​—this meant a quick run from one place to the other. Then from Santa Fe to Rosario, where one group was visited in the evening hours. The next day, four more groups in Rosario were visited.
After noon, the car group headed for Ciudad Evita (Cañada de Gómez). Here the congregation servant was met, as was done all along the way, so he could direct the visitors to the place of meeting. This time it was about six kilometers from town on a brother’s farm. Three congregations were present, and the brothers had really made a day’s picnic out of it. When the car was spied, the brothers were notified. By the time the visitors arrived, all were seated in the backyard where a platform had been set up and the year’s text had been hung. Bouquets of flowers were everywhere. Brother Knorr commented on how “all of these brothers all along the way in all parts of the country had come great distances and taken off from work in the middle of the week just to be assembled with their brothers of like precious faith and to receive good words from one of Jehovah’s servants. To tell just how they felt and how Brother Knorr felt would be hard to put in writing. But love is expressed. Here love was in action.” Although there was no time to eat with the brothers, the visitors were given a huge cake and a roasted chicken to take along. As they left, the local brothers were singing theocratic songs to accordion accompaniment.
The Watchtower describes the next stop, in Bell Ville, at the home of one of the sisters on the outskirts of town. “. . . they had prepared a place alongside the house. Where the trees and bushes failed to cover sufficiently, blankets and pieces of material were hung, to keep from drawing attention from passersby. Here there were seventy-five from three congregations.”
At 1:40 a.m. the group arrived at their next destination, Río Cuarto. At 9 a.m. the talk was scheduled in a secluded spot on a little farm. Brother Knorr gave a very stern and emphatic talk on service. About thirty publishers and four pioneers in this congregation had caused division among the brothers and were failing to recognize the present congregation and yet would come and request literature and territory. Brother Knorr answered questions as to proper procedure in disfellowshiping those causing division. It was amazing to see how organized this group was, so that the unfaithful ones would not find out the meeting place. The congregation servant had indicated to them a certain place on the outskirts of town where a brother would be waiting and there he would tell them the exact place. In that way unwanted persons could not filter in.
Time must not be lost, so the brothers took fruit along for the six-hour ride to Pergamino, where two groups had come together for Brother Knorr’s talk. Then on to the last stop before Buenos Aires, the city of Salto. The brothers here had written ahead requesting the travelers to stay for dinner after Brother Knorr’s talk. So upon arriving the visitors caught sight of two roasting lambs stretched out on reclining iron stakes. It took three hours of slow cooking in this way. Brother Knorr served the spiritual fare of more than one hour, and then the tables were set. The brothers expressed their joy that it had not rained, for had it poured it would have been impossible to travel the muddy road. After the brothers left, a cloudburst came!
Brother Knorr and Brother and Sister Eisenhower, together with their car driver, Brother Barrena, arrived in Buenos Aires at 2 a.m. All these days of travel​—some 1,500 miles—​they had kept a very tight schedule, visiting, in all, nineteen groups and talking to 1,232 in just six days. How they appreciated their privilege of service and the way the brothers had carried out instructions faithfully! And they appreciated the fine service Brother Barrena had rendered, driving them in his car.
When Brother Knorr entered Argentina from the west, Brother Milton Henschel came down from the north, from Paraguay. In Buenos Aires he picked up his travel companion, Brother Hughes, and together they flew the over 1,000 kilometers south to Neuquén, situated below the 38th parallel in the rich, fruit-growing valley of the Río Negro. Here, on the farm of one of the brothers, some 115 of the friends from four congregations in the area had met together. For these semi-isolated brothers this was the greatest event in their history.
Directly east of Neuquén on the Atlantic coast is the city of Bahía Blanca, and the local train stops at every town along the way on its day-long trip. In many of these towns brothers were waiting to greet the travelers. The following morning Brother Henschel addressed two groups in Bahía Blanca. One of the local brothers who owned a car offered his services, and so began a journey by car of 1,245 kilometers. Traveling north along the Atlantic coast, the next stop was the famous seaside resort, Mar del Plata. Due to a late departure from Bahía Blanca, the brothers wondered if the group in Mar del Plata would still be waiting for them. They were, and after 10 p.m. they were rewarded with the long-awaited talk by a special representative of Jehovah’s organization.
At dawn the next day, our brothers visited Balcarce, where twenty-two brothers assembled in a farmhouse close to the city. Next on the route was Tandil, where a small congregation had been formed by a pioneer brother. In a small house on the edge of town, some thirty-three came together for the talk. Late at night the traveling brothers arrived in Buenos Aires.
Congregations around the Federal Capital were next in line for visits: Eva Perón (now La Plata; many cities were renamed during the Perón regime, reassuming the former names after the 1955 revolution), Berisso, Ensenada, and Bernal. On December 25, Brother Knorr and Brother Henschel were in Buenos Aires. No congregational meetings were scheduled for this day, but in the evening all the graduates of Gilead in Buenos Aires met in the missionary home for dinner and a discussion.
Starting the next day, three days were devoted to visiting groups in Buenos Aires. Each group received a full two-hour program: first, Brother Knorr, with his interpreter, spoke for about forty minutes; when he concluded, he introduced Brother Henschel, who read a forty-minute talk in Spanish; then Brother Hughes was presented and he gave a discourse in Spanish on the theocratic organization. A very accurate schedule had been made, and it ran as smoothly as clockwork. When the brothers arrived at an apartment or a little house on the edge of town, or walked into a patio, or kitchen, or living room, everyone was seated, anxiously awaiting them with smiling faces. How they desired to applaud​—but they didn’t dare attract attention to their place of meeting! One day nine such two-hour meetings were held, and the following day, Sunday, eleven groups were visited.
On this visit to Argentina, Brother Knorr addressed a total of 43 groups, with 2,053 in attendance. Brother Henschel had talked to the same groups in Buenos Aires, plus 13 other congregations to the south and west, with an attendance of 452, bringing the grand total up to 2,505 persons for this very different kind of assembly arrangement. Not without reason The Watchtower of May 1, 1954, entitled its account of Brother Knorr’s travels as “Holding a New World Assembly Nationwide in Argentina”!
CIRCUIT SERVANTS CONTRIBUTE TO EXPANSION
Circuit work continued to make a splendid contribution to the increased activity in the congregations and isolated groups. Brother Del Pino vividly describes the obstacles and joys of this service: “Our work with the brothers was not always one of explaining the meaning of some Bible prophecy and its fulfillment, at times it had to do with many aspects of daily living​—putting order into the home life, the children, and a decent ‘outhouse.’ It was a question of organizing the congregation files, explaining their use​—only to return a year or so later to find that nothing had been done. So we would start all over again. The same was true with instructions regarding field service and meetings; the big thing was not to become discouraged, and to use what was available, what was at hand. How much joy we have today when we observe these same brothers occupying servants’ positions and having much responsibility within God’s organization and carrying it out with ability and appreciation!
“When we visited small isolated groups and congregations with few publishers and in places where the work was well known, we made arrangements to visit other nearby settlements. This meant getting up early, sometimes at 3 a.m., in order to wait for a small bus that went by only at this early hour and returned at sundown. During the cold season we would all be shivering. Arriving at our destination around 5 a.m., we would get off the bus before arriving in the town, because the police would check the passengers at the stop and ask questions of those not known in the community. We kept in mind that the work was proscribed. As soon as the roosters would begin to crow and we could see some movement of the people, or the lights going on, we would begin to visit the homes with the good and early news of the Kingdom. We would always work the rural portion till noon, arriving in the center around the police station while they would be eating. We would stop for a while, eat the sandwiches we brought along, and then continue on till the bus came along for the return trip home.
“Circuit activity in Chaco Province will also acquaint you with what our work of making disciples involved. The intense heat, the lack of transportation in those years, the lack of water many times, and the mountains of dust on the roads made the visits hard and fatiguing. Many times we had to use bicycles so as to cover long, tiring distances, and since most of the brothers were younger and more used to riding bicycles it was hard for us to keep up the pace that they set on those tortuous roads and paths. Many times we returned at night through narrow paths grown up with weeds and thorns, and if one got just a little off the narrow road he would end up with torn clothing and bruised skin. Arriving at the house, we would find the scratches on our bodies. Today we remember those days and how Jehovah blessed his zealous servants. Today in Chaco, along those roads and byways, there are groups and congregations that praise Jehovah.
“Another interesting aspect of the work in Chaco Province was delivering public lectures in the wood-chopping camps, not to be confused with logging camps in North America. These camps are situated in the heart of junglelike surroundings and are composed of precarious shacks and ‘lean-tos’ where the woodcutters live. Some put up modest tents or hang up a hammock, and that is how they live. We would visit these camps to invite them to a free Bible lecture for a certain day and hour​—of course, it was always after working hours, at nightfall. This would give them time to come in from work, clean up a bit, and drink a few mates (yerba mate, the national drink of Argentina). The trip from the brother’s home where we stayed was another experience: we took a kerosine lantern for the night meeting and, at times in Indian file, passing barbed-wire fences that divide the land parcels​—rarely did any of us return unscathed from this adventure, our shirts and bodies indicated that we had passed by the barbed wire. But this was not the only obstacle. At this hour of the afternoon the snakes would come out and lazily stretch themselves along the road; to make the mistake of stepping on one could be fatal. Our arrival at the place of meeting was singular​—no ceremony here, just a few greetings, a few handshakes with those weather-and-work-worn hands, then look for a tree in which to hang the lantern. No speaker’s stand or platform or electric fan. Each one sat where he liked, on the ground or squatting, or on a box or resting against a tree. The error I once committed was to stand under the kerosine lantern in order to have better light: I was visited by hundreds of insects that were interested, not in me, but in the light. It was marvelous to observe that while we spoke those faces, tanned like leather by the sun and elements and reflecting untold fatigue, could still muster a smile of happiness upon learning of the promised New Order of things. The talk ended, and after greeting everyone again, we would walk home under a starry sky, feeling joyful for having had a part in fulfilling Jesus’ command: ‘Go and make disciples.’
“The province of Misiones was also a challenge to the circuit servant. When my wife, Dora, and I visited there, few were the roads and fewer still the means of transportation. Frequently we traveled in the small but rapid buses that served this area; going downhill here and then chugging up the next hill to descend again in the next dip. We would be surprised by a sudden rainstorm​—a curtain of water that fell in torrents making visibility impossible and carrying the small bus from one side of the slippery road to the other—​only the experience of the driver prevented serious accidents. Suddenly the bus would come to a stop on the side of a ditch and the unmistakable order would be heard: ‘All the men can get out and push!’ You weren’t asked if you were dressed for the occasion. At once the passengers would take off their shoes, roll up their trouser legs and push with all their might, women, children and packages staying on board. Yes, the circuit servant, too, joined in pushing. Upon arrival at his destination he wasn’t very clean, but in this part of the country the red mud is very familiar; it is part of their life so they don’t worry about its spots. It was consoling to think that we ourselves are of the same stuff​—earth.”
Northern Misiones Province is an intricate, virgin jungle, but there is also human life here, and these people must be reached by the Kingdom message. Brother Del Pino tells of visiting this zone and the congregation on May 25: “The brothers here live in the country, and just a short distance away begins the jungle itself​—it is like a no-man’s-land. Runaways from political persecution and others who for their own reasons want to get away from things cross over from Paraguay and Brazil to hide here. It is just a matter of going into the jungle, cutting down a few trees, making a clearing and putting together a primitive shelter. A Paraguayan together with his wife and three children had gone there to live, and with the help of the brothers he was now a Kingdom publisher. My visit to the area had a special purpose: I was to give the baptism talk and then immerse this new publisher. Knowledge of the truth about God’s purposes did not come easily to this brother. Right from the first visit the brothers made on him, he made arrangements to attend the congregation meetings; this involved crossing the dark jungle, notwithstanding inclement weather, and facing the danger of wild animals and snakes.
“The circuit to the south presented other experiences and a different panorama. As in the North, the distances are great and the travel tiring. Often the rail trip of over twenty-eight hours from Buenos Aires to the end of the line, San Antonio del Oeste, is but the beginning. Then there is a wait in order to transfer to small buses for the long trip across the arid desert, across the Patagonia. But the sound of the Kingdom message is being heard across the Patagonia and the sheeplike ones are hearing the voice of the Fine Shepherd; in the city of Comodoro Rivadavia, where there were just five publishers a few years ago, there are now two strong congregations with over 150 publishers, and they have built a fine, spacious Kingdom Hall.”
In the year 1953, Argentine circuit servants covered a total of 33,261 kilometers, or some 20,672 miles. Such loving attention and personal sacrifice on the part of the circuit servants and their wives was greatly appreciated by the brothers and did much to unite the efforts being made and to stimulate the expansion. For the brothers living in faraway congregations and isolated groups, the circuit-servant visit every four months reassured them of the Society’s interest in them and the work that they were doing and kept the publishers up-to-date on how most effectively to preach the Kingdom good news.
CONGREGATIONS TAKE FORM
In the far northwest province of Salta, Brother Argyrós had passed through in the late 1930’s and the Córdoba bus group witnessed there again in the 1940’s. Brother Eisenhower visited Salta as circuit servant in 1950. The first local resident, Sister Louisa Anachurí, was baptized in 1955. By 1957 over twenty persons were attending the meetings.
Some 330 kilometers south of Salta, at the foot of verdant hills lush with vegetation and surrounded by sugarcane fields, lies Tucumán. Literature had been distributed in the area by Brother Argyrós and by the Córdoba group headed by Brother Menazzi. In 1947 Sister Lunkenheimer, with her two sons, Hatto and Ortwin, came to Tucumán from La Plata, Buenos Aires. A study was started in the home of María Ester Aldazabal and her mother, and these two were the first local residents to be baptized. Real organization of the Tucumán congregation got under way with the arrival of Brother and Sister Reindl in 1954. At this time there were just eight publishers. Brother Reindl especially remembers two of them: “A German couple, the Kaselowskis, had come to live near a married son, not a Witness, in Tucumán. They were the parents of a young lad who had maintained his integrity unto death under the Hitler regime, and I had the pleasure of reading the letter that he sent to his parents before being killed, in which he told them that when they received the letter he would be dead, but that they should not grieve, for ‘Mama and Dad, we will be together again!’ Despite their not speaking much Spanish, this faithful couple did witness and they distributed much literature while they lived in the area.” The first circuit assembly was held in Tucumán in 1957; some seventy persons attended from all of the northwest provinces. Today just one of the two Tucumán units has that many publishers.
Leaving the greenery of Tucumán behind, the road continues south through the arid desert region that characterizes Santiago del Estero. Here, too, the preaching work by Brother Argyrós and by Brother Menazzi and his group had sown the seed. But in 1954, with the assigning of Brother Fernando Fanin and his wife as special pioneers in Santiago del Estero, real organization got under way. Brother Fanin describes what they found, as well as his impressions: “There was a small group that met with a brother (Demetrio Cevilán) who had associated with the brothers in Rosario, Santa Fe. In all, we were some five or six who met together. Besides meeting very hospitable people, we encountered extremely intense heat in the summer. My wife and I would preach to the people seated in the doorways of their homes as early as 7 a.m., while other members of the family were still sleeping in the patio, their mattresses being placed directly on the floor. At 10 a.m. we would go home to fix lunch. After a long siesta we would start our afternoon activity after 4 p.m., staying out until 9 or 10 p.m. The main problem to overcome in this territory was not the placing of literature nor finding interested persons who wished to study. The problem was getting the interested persons to abandon their religious traditions, mixed with folkloric customs and ritual, as well as their immoral practices, and progress to maturity.”
Zealous publishers and pioneers continued their preaching activity in remote and inaccessible parts of the country. One such publisher was Rosendo Ojeda, who first heard of the message of the Kingdom in 1951 when Brother Eisenhower visited their home. He tells us about his witnessing in the 1950’s: “Imagine that you are along with me on a trip I had to take on many occasions. We are in General San Martín, Chaco, formerly called El Zapallar, and we have to go by bicycle to Kilometro 213, in the province of Formosa​—a distance of some sixty kilometers. Prepare yourself to do some of these kilometers on foot, and remember that during most of the trip we won’t meet up with vehicles of any kind, not even the horse-drawn ones, since some of the zones are flooded to a level above the posts at the side of the road. This is due to continual rains and the overflowing of the Río Colorado. There are some places where you can continue only by walking with water up to your armpits. Upon arriving at these places, we will first cross with our bicycles, carrying them above our heads. After depositing them in a dry spot, we will return to get the boxes of literature and our clothes, inasmuch as we take along supplies for one week. It is true that under these circumstances the body wears out physically, and sometimes you don’t feel like going on. But no one can deny that deep within you, in your mind and in your heart, there is a strange, but wonderful, feeling of happiness and a refreshing joy. And where does this feeling come from? From the gluelike mud that sticks to you so that you can hardly walk? From the scorching heat that at 40 degrees Centigrade burns you from above? Or, could it be from the majestic scene that surrounds you​—the birds and ducks that pass in droves, the giant quebracho and carob trees that watch over us from the side of the road? It is true that all of these cause us to think on and appreciate the handiwork of Jehovah, as Paul says in Romans 1:20. But, above all, we appreciate the dynamic energy with which our Creator impels and moves His servants.
“Up until now we have walked some ten hours under these conditions. Look! There in the distance can be seen the first houses of the town. Now the sun is slipping below the horizon, leaving an even more beautiful picture before our eyes. But we’re a little tired, aren’t we? Don’t worry, we’re coming to the house of an interested person, Señor Alejandro Sozoñiuk. What now? Shall we rest? No, not yet! There is just time to bathe and eat a bite, for, remember, we have a meeting until 11 p.m. This same night a newly interested person exclaims: ‘I just can’t believe it! That someone would come all the way from General San Martín to conduct a meeting!’ This same person we now know as Brother Carballo; today he, too, understands why one of Jehovah’s witnesses will go anywhere if it is for the purpose of feeding the ‘sheep.’
“This trip and many others were repeated once a month during a period of five years. But the question comes up: Was it in vain? The answer: an emphatic NO! Today, after some fifteen years, there is a flourishing congregation with twenty-six happy praisers of Jehovah. If you’d like to visit these brothers, you no longer have to go with water up to your armpits; there are now paved roads and you can make the trip by car in one hour. The congregation overseer is Brother Sozoñiuk.”
“It was moving to see how the brothers put forth efforts to get to the meetings,” writes a circuit servant. “They walked across the islands that were more often than not flooded with water up to the knees or higher, and where the high leafy treetops joined to cut out most of the light of day, and leaving total darkness at night. Upon arrival at the place of meeting, the brothers would change their wet clothes for some dry ones that they brought tied in bundles and carried high above the water. When the meeting ended they would change back into their wet clothes for the return walk of several kilometers to their homes. It was most encouraging to see the newly interested ones doing the same, coming along with the publishers to the meetings. In time the congregation obtained a launch and a brother began around 1 p.m. to travel and pick up the brothers on the different islands and bring them to the meeting that was held at 4 p.m. When the meeting ended, the brothers were returned to their homes; the brother finished his transportation service around 11 or 12 p.m.”
Witnessing in the islands was first done by a Hungarian brother, Alejandro Beckfy; later he was joined by Carlos Ortner and the José Schemmel family. The Schemmels’ son, Nicolás José, entered the pioneer ranks, and later served as a circuit and district servant; following the ten-month course in Gilead, Brother Schemmel and his wife, the former Mary Seegelken, were called to serve at the branch office in Buenos Aires.
Mention of the islands in the Delta area of the Paraná River brings to mind the two occasions in which relief supplies​—foodstuffs, clothing, money, and so forth—​were sent to our brothers who were flood victims in this zone and in parts of Chaco, Formosa and Corrientes. So bountiful was the demonstration of love on the part of the brothers in the Buenos Aires, Rosario and Córdoba congregations that the literature depot at the branch was bulging with donated items, and the flood victims informed the Society please not to send any more​—their needs had been more than cared for! One of these occasions was in April and May of 1959 when thousands of kilos of food and clothing were contributed. To just one place 1,260 kilos of goods were sent. The comments on the part of the brothers receiving this help were, ‘What unity!’ ‘What love within the New Order society!’
Brother Ojeda recalls still another occasion when relief was received: “In 1965 the town of General San Martín had a hard experience. It was hit by a violent tornado that toppled many well-constructed houses, leaving a path of destruction some 200 meters wide crossing the city diagonally. The Catholic church suffered considerable damage, so much so that the patron saint of the city, Saint Anthony, was left in the open air. This caused many Catholics to ask: ‘If this temple is of God, why did he permit this to happen?’ Our Kingdom Hall was also destroyed, since it was located in the path of the tornado. But since we know that Jehovah does not dwell in temples constructed by human hands, the true worship of Jehovah continued on just as it did before the tornado. Soon we received help from our brothers elsewhere and a new hall was built.”
MISSIONARIES IN BUENOS AIRES
From the arrival of the first six foreign missionaries in 1948, the following years saw a small flow of Gilead graduates into the country; some of these were full-time ministers from Argentina, while others came from other lands. At first their work was concentrated in Buenos Aires, where the first missionary home was established; later, a missionary home was formed in Rosario.
Mary Seegelken, back from Gilead and assigned to one of the congregations in Buenos Aires, tells one of her outstanding experiences: “I revived a study with a young woman whom Viola Eisenhower had called on. Since Sara Bujdud’s family was opposed, I would go to the factory where she worked, and together we would go to the plaza for our study. As she progressed in knowledge, she changed jobs so as to have more time for study and for preaching. Although she was of age, she was not free to do so as she pleased​—such is the strictness in many Arab families. Sara didn’t tell the family when she changed jobs; she worked half a day, and the other part of the day she was free to devote time to the service. For many months I would take along an extra portfolio to our meeting place and then take it back to the missionary home that evening. In order for her to attend meetings, I sometimes had to buy tickets to the movies, and when I went to get Sara I would show the tickets to her mother. We would attend the meeting, and then go to the movies! In this way Sara had time to become strong in the faith. Then one day she left home as a special pioneer. Later she told me that the family had cried as though she had died, so serious did they esteem the change from the Moslem religion to the true Christian faith. Sara has been a special pioneer now for some fourteen years; back in 1957 she and her partner had the privilege of working in La Rioja, where they helped to organize a congregation.”
In 1954, Sophie Soviak, from the second class of Gilead, and Edith Morgan from the fourth class, arrived in Buenos Aires, together with Brother and Sister Eduardo Adamson and their little boy, Eduardito. The Adamsons had just completed the Gilead course and were returning to their native Argentina. Sisters Soviak and Morgan give us their impressions of their new assignment: “As we walked into the terminal building we sort of felt at home; the atmosphere was cold and silent, and the walls were covered with pictures of President Perón and his wife, Eva. We had been working for several years in the Dominican Republic under the dictatorship of Trujillo, so now we realized that we had just exchanged one police state for another. But since we were accustomed to working under proscription, we could lift our heads high and face whatever came our way.”
These two missionaries were assigned to work with a congregation in the heart of the city, and they lived in a small apartment in the same area. Soon each one was assigned to handle one of those small service groups that functioned like a little congregation. Sister Morgan fondly recalls her work with the group: “There were several elderly Spanish sisters who were always waiting on the corner to preach from door to door. One had very poor eyesight, but she managed to see the house number and write it down when she made a placement. Another had bad legs and couldn’t climb the stairs, but with the help of the younger ones, we got the territory worked and found the worthy ones. I remember one very hot summer afternoon. When the hour came for our group to meet, I thought to myself, surely no one will come. But I went by the corner just to make sure. There were the three little elderly sisters waiting for me to come. How encouraging it was to be with them and see their zeal!”
The sisters tell us “it was interesting working in Buenos Aires among people of many different nationalities, and of a well-educated class.” One problem was getting the permission of the janitor or porter of the large apartment buildings. Sometimes entry was denied, so it was a matter of waiting until he wasn’t around in order to work the building. Sister Soviak tells us that it was on one such occasion, when the janitor wasn’t in, that she found a woman who showed some interest. “On the return call, the janitor saw me enter the building, so he followed me up in the service elevator. The woman I called on realized that if she didn’t invite me in I would be put out of the building, so she invited me in, to her blessing. In due time she and her husband and two daughters became dedicated Witnesses.”
There were many buildings without elevators, and there one’s love was tested. How many times should one call back to find the person in, especially if the placement is up several flights? Well does Sister Soviak remember one such call: “I lost count of the times I went back on a magazine placement. ‘I travel a lot, you may not find me home,’ she had warned me. One day I did find her, with suitcase in hand just as she returned from a trip. I placed a study book with her. She told me she was a Catholic and had uncles who were bishops. After about ten more visits, I found her again. She not only had read the book, but kept telling me all the wonderful things she had learned​—so I realized that all of my patience and stair climbing was not in vain. She said she would not be traveling anymore so I arranged for a study. At the appointed time I eagerly climbed the stairs, only to find that no one was there. I tried calling her by phone, with no success. Something must have happened, I thought, so I tried to phone her again one morning very early. This time a tired voice answered; she had been taking care of her mother in the hospital and had come home to bathe and change her clothes. She said she had prayed that I would not lose patience but would come back. After her mother’s death, we had some wonderful studies together and in a short time Elena Rubio became a zealous dedicated praiser of Jehovah and very diligent in making return visits​—a lesson learned from her own experience.”
SOCIETY’S FILMS STIR INTEREST
Another outstanding feature that had much to do with the advancement of the work in Argentina was the showing of the Society’s film “The New World Society in Action” and two later films. Brother Eisenhower and Brother Adamson commented several times that in Jehovah’s organization one learns to do many things. So when the film was brought into the country in 1954, a projector was purchased and Brothers Adamson and Eisenhower would show the film around Buenos Aires every free night of the week. The time came when the film was turned over to the district servant and he would show it at his assemblies and the congregations he visited on his route. Brother Del Pino tells a very interesting experience had when working with the film:
“I went by train from the city of Roque Saenz Peña, Chaco, to visit a small town where there were several publishers and some interested persons; the name of the place was Pampa del Infierno (Plain of Hell), and the time I had before arriving really adorned the name with more significance. The train hardly left when a tremendous rainstorm hit with deafening thunder. The prospects were not very encouraging: I had never been there before and there wasn’t a congregation. Often I had asked myself what I would do if confronted by such circumstances. God had the answer. I went into the train’s diner, and a German gentleman sat down at my table. As is understandable, we conversed, and I learned that this man was the administrator of a plant that manufactures the famous leather-tanning product, Quebracho Extract. The small settlement I was to visit was mainly dependent upon this factory. When I told him the purpose of my visit and the name of the person who was supposed to be waiting for me at the train station upon my arrival at 3 a.m., I was told that this person would most likely not be there to meet me for he was an employee in the factory and would be working the night shift. Upon noting my preoccupation, he assured me that I had nothing to worry about and that he would put me up in the guest room of the establishment, the same room occupied by the governor when visiting this area. So despite the storm and the fact that no one came to meet me at that hour, I was most comfortably put up in a magnificent room and an employee came to ask if I wished something to drink. The next day the administrator informed the brother of my arrival, and offered the spacious hall of the factory for the film showing. He also ordered the powerhouse to maintain a steady current for better showing. A local publicity agency that had loudspeakers strategically located all over town made the announcement regarding the film showing and that it would be free. Once again Jesus’ words were fulfilled: ‘What is impossible for men is possible for God.’”
Brother Eldon Deane, who at a later date served in the district work, tells of his joy in showing one of the Society’s films in Almafuerte, Misiones: “Our work with the brothers in the service that day meant walking all day through the scenic rolling hills, going through banana plantations​—and in the whole day we preached in just eight homes because the distances between homes were so great and because in each visit the humble people would listen to us for twenty or thirty minutes. I thought: Who will come to see the picture tonight? Surely just a handful. But that night the country folk came in from all directions in every kind of carriage imaginable. There were some 160 persons present​—whereas the local congregation only had some fifteen to twenty publishers! During the film showing they made so much noise that I thought: ‘My word! What an unruly group I have here!’ But I soon realized that many in the audience had never seen a ship, tall buildings or huge airplanes. The movies made an excellent impression on their minds, showing them how the work is done and to what extent.”
TROUBLOUS TIMES
Meantime, political unrest was gaining momentum, conditions were very uncertain, and rumors of a revolution were going about. In September 1955, the Perón government fell. Jehovah’s servants as a group used practical wisdom and the spirit of a sound mind, not exposing themselves unnecessarily to danger from bombardings, street fighting, and so forth. And, as law-abiding Christians, they respected the impositions of curfews, blackouts, and other restrictions. Sister Helen Nichols was living in the missionary home out of the downtown area; she relates that when the trouble started earlier in the year with the intent to overthrow the regime, “we could not be out at night to make back-calls nor to conduct book studies. From the roof we could hear the fighting just at the edge of the city, some five or ten blocks away. During the day, we went out to witness and when I spotted a policeman on the street I would walk up to him and tell him why our group of five or six was going from door to door. With that he would know that we had nothing to do with the revolution, and so we were not bothered.
“Helen Wilson and I had all our documents in order for travel to the Dallas, Texas, assembly that year. Then came the first attempted revolution, and before time to travel we had to obtain new Good Conduct Certificates from the Federal Police to prove that we were in no way connected with the uprising. We attended the assembly and were back in our missionary assignment before the successful revolution in September 1955 brought a change of government.”
Brother Ciruelos Martín, who had become a Witness in 1941, was about the only one among us injured due to the revolution. He was the caretaker of a large apartment house in Buenos Aires, and twice he was hit by shrapnel when bombs hit on the street. He tells us: “I was taken to the German Hospital and remained unconscious for two days. Here my wife had to put up a strong fight against blood transfusion​—this despite other members of the family who insisted and offered to donate blood.”
With the change in government, the big question in the minds of the brothers was, “Can we have assemblies and meet together in Kingdom Halls?” How the brothers looked forward to that time! “In 1956 it was decided that we would again try to hold our circuit assemblies,” recalls Brother Eisenhower. “The first assembly was held in La Plata, Buenos Aires Province; the most outstanding feature of the assembly was the singing of a Kingdom song all together​—the song was ‘Be Glad You Nations with His People,’ and many of the brothers could not finish singing the song due to the emotion they felt. The assembly progressed very well, finishing with complete success. This was a stimulus for us to organize assemblies in other parts of the country, which we did.
“Toward the end of the same year, Brother Milton Henschel visited us from the President’s office and Brother Grant Miller, from Uruguay, served Argentina again as zone servant. A larger, national assembly was organized in La Sociedad Rural (The Rural Society) in the center of Buenos Aires. This was one of our biggest assemblies, with over 5,000 persons attending.” The assembly started out fine the first day, the second and third days going along very nicely too. On Sunday morning, when Brothers Eisenhower and Adamson arrived at the assembly site, they found the gates closed and police guarding the place. This was due to the Catholic priest who had his church directly in front; he had influenced the police department to take action.
Brother Eisenhower continues the account: “The only thing that could be done was to go to the police department and see if they would open the assembly grounds so that we could finish our assembly. It so happens that at that time an official in the central police department had been contacted by the Witnesses, and he was very kind and considerate. He had heard about the work of Jehovah’s witnesses in other sections of the country. He asked if we had anything in writing to show that we had permission to hold the meeting. We told him, ‘Yes, we do; the municipal permit.’ So when he talked to his superiors, he told them that orders were to be given allowing the assembly to continue, but that the police should stay on the premises and listen to the program. The talks that were given at that time were on the subject of Marriage, so the police stayed a short time and then reported back to headquarters; from there they were sent to their local precinct stations and the assembly was concluded without any further interference.”
BRANCH EXPANSION
The year 1956 was a year for expansion at the branch office, too, as we saw the need to do our own printing of the Kingdom Ministry and service forms for the country. Permission was obtained from the Society to buy a small vertical printing press and we started printing​—but not without difficulty. Brother Eisenhower tells us that he and Brother Adamson would work in the branch office during the day, and at night they would work in the printery till two or three o’clock in the morning because the brother who was assigned to the press found it impossible to keep up with the work. Of course, the printing was done with much joy, even though both Brother Eisenhower and Brother Adamson were just learning the printing work.
In March 1958, Brother Eldon Deane arrived in Argentina with three other graduates from Gilead. Brother Albert Schroeder, Gilead’s registrar, had approached Brother Deane before graduation stating that Brother Knorr wanted to know if he would accept an assignment in the printery in the Buenos Aires branch. Brother Deane tells us that this was quite a shock to him, for he had signed up for Gilead with missionary service in view, not “institutional” life. But he confesses now, “I have come to have a certain preference for Bethel life.” Brother Deane’s account of his work in the printery gives us a very human and vivid insight into what was involved: “The printery in Argentina had not been functioning too long when I arrived. I learned that one of the brothers who had been assigned to it just up and walked out one day, never to return! The district servant, German Seegelken, had been called in early that year, but he was anxious to get back to the district.
“I arrived at that juncture, having had a prolonged training of two whole weeks in the Brooklyn job printery. The press was new; while we kept her shining, she kept us undelighted. In time we learned that much of the trouble had to do with us​—we just didn’t know fully how to operate her. When we printed the Kingdom Ministry, the lines between the columns would raise up, either cutting the paper or printing too black. All of that was finally overcome with more experience​—but not without first having wished that the Americans or Russians had used her metals for making the apparatus that they sent to outer space. Brother Seegelken had told me that sometimes he had gone to bed with tears in his eyes because of having to fight with the press all day. That seemed hard for me to believe, but not for long. More than once I lay in bed with wet eyes because of that.
“Then there was ‘Big Bertha.’ That was the paper-cutting guillotine we had​—the first one. If my memory isn’t tricking me, she carried a manufacturing date of some time in the first part of this century. She reminded me of the other type of guillotines​—the one where heads were lopped off—​and she was French-made! It was a large machine, hand-powered. It had a flywheel crank a yard or more in diameter, and when we would cut a measure of paper of 500 sheets, we would wind up that wheel with all our might in order to make it through the stack of paper​—or almost through it. Was it ever hard to keep cutting the paper square! A day whirling that huge flywheel made you sleep deeply at night​—that is, when it didn’t give you nightmares. Because of the change in operators and due to the lack of experience, a backlog of work had accumulated in the printery. With time we started getting coordinated in our work, thinking that sooner or later we would get caught up. But it is hard to stay up-to-date with the work at Bethel, what with new assignments, the increase in the work, and so forth. This makes for a very busy life, and it also makes it extremely difficult to get bored.
“Back in 1958 we were printing some 5,000 Kingdom Ministry. That seemed like a huge pile then, but now the number is many times that: 25,000 Kingdom Ministry for Argentina, and 20,000 for Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay. In addition, Argentina is printing service forms and letters, and so forth, for the four above-mentioned countries. ‘Big Bertha’ is no longer in Bethel​—she has been retired. A modern guillotine takes her place. The small vertical press is still working faithfully and is used mostly for printing handbills. Alongside her, we have a larger, automatic, Italian-made flatbed press. We also have our own linotype.”
Closely related to the printery is the shipping department, where Brother Carlos Ott served from 1940 on. In the early years the work included the dispatch of literature to points within the country as well as the handling of subscriptions for Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay and Chile. “The branch had no vehicle at that time,” explains Brother Ott. “For many years I made my daily trips to the post-office substation with literature parcels and magazines with the help of a homemade tricycle. Even after the branch bought a motor vehicle, I continued to use my tricycle right up until 1960, when, due to a hernia operation, I was forced to give it up.” Brother Ott is now in his eighties, but at diverse hours of the day and night you will find him reading his Bible in German or in Spanish. His mind has not dulled in regard to the light of understanding regarding the Bible; he keeps up-to-date, as his regular comments in the Bethel morning worship and weekly Watchtower study, and in the congregation meetings indicate​—certainly a wonderful example for the younger members of the Bethel family and for all. God’s Word is truly part of him!
The year 1957 saw the arrival of six missionaries assigned to the western city of Mendoza: Gordon and Lillian Kammerud, Ruth Holien, Ethel Tischhauser and Mary Helmbrecht, all of whom had been serving as missionaries in Puerto Rico. They were joined a month later by a new missionary from Gilead School, Kathryn Hyams.
It might be mentioned that the Society initiated a new method for learning the language spoken in one’s assignment, and graduates of the twenty-ninth class of Gilead were the first to benefit from the course. True, Gilead had provided several hours of language study per week, “but,” says Sister Hyams, “the new method was really accelerated. We were to study the language eleven hours a day for the first month in our assignments, and five hours a day the second month, with the rest of the time each day devoted to door-to-door and other ministerial activity. I remember that when Brother Henschel explained the course to us before we left Gilead, he mentioned that with eleven hours of language study a day, we would be eating, sleeping and dreaming in the language of the country. I thought that he exaggerated a bit to make it humorous; but after a couple of weeks of studying Spanish with my instructor, Brother Kammerud, I was actually dreaming in Spanish. The trouble is, the Spanish in my dreams was always much superior to that of my waking hours.”
As in the case of the missionaries who came to Argentina in earlier years, these missionaries were assigned to work with and build up existing congregations. And what a beautiful assignment this group had! Just listen to one missionary’s description of it: “The tree-lined streets of Mendoza are so cool and refreshing and the city is spotlessly clean. Housewives take special pride in shining the glazed-tile sidewalks in front of their homes. Between the sidewalk and the curb there is a narrow canal​—a waterway that makes it possible to have trees in an area where rainfall is negligible. And people will scoop water from the canal and wet down the streets. Mendoza has the pulse of a modern, active city, with industrious and well-educated citizens. When people of this class dedicate themselves to Jehovah God, they show this same industriousness in the Christian ministry.”
The number of missionaries serving in Argentina being so few, when considered in relation to the vast size of the country, many publishers and circuit servants had never had contact with them. Brother Ernesto Ots, the circuit servant for the Mendoza area, was one. Never had he served a congregation with missionaries, so he didn’t know quite what to do. He concluded that since these had Gilead training plus years of experience in the service, they shouldn’t need the circuit servant’s meeting with the pioneers. Brother Kammerud assured him that the missionaries were not “super” pioneers, and that Brother Ots should conduct the pioneer meeting with them in the normal manner prescribed by the Society.
FIGHTING FOR LEGAL RECOGNITION
Expectation ran high as the calendar year 1957 drew to a close. In December another national assembly in Buenos Aires was scheduled and a contract had been signed for use of Les Ambassadeurs hall. Many were the delegates who arrived at the assembly site early in the day. Imagine their dismay when at noon they found the assembly hall closed by the police. Many brothers had traveled long distances and at great personal expense, but this experience only served to stimulate them to greater activity. They realized that even though conditions were more favorable for the work, never should they become overconfident nor take things for granted.
On this occasion four of our brothers were detained by the police, fined, and given a suspended sentence of one year. But, why? They were accused of holding an illegal meeting because they hadn’t obtained due police permission. But this was not true. The requested permission for our assembly had been filed on November 20, 1957. Since the closing of the assembly and the detention of the brothers was an open violation of the Argentine constitution’s provision for freedom of religion and assembling, the case was appealed to court. It was a real occasion of joy when on March 14, 1958, the judge gave his decision. The brothers were freed and exonerated, and eight articles of the Public Meetings Edict were pronounced illegal. This was the first victory for Jehovah’s people in the Argentine courts and it received ample publicity in many of the large daily newspapers.
In 1958 there was a change in government and it seemed that we might be able to gain greater liberty. With the authorization of Brother Knorr it was decided that a concentrated effort be put forth to get the needed legal recognition. A special letter was prepared giving a résumé of the activity of Jehovah’s witnesses as well as the formation of the Ministry of Cults and how our legal status was taken away in 1950 under resolution 351. A copy of this seven-page letter was sent to all the legislators, editors and deputies, as well as judges, in Argentina. As a result, some fine comments were received by the branch office and some of the representatives of the government expressed themselves as wanting to help. But there was always the Catholic Church in the background pulling strings.
The following year, it was determined that we appeal to the government in the form of a petition for religious freedom. Our brothers in Chile, Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay helped in this work, and, in all, some 322,636 signatures were obtained. When all the petitions were received, the sheets were put together in packages and Brother Adamson, Brother Eisenhower and Brother Guillermo Fernandez loaded these into the station wagon that the branch had at this time and these were delivered to the government house. Brother Eisenhower tells us: “At this time we had requested an audience with President Arturo Frondizi. This was refused and the petitions never received an official answer. We continued to be denied legal recognition as a religious organization.”
The next step was for brothers in all parts of the earth to write the Argentine government to decry the lack of freedom of worship and ask that religious liberty be conceded to Jehovah’s witnesses. The response of the brothers was marvelous. The Argentine brothers wrote more than 2,500 letters to government officials and congressmen, and a government official indicated that they had received more than 7,000 letters from all over the world.
Brother Eisenhower tells of visiting the secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cults on several occasions: “We requested that he consider our case since religious freedom is guaranteed by the Argentine constitution. On one of these occasions he took us to a room where there were several bookcases filled with these thousands of letters that had poured in from all over the world asking for freedom of religion for Jehovah’s witnesses in Argentina. The comments of this individual were that ‘it was impossible to open and read all of the letters, but he was really amazed that someone would write from as far away as the Fiji Islands regarding freedom of worship in Argentina.’ Although the government’s view remained negative, the answer being decree 416, in 1959, which upheld the former 1950 decree 351, a very fine witness was given to those in power in Argentina.”
MISSIONARIES MOVE TO FARTHER FIELDS
The year 1958 was notable also because of two other outstanding events that contributed to the advancement of the Kingdom work in Argentina, each in its own way. There was the international assembly in New York, to which ninety-four brothers and sisters from this land were privileged to go, and from which they returned loaded with spiritual refreshment to share with those who could not attend. Then there was the assignment of some of our missionaries, who had till now served in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area, to outlying towns and cities around the country. There they would be a great help in strengthening congregations and aiding the newer publishers to improve their ministry.
Of her first impressions in her new assignment in Villa María, Córdoba, Sophie Soviak writes: “In downtown Buenos Aires many didn’t even know who their neighbors were, but here everyone seemed to know everyone else’s business. They seemed suspicious of us and watched our every move. When people would see us coming, they would go inside the house and not answer the door. It took months to break down prejudice so that people would at least listen to us.” Sister Morgan adds: “Between the missionaries and the local publishers, we worked the territory rapidly. Since there wasn’t any urban transportation, Sophie and I bought a motorbike. That way we could go to our outlying territory and make our back-calls. We would go to the territory in the morning, chain the motorbike to a tree, then come back and ride it home at noon. It got quite windy every day, and sometimes by noon there was so much dust blowing that it was hard to use the Bible and present literature at the door. The people were quite indifferent to the message. Many had been staunch Perónists as well as Catholics. But after the Church used its influence to get Perón ousted, most people didn’t have much love for the Church. Many just went to church during Holy Week or to the procession of the Virgin. At times children would be sent to run ahead of us and warn all the housewives that we were coming. Sometimes we changed to another street, going back another day to the former street. Despite these conditions some seed was sown and some did take their stand for the truth.”
The missionaries assigned to Salta, Sisters Wilson and Hyams, arrived there after a trip of forty hours by train. The missionaries initiated their work in the heart of the downtown residential area and they encouraged the publishers to work the center of town too. “Of course,” relates one of the sisters, “we met some very tradition-bound persons. Religious tradition and social standing are inseparably linked in Salta. The old families who can trace their family name back to the time of the Spanish conquest take great pride in using several last names in order to impress upon one their genealogy, together with the boast that at least one member of the family is a priest or a nun.
“While we were working the high-society territory, we were living in the back room of an old office building where a sister was the caretaker. Our room had a thatched roof, plastered adobe walls, and a brick floor​—I think it had been there since Colonial days. We did our cooking on a one-burner kerosine wick, scrubbed ourselves in an enamel wash pan, and for all of our activities we usually had four eyes silently watching​—Sister Ahmed’s two children had an unending curiosity about what the two missionaries were doing, no matter what the hour of day or night. Finally we found a comfortable apartment.”
Helen Wilson fondly remembers working unassigned towns out from Salta: “Many times we would leave home before daybreak to catch a train to the little town where we were to work, and sometimes we would take our lunch and spend the whole day. Other times we would take a bus out to a little village, and when we finished working it, we would walk back to town, witnessing to the scattered families along the way. Trading for produce was something the local publishers had never done. How they laughed at first when the missionaries would turn up with fresh eggs tucked away in their book bags, or with a string shopping bag full of squash and other vegetables! Soon the publishers learned to trade too.”
Among the poorer class other traditions reign. Salta is the cradle of the misachico, a procession of poor folk who come from the hills carrying a statue of a virgin surrounded by flowers on a stretcher-like affair carried on the shoulders of two or four persons. Members of the procession will beat on a tambourine-type rawhide drum, fiddle a violin, play a quena (bamboo flute) and another instrument very similar to the alpenhorn, while the other peasants chant. As the little group moves slowly along, children and others come out to give an offering of a few coins to the “virgin.” Later the offerings are often “consumed” by being exchanged for wine.
Other processions are much more elaborate and under the auspices of the local churches. Each church has its patron saint, and, on the anniversary of such, special services are held in the form of a novena (nine days). On the final day the statue of the patron saint is taken out of the church, paraded around town with a long procession of worshipers before returning to its altar or niche in the church. On these occasions a well-known hymn to the “virgin” is sung; it includes these words: “. . . the heavens, the earth and Jehovah himself . . . adore you . . .” When witnessing in the northern provinces where mention of the name Jehovah sounds strange and new to many Catholic people, the publishers and missionaries often call attention to the fact that the name of the true God is used in this song.
From their arrival in Salta in September 1958 until their assignment to Tucumán some three years later, the missionaries rejoiced to see the congregation grow from twenty-six to seventy-one publishers. Salta now has two congregations, each with its own Kingdom Hall built by local brothers.
Being assigned to work in Tucumán, the fifth-largest city in Argentina, with a population of over 300,000, was a big change. This is the home of the Argentine sugar industry, and many refineries or mills are situated near the city. It is also the seat of one of the important national universities. The climate is hot and damp. Territory includes well-educated university professors and students, owners of industry and commercial houses, as well as poor mill workers and cane cutters. Tucumán is also famed as the “Garden of the Republic.”
Sister Wilson writes about this missionary assignment: “Despite Tucumán’s being a large city, the people are usually not in a hurry and will listen to the message. Studies are easy to get started. But there are problems: the general lack of formality and organization in the home and in their personal life, which makes it difficult for them to accept responsibility.” As in much of the North, although the Catholic religion is professed, many are mixed up with spiritistic practices. They believe that special favors can be obtained from the spirits of the dead, regardless of what kind of person one was before death. Fortune-telling and related practices flourish as rich and poor, educated and illiterate, seek to solve financial or family problems, or to assure success in an amorous adventure or a passing grade in a school examination. There is gambling in all of its forms, lottery, horse racing, cockfights, casino, raffles, playing the numbers; and it is closely linked with spiritism due to the superstitious beliefs connected with certain “lucky” numbers or playing “hunches.” Single persons living together without benefit of marriage, married men keeping one or more additional women, homosexuals, and many other evidences of a lack of Bible education are common.
Thus placing literature and starting Bible studies, helping the interested ones to separate themselves from false religion are only the beginning of a missionary’s service. Many unchristian practices so prevalent in this system of things must be left behind. But diligent effort in the ministry and in teaching Bible principles has produced increase. At present, Tucumán has two congregations, with a total of over 150 publishers.
Missionary activity has truly been a heavy contributor toward expansion of the Kingdom work in Argentina. As one district servant described it: “The Bible knowledge acquired through years of study, the special ministerial training received at Gilead, and years of working closely with Jehovah’s visible organization place the missionary in a unique position for helping the local publishers to improve the quality of their work, while giving them a broader view of Jehovah’s organization, and the need for absolute loyalty to it.”
A circuit servant found that the missionary home schedule and work program served as a model for the publishers and especially the pioneers, as they provide for better organization in the home and allow for fuller participation in Kingdom service. He also mentioned that the missionaries, in having left home and family, accepting an assignment in a strange land with a different language and customs, and then faithfully sticking to that assignment and making it their home, set a fine example for others contemplating pioneer or special pioneer service, or attending Gilead School with missionary service in view.
GIRDING FOR GREATER ACTIVITY
The upsurge and expansion of the work within the domain of the Argentine branch office received frequent help and stimulus from the visits of Brother Knorr and Brother Henschel, as we have already seen. In December of 1959 these two brothers again visited Argentina and two assemblies were held: one in Córdoba, the other in Buenos Aires. This visit aided the organization of the work within the country and also gave commencement to the building program at the Buenos Aires branch. Brother Knorr had prepared a temporary or tentative set of plans for a new branch headquarters that were later worked over to comply with the municipal building code. When these plans were finally authorized by the municipality of Buenos Aires and by Brother Knorr, work on the new building got started. This was in October of 1961. By October of the following year it was ready for occupancy.
When work started on the new branch, this meant that everything had to be moved into what were the storage and dispatch areas of the 1940 building; the house at Honduras 5646 had to be demolished. Brother Eisenhower describes the arrangement: “The offices were moved into one part of the storage area; another part was divided or partitioned off into bedrooms; at the same time the press was operating in another part. When one got up to prepare breakfast, no bell was needed to call the family; we were guided by the smell of the food that was being prepared in the rear of the same hall. We called our living quarters ‘Villa Cartón’ (Cardboard Villa) and it was truly an unforgettable experience! About the only problem that came up at that time was having to listen to the different tunes of snoring and sometimes one wasn’t able to sleep.
“How happy we were when the new building was finished! It meant much more space for the office, shipping, as well as living quarters for the family. And, once the building was completed, the Kingdom Ministry School was moved to the branch headquarters. It was a blessing to be able to have the congregation overseers with us and they, in turn, were able to assist us with the work at the branch.”
The Kingdom Ministry School for Argentina was initiated in the year 1961, and for the first year operated in one of the Kingdom Halls in the center of Buenos Aires. Housing for the brothers attending the month’s course was lovingly provided in many homes of the brothers. The students were assigned to work with different congregations in Buenos Aires, thus their companionship was shared by many. The initial class was made up of district and circuit servants as well as congregation servants with long years of service. From these first classes some future circuit servant assignments were made. Brother Rogelio Del Pino had been called in from the district work and, together with brothers from twelve other Latin-American countries, he had received a month of special training in Gilead, South Lansing, New York, to prepare him for the service of Kingdom Ministry School instructor. He also served in Uruguay in this capacity. Without a doubt, the school has served a most important role in training and qualifying servants within Jehovah’s organization.
A decade of work under proscription had passed; the 1960’s were already promising greater expansion of the Kingdom work in Argentina. The brothers had wondered how the ban would affect the work. Let the report for the service year of 1960 speak for itself: 205 congregations with a peak of 7,204 publishers, including 227 regular pioneers and 155 special pioneers, reported a total of 1,327,294 hours. They had placed 128,126 books and booklets, 1,116,751 magazines; 14,766 subscriptions had been obtained. Our brothers made 588,443 back-calls and conducted an average of 6,600 home Bible studies. The Memorial that year saw 13,937 persons in attendance; in addition, 5,443 public talks were delivered. Truly the ban had not hindered the expansion of the preaching activity in this land.
Apart from the introduction of the Kingdom Ministry School, additional special training and help was provided for Argentina commencing in 1960. That year Brother Eisenhower was appointed as zone servant for southern South America: Chile, Paraguay, Uruguay, Argentina and Brazil. In 1963 he served these branches and then had the privilege of attending the ten-month Gilead course. This added responsibility assigned to Brother Eisenhower has meant, in turn, the placing of more responsibility on the local brothers. Brother Eisenhower mentions that “this has proved to be most beneficial, because we now have well-trained brothers in the country who are qualified to look after the activity.
“In 1961 one of our Argentine brothers, Edgar Iribar, was invited to receive special training at Gilead. Upon his return he served for some time in the branch and in translating work. Then in 1962, two more Argentines, Brother Ortwin Lunkenheimer and Brother Nicolás Schemmel, also attended Gilead’s ten-month course.”
District assemblies continued to play a large part in improving the personnel of the preaching organization in this land. But, more and greater surprises were in store! In 1966 Brother Knorr made a lightning visit to the South American branches, including Argentina, to organize international assemblies for Latin America that would commence at the end of 1966 and run into the first weeks of 1967. During Brother Knorr’s short visit, Brother Eisenhower commented to him that he hoped he’d never have to do any more building. Brother Knorr’s remark was, “Why, you’ve just put up one building; we are building all the time!” Brother Eisenhower continues the story: “By the time Brother Knorr’s brief visit ended he had decided that we should add a new floor to our present branch building, thus giving us six more bedrooms, and bringing the total of bedrooms up to eighteen. The work got under way almost immediately, and by the end of 1966 our present branch building of four floors was completed, together with the addition of a room on the roof for the Kingdom Ministry School. This has proved to be very beneficial, not only for the brothers coming in for the school, but also for the increase of the branch family, which now numbers twenty-two.”
As the work grew and steady increases were evident, it is understandable that Brother Muñiz felt a great satisfaction. He lived to see not only these buildings, but also the passing of the 13,000 mark in publishers. As a way of expressing his joy and sharing it with the members of the Bethel family, it was his habit to give a special supper for the family each time another 1,000 peak was reached. The menu was planned and prepared by Brother Muñiz and always included special and costly delicacies. These were truly banquets, and Brother Muñiz paid for everything with his own money. At each of these special suppers there would be a small table set apart with fruit and other foods that would not be used or eaten as part of the meal; Brother Muñiz explained that this represented the abundance in Jehovah’s organization.
AT LAST, AN INTERNATIONAL ASSEMBLY!
Large cities in the United States and Europe have been the frequent scene of international conventions of Jehovah’s name-people. Many of our Argentine brothers have overcome the obstacle of great distance and high travel costs in order to be part of the happy congregated throngs at these unforgettable spiritual fiestas. But, how often the question was voiced by them and by the great numbers of brothers who stayed behind on such occasions: “Why doesn’t the Society program international gatherings in Latin America?” “When will the time come for brothers from other lands to visit us?”
What expressions of joy and excitement flowed from the lips of the Argentine brothers when they learned that at last their fond hope was to be realized! Buenos Aires would be the southernmost link in a chain of Latin-American assemblies scheduled for late 1966 and early 1967. Well over 400 brothers from other lands of the Americas and Europe made up the international delegation; some were routed by Santiago, Chile, others came directly from La Paz, Bolivia, while a few stopped in Asunción, Paraguay, before converging on Buenos Aires. Unforgettable were these days of Christian fellowship, the 11th through the 15th of January 1967!
Unforgettable, too, was the special privilege of having six of our “older brothers” visit us from the Society’s headquarters in Brooklyn: Brothers Knorr, Franz, Suiter, Henschel, Larson and Couch​—names that the great majority of the Argentine brothers had only read in the Yearbook.
The significance of having these brothers present with us was fittingly described by Sister Lira Berrueta, who has served as a missionary in Argentina since 1950. Sister Berrueta is a South American by birth, and at the special English-language program presented at the Buenos Aires assembly for the out-of-country delegates she commented to the audience: “At the missionary meeting in 1958 in New York, Brother Franz commented on the assembly talk based on Isaiah 8:18, and said: ‘Well, now you can go back to your assignments and tell the brothers you have seen the remnant. The remnant are for signs and wonders, as Isaiah’s sons were in their time.’ At that time I thought: ‘How I wish all our brothers back in South America could see the remnant and feel how we feel on this historic occasion!’
“Now this wish has become a reality at this marvelous assembly. When I was encouraging the publishers to attend this assembly, I referred to Brother Franz’ words and told them: ‘You must not miss this assembly, for when the New Order comes you, too, will be able to tell the new generations that you have seen the most representative part of the remnant!’ We are very grateful for this assembly, for the presence of all of you.”
A most outstanding feature of the English program was hearing from Brother Juan Muñiz, the one who, with Jehovah’s help, organized the preaching work in this and other South American countries some forty-three years ago. Quite appropriately, he was the first speaker introduced by the branch servant, Brother Charles Eisenhower. And, appropriately or not, Brother Muñiz lived up to his reputation of running overtime. Brother Eisenhower recalls Brother Muñiz’ words: “How can I say in fifteen minutes what I should say in three or four hours? How can I condense all I want to say? To talk for just fifteen minutes is not for me!”
Members of the Bethel family and others who knew him well appreciate the fine example set by Brother Muñiz, not only in teaching the Bible, but in being a lifelong student of God’s Word. For some years before his death, he attended the reception desk at the Buenos Aires branch. When other matters did not demand his attention, it was a most common sight to find him there behind the desk reading the Bible. How many times he had read it through we do not know. But one thing is sure: even in his advanced years he never failed to feed himself on bountiful daily portions of God’s truth. His firm faith in that Word is well illustrated by an incident that Brother Adamson recalls: “One morning in January of 1942 I read in the Buenos Aires Herald that J. F. Rutherford had died. It was a brief article, but it was a real jolt to us. What would happen? Again Brother Muñiz’ attitude was decidedly a help. ‘Brother Rutherford did not tell us to go out and preach, did he? That is instruction from Jehovah through His Word. So let us keep on doing what we were told to do and Jehovah will take care of the matters in his organization,’ was Brother Muñiz’ faith-inspiring comment.”
The program that Saturday morning, January 14, provided for groups of six or eight missionaries to occupy the platform at a time, each one telling something about the one theme “The Joys of Missionary Service.” In between these group presentations, each of the six special representatives from the Society’s headquarters spoke. Fittingly, the first missionary expressions were presented by three sisters, all graduates of the first class of Gilead. Their experiences were later commented upon when Brother Knorr addressed the gathering. He reminded the audience that these and other early missionaries had had the joy of being ‘mothers’ to the congregation servants, circuit servants, district servants and other Gilead graduates. Brother Knorr also laughed about the fact that the missionaries were so nervous because they had to talk in English.
If the missionaries felt warmed by the presence of the Society’s directors, how did the directors feel? One of them said: “You missionaries have given something to us and we feel encouraged and built up due to having had the privilege of being with you.” Another one of the directors, addressing himself to travelers who had come from other lands, said: “The most important part of your tour has not been visiting new and different lands, viewing majestic works of Jehovah’s creation, and seeing interesting historical landmarks. The most important part of the trip has been visiting the missionaries, listening to their experiences and seeing their joy in serving Jehovah for many years in these lands. We hope that you will go home and encourage your sons and daughters to aspire to missionary service, and that you will encourage the publishers back in your home congregations to arrange their affairs to go where the need is great in other lands.”
Gilead graduates will also long remember their special meeting and supper with Brother Knorr and some of the Society’s directors on that occasion. It was a clear, balmy summer night as the happy group of missionaries from all parts of Argentina, together with members of the Bethel family in Buenos Aires, assembled on the terrace of the Bethel home Friday night. After a delicious meal Brother Knorr was addressing the group. Up to this point the mood had been light. Then Brother Knorr looked at his watch; the hour indicated that it was past midnight; another day had come. The voice addressing us took on a serious tone, and there were moments when it was noticeable that Brother Knorr found it difficult to overcome his emotions and continue. It had been just twenty-five years before, on January 13, 1942, that he had been named President of the Society. He reviewed with us the keen desire he had always had, since his days as factory servant in Brooklyn, to see missionaries going out into all parts of the inhabited earth. Although he mentioned this to Brother Rutherford, he was told that there wasn’t enough time left for such a work. But, twenty-five years ago, when Brother Knorr became president, he presented the proposal of a missionary school to the board of directors, several of whom were present with us this night, and it met with their approval. The Watchtower School of Gilead was soon a reality. When graduates of that first class and other earlier classes were sent to their foreign assignments, Brother Knorr passed many worried and sleepless nights, prayerfully wondering how these dear brothers and sisters would fare. Now, twenty-five years later, it seemed most appropriate that Brother Knorr be with the missionaries. How well they had fared was evident: here in Argentina four of that first class of Gilead are still faithfully serving.
In addition to the main assembly at Buenos Aires, another assembly took place simultaneously in the interior city of Córdoba and the brothers from Brooklyn appeared on the program there also. Imagine the joy of all, native publisher and foreign visitor alike, upon learning that a total of 15,238 persons attended the two assemblies, some 11,000 in Buenos Aires alone! A total of 692 had symbolized their dedication. These figures take on greater significance when one realizes that just twenty years before, in 1947, there were just 679 publishers in all of Argentina​—not even equaling the number baptized at this assembly. This year, 1967, 13,317 had participated in field service.
An interest-packed schedule had been arranged for the visiting delegates, including tours to many of the historic sites of this metropolis where the Kingdom preaching was commenced in Argentina. Special arrangements had been made for the travelers to enjoy a typical asado in the country. Buses, with a missionary assigned to each bus as guide, picked up the brothers at their hotel for the pleasant ride to a countryside ranch-restaurant. The rustic atmosphere, plus the close-up view of the asado in preparation​—huge low grates over charcoal embers and covered with a good selection of chorizos and long strips of beef ribs, plus entire halves of beef pierced through with iron stakes, one end sunk in the earth, the other holding the meat at an angle over the coals—​gave the brothers the opportunity to “taste” Argentine camp life at its best. But this wasn’t all! As the noon meal ended, Argentine and Paraguayan folkloric groups of musicians and dancers in typical attire presented interesting exhibitions of their talents.
All too soon the visiting brothers traveled on to assemblies in Uruguay and Brazil, but not without leaving a lasting impression with their Argentine brothers of genuine interest and Christian love that knows no national boundaries. That those assemblies had, indeed, a favorable effect on our publishers is evident from the fact that the 1966-1967 service year proved to be the best yet in the history of the Kingdom work here.
MORE BRANCH EXPANSION
In December 1968 Brother and Sister Knorr made a two-day visit to Argentina during a South American trip. It was at this time that Brother Knorr and Brother Eisenhower considered the need for expansion in the Argentine branch, “so we looked around at adjoining properties to see if it would be possible to obtain something,” Brother Eisenhower relates. “After checking with the neighbors, we were able to buy a nice piece of land connecting with our present property to the rear and going through to the next street. This piece of land measures 9 meters by 51 (about 30 feet by 164 feet). The signing of the deeds on the new property was effected toward the end of 1969. At the beginning of 1970 plans were drawn up for the new building. These were approved by the municipality and also by Brother Knorr. This gave us 740 square meters of additional space; the ground floor for shipping, storage and also reception; the second floor for offices, and three bedrooms on the third floor.
“It was determined that construction would be done by the brothers wherever possible. We contacted the contractor who had erected our buildings on Honduras Street and he was willing to make the plans, present them to the municipal government and get the necessary building permits. This was done in October 1970, and demolition work on the buildings was begun at once. We are pleased to have had brothers working on the building during the week, some being paid by the Society as they had families to care for; others, including special pioneers, came in and contributed their help, staying at the Society’s branch. Special activity was arranged for the weekends when brothers from the congregations in and around Buenos Aires could contribute their labor in the construction work. Great was the enthusiasm on the part of the brothers. Sisters as well as brothers lent their help. It was outstanding to see the zeal of our brothers in their desire to see the expansion of the work continue here in Argentina.
“A joyful feature of this weekend activity was the noon meal. This would generally be an Argentine asado. We would all eat together (80, 90, or 100 or more) at the long plank tables put up for the occasion in the storage area of our building or upstairs in the new building under construction. Following the noon meal, for a short time a brother or sister who could play the guitar or some other instrument would provide the music while others in the group would frequently join in the singing. Thus the music, both the native variety and Kingdom songs, would provide relaxation for the brothers and lend enthusiasm to the occasion. One Sunday 114 brothers and sisters were present working on the building.”
As a general rule, work on buildings in Argentina drags out to such an extent that what is planned to be done in one year generally takes two years to complete. Brother Eisenhower assures us “this has not been the case with our building. We were organized in such a way that once the people who did the cement foundation work moved out, our brothers moved in and we started putting up the walls. In just six months we are pleased to see the new building completed. We moved in during August 1971. The painting as well as the electrical and plumbing work were all done. All this activity has meant weekend work for a number of the brothers of the Bethel family, but it has been done joyfully because we know what the new building will mean for the work in Argentina. A great part of the money for this new building has been contributed by the brothers, and others have made interest-free loans. We thank Jehovah for the way he has moved His people to give so willingly.”
The 1971 report bears out the need for the enlarged quarters in order to better serve the brothers in the field: a peak of 20,750 publishers reported, including 408 special pioneers and 1,019 regular pioneers; literature placed totaled 466,301, as well as 3,698,032 magazines and 29,865 new subscriptions; 2,253,005 back-calls were made and 21,177 Bible studies were conducted. Evidently much time was needed for all this activity, and our brothers reported 4,215,406 hours. The Memorial was attended by 45,337 persons, and 15,341 public lectures were given during the year.
In addition to the field activity, the branch servant reports: “Our printing presses are running all day long printing for Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay, Uruguay and Argentina. We will soon have to expand in the printery as well, adding a new press to our present printing equipment.”
Another very evident sign of Kingdom expansion here in Argentina is the construction of many fine Kingdom Halls. Frequently brothers have donated lots for such buildings, or a portion of a home has been given over for remodeling into a Kingdom Hall. In other instances interested persons have felt the desire to help the brothers have suitable places to meet.
SHARING OUR BLESSINGS WITH OTHERS
The organization of Jehovah’s people in Argentina has had the happy privilege, not only of receiving helpers in the form of devoted missionaries, but also of sharing the consequent prosperity with other branches. Back in the year 1963 in a zone servant visit to Chile made by Brother Eisenhower, it was appreciated that more qualified brothers were needed in that land, so recommendation was made to the Society’s headquarters that some of our Argentine brothers be transferred to Chile. This was approved and Brother Ernesto Ots and his wife went to Chile to serve in the circuit work. Later Brothers Pedro Lovato and Fernando Fanin, both Gilead graduates, and their wives were assigned to Chile. Also, in 1965, an Argentine Gilead graduate, Raúl Vazquez, and his wife were assigned to Spain as missionaries.
By 1970 it was appreciated that more help was needed in Paraguay, so the President’s office authorized the sending of ten special pioneers from Argentina to help our brothers there. These brothers are doing an excellent work in finding and helping the interested ones in that land, so the Paraguayan branch has asked that we send them six more special pioneers.
Another neighboring branch, Bolivia, requested ten special pioneers from Argentina; three are already working there and two more are on their way. So by the end of the year we will be able to complete the quota of special pioneers requested for Bolivia and Paraguay. Brother Eisenhower is pleased to say that “the Argentine brothers feel very happy over being able to go to other countries to help in the preaching work, helping the sincere ones to free themselves from Babylon the Great.”
One of the instruments that has contributed toward bringing many more persons into active association with Jehovah’s organization is the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. “We have received and shipped out of the branch 490,611 of these books,” Brother Eisenhower tells us, “and most of these have been placed in the hands of the people. This wonderful instrument, called by many ‘la bomba azul’ (‘the blue bomb’), has aided immeasurably in getting the good news of the Kingdom to the people. And through regular Bible studies conducted in this publication, genuine Bible truth has been sounded down into the hearts of thousands, and as a result they have come to love Jehovah with a desire to serve him.”
According to Brother Eisenhower, “another fine witness is being given by our brothers who are serving terms of three years in military prisons because of maintaining their neutral position in regard to involving themselves in the things of this world and military service. There are some thirty-five brothers currently serving out sentences and they rejoice that they have had the opportunity to give and be a testimony to the military officials.”
So as we review the work done over the past forty-seven years by our brothers and by the theocratic organization now in operation, there is no doubt that Jehovah has richly blessed the work of the hands of His faithful integrity-keeping servants. We would especially like to make mention of the many Gilead graduates who have served here​—both native Argentine brothers and sisters as well as others who have been assigned to work in Argentina. Many of these faithful ones are still busy in the full-time ministry here and in other countries. Others, due to poor health, or the full-time job of being parents and fulfilling other Bible obligations, have left. We feel like Paul when he tells of the faithful men of old in Hebrews, chapter 11, and ‘time fails us to tell about the activities of all who have served in Argentina.’
Looking at the map of Argentina, we can now appreciate in retrospect that what had seemed a staggering task and almost a formidable challenge to that small handful of dedicated servants in the early 1920’s is now a pulsating reality. Run your eyes again from north to south as you realize that scattered throughout all of the twenty-two provinces and the Federal Capital, from the far northern reaches to the southernmost tip of South America in the territory of Tierra del Fuego, are to be found 361 congregations and 110 isolated groups of Jehovah’s witnesses. Zealously working with these are over 400 special pioneers, not to mention the circuit and district servants. Again in this decade our pioneers are working the railroad lines in three provinces of the North: Salta, Formosa and Chaco. But this time it is completely different​—this time our brothers are not just going out to place literature; they are returning to conduct studies with interested ones and bring sheeplike ones into Jehovah’s congregation!
Yes, wherever one might go in Argentina today, Jehovah’s Christian witnesses are to be found spreading spiritual sustenance and joy as they actively follow Jesus’ command registered in Acts, chapter 1, verse 8: “. . . you will be witnesses of me . . . to the most distant part of the earth.”
[Map on page 49]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
ARGENTINA with PROVINCES IN RED and CITIES IN BLACK
BOLIVIA
PARAGUAY
JUJUY
SALTA
FORMOSA
CHACO
CATAMARCA
TUCUMÁN
SANTIAGO DEL ESTERO
Resistencia
MISIONES
LA RIOJA
CÓRDOBA
SANTA FE
CORRIENTES
BRAZIL
SAN JUAN
SAN LUIS
ENTRE RÍOS
Rosario
URUGUAY
Mendoza
CHILE
MENDOZA
LA PAMPA
BUENOS AIRES
Buenos Aires
La Plata
Bahía Blanca
Mar del Plata
NEUQUÉN
RÍO NEGRO
CHUBUT
Rawson
Atlantic Ocean
SANTA CRUZ
Río Gallegos
TIERRA DEL FUEGO
Ushuaia

