From Our Readers
Menopause  Thank you from the bottom of my heart for the series “A Better Understanding of Menopause.” (February 22, 1995) I am 43 years old, and you gave me satisfactory answers to my questions. Two women who work with me asked for copies, but I had to lend them my personal copy. Our congregation had run out of them!
M. H. S., Brazil
The articles opened my mind and heart to see what kind of a change my mother is going through. I hope I can continue to understand this change in her life and be more helpful.
A. K., United States
I am 47 years old, and until I received that issue of Awake!, I had no understanding of the subject, even after consulting doctors. You have helped me to understand that these changes are natural. I am ready now to cope with the problems.
E. M., Sierra Leone
I recently attended a three-​hour seminar on this subject. It was put on by the education departments of two major hospitals. The program was very informative, but I learned more in 30 minutes by reading Awake! than I learned in three hours at the seminar.
J. B., United States
Missing Articles?  I am an 11-​year-​old girl. I found out that you are no longer printing the “Young People Ask . . .” series. Why is that? I really enjoyed that section. Some of the questions applied to me, and I liked reading them! It was the first thing I looked for when we got the Awake! I’m sure that other kids feel the same way. Are you going to print that section in the future?
E. K., United States
“Young People Ask . . .” will continue to be published once a month. It will appear in the issue dated the 22nd of each month. Since the series began in 1982, over 300 articles have been published in this series. We encourage our young readers to look over some of these older articles. Be assured, though, of our continued interest in the problems of young ones.​—ED.
Inquisition  In your article “The Inquisition in Mexico​—How Did It Happen?” (October 8, 1994), you referred to “king of the Aztecs, Netzahualcóyotl.” However, Netzahualcóyotl was not a king of the Aztecs but king of the Chichimec.
E. R. C. L., Mexico
Netzahualcóyotl was indeed Chichimecan, not Aztec. Interestingly, though, some reference works, such as the “Nueva Enciclopedia Cultural IEPSA,” do refer to him as “king of the Aztecs.” As the book “Historia de México” explains, Netzahualcóyotl ruled “in alliance with the Aztecs,” who already dominated the Chichimecan people.​—ED.
“Prodigal” Youths  I can’t begin to express to you the spiritual uplift I received upon reading the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Straighten Out My Life?” (January 8, 1995) It gave me the courage to pray to Jehovah and ask his forgiveness for the sins I have committed in the past. Before reading this article, day and night my heart grieved over these sins. Many nights I would lie in bed and feel that suicide was the only answer. I now know that Jehovah’s principles are for our benefit, and I will learn from my past mistakes.
Q. B., United States
As a youth, I left Jehovah and his organization. Even though I have been back now for almost five years, I sometimes felt that Jehovah would never forgive me fully. I now know that I was wrong; the deep, nagging feeling of doubt inside has finally subsided.
R. D., Trinidad

