Do You Remember?
Have you enjoyed reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
□ What is the basis for a successful marriage?
The partners must show mutual love, respect, and loyalty, appreciating each other’s virtues and learning to overlook and forgive each other’s weaknesses.​—5/15, page 15.
□ In what respects did God’s laws given to Israel assist them in remaining holy?
Jehovah’s laws helped the Israelites to remain clean spiritually, morally, mentally, physically, and ceremonially, the latter in connection with their worship.​—6/1, page 11.
□ What is meant by the expression “mental hygiene”?
“Mental hygiene” means conscious effort on our part to be clean in mind by dwelling on things that are ‘true, righteous, and chaste’ and by ‘continuing to consider these things.’ (Philippians 4:8)​—6/1, page 16.
□ Why did Jesus say that his presence would be “as the lightning”? (Luke 17:24)
Jesus was here indicating that proof of his presence in Kingdom power would be seen over a wide area, enabling all who wish to observe it to be aware of the fact.​—6/15, page 8.
□ Why are Christian manners directly related to Christian love?
Christian manners​—the way we deal with others, our bearing, our deportment, and our habitual conduct—​are an indication of how much we care about other people. Our manners show the depth of our love for them. (John 13:35; 1 Corinthians 10:24; 13:4-7)​—6/15, page 14.
□ When does the marriage of Jesus and “his wife” of 144,000 faithful anointed followers take place? (Revelation 19:7, 8)
This marriage will take place following the battle of Armageddon and the abyssing of Satan. Then Jehovah will have vindicated his sovereignty by removing from the earth those who challenge his rulership and by eliminating the wicked influence of Satan and his demons.​—7/1, page 24.
□ How can the yoke of discipleship bring refreshment, as indicated in Jesus’ words at Matthew 11:29, 30?
Since Jesus is not unreasonable, it is refreshing to work along with him under the same yoke. He takes into consideration our limitations and weaknesses. And how refreshing it is to tell others that they can live forever in Paradise!​—7/15, page 20.
□ What is “the re-creation” that Jesus speaks about at Matthew 19:28?
Jesus showed here that there will be a “re-creation” of conditions on earth so that things will be as they were in the garden of Eden.​—8/1, page 9.

