R1020 : page 1 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., APRIL, 1888. 

NO. 8. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :-FIFTY CENTS A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., paper 
bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," four 
shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 



money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "-ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

TELL ANY, who do not get the TOWER because too poor, that 
it is their own fault. They should read the TERMS above. God 
has thus provided food, for all his children. 



DEAR FRIENDS :-The general work is great, and as at present 
situated, it is impossible to answer your welcome letters. Please 
accept our good wishes and the TOWERS and DAWN as your 
answers, just as when you pray to God you accept the answers 
already given you in the Bible. 



MANY inquiries come for our reason for regarding 1878 as the 
turning point from which it is henceforth, blessed for the dead 
who die in the Lord. (Rev. 14:13.) This will be made clear in 
DAWN VOL. II. How soon it will be ready we cannot yet say 
definitely. Please wait as patiently as possible. 



R1021 : page 1 



TILL HE COME. 



Because Paul, referring to the Lord's Supper, says that we do 
thus "show forth the Lord's death till he come," some regard that 
as a limitation. Consider, however, that in the Jewish age the 
typical lamb was slain and eaten every year, until our Lord, the 
true or antitypical lamb, came. But when John the Baptist 
introduced our Lord as present, and said "Behold the Lamb of 
God," the killing and eating of the typical lamb did not at once 
cease to be proper; for our Lord himself observed it up to the 
same night in which he was betrayed. The commemoration of 
the typical lamb only ceased to be proper, when the antitypical 
lamb was slain on Calvary. 

So now, our Lord, the true Lamb of God, gave us the bread and 
wine as emblems of his flesh and blood, given for us— for our 
passing over or sparing. And we are to commemorate his death 
with these emblems until he comes, and until the last member of 
his body shall have been passed over— into the fullness of 
salvation, with him and like him. Then the symbol shall cease, 



the antitype having fully come in our being thus passed over. 
Until this grand consummation of our hopes, it is proper for us 
to show it forth by commemorating his broken body and shed 
blood by which it shall be secured. 



R1020 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

A very precious season of communion of saints was the four 
days meeting held by the church at Allegheny, commencing 
Sunday, March 25th, and closing Wednesday night, March 29th. 
Though the weather was unfavorable the attendance was good, 
and it might be said that it was four days of continuous meeting, 
broken only by intermissions for rest and food. 

The number from abroad was about as usual, and though some 
of the faces were new we were already acquainted by letter. The 
greater number of these were from Ohio, West Virginia, 
Maryland, Virginia, New York, and of course Pennsylvania; 
while some came from far off Minnesota and Wisconsin. 

Our first meeting at half past ten o'clock Sunday morning was of 
a social character, and we need not tell you that the testimonies 
as to the Lord's dealings, and the preciousness of the truth, and 
its spread in different localities were warm, heart-cheering, 
stimulating and encouraging in the extreme. Our hearts burned 
within us, as for two and a half hours we communed together, 
and then adjourned almost from necessity, while as many more 
were yet unheard from, though the testimonies still continued in 
a less formal way during the hour for our noon lunch as well as 
during the intermissions of the days following. 

It was a ministerial conference in the truest sense; yet not 
composed of ministers of sectarianism, nor such as would be 
generally called ministers by men to-day, but ministers 
(servants) of Christ, in the Scriptural use of that word, all of 
them or with few exceptions. The report of each consisted 
mainly of a brief statement of his service of the Lord and his 
truth, and the blessing and strength he himself had enjoyed 
while endeavoring to dispense the words of life to others. One 
brother with tears in his eyes told how the truth filled his heart 
and overflowed in desire and effort to bless his neighbors, how 
he had been misunderstood by some, and misrepresented by 
others; of how he had gotten a brother of our Allegheny church 
to come up and preach eight public discourses in eight days, and 
how some had been blessed by this means and his distribution of 
Arp tracts and loaning of Dawns. Brother Adamson told of his 
field which at present is in central Ohio. He is doing a great 
work, putting Dawn into the hands of thousands, besides holding 
meetings with the interested and writing articles for secular 



journals to thus draw the attention of the masses to the truth and 
its beauty as compared with the errors and distortions so far 
from the "glad tidings," yet commonly dispensed under the 
name of "gospel." Among the many other testimonies, all of 
which were cheering, was that of Brother Wright, of Wisconsin, 
and Brother Page, of Minnesota. These two were insurance 
agents until a short time ago; now they are preachers of the glad 
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. Not that they 
have left the insurance business, but that now it is secondary to 
the preaching of the cross of Christ and the restitution, and 
kingdom which now is the first, the chief business of life: The 
insurance business stands related to their present work as tent- 
making did to Paul's ministry (Acts 18:3)— as a necessary means 
to the 

R1021 : page 1 

one grand work and end in view. And thus it is with all the 
consecrated when they come to see the privileges of the present 
high calling. With all such to whom as ambassadors of God this 
ministry of reconciliation has been committed, (2 Cor. 5:20) the 
service in the "Royal Priesthood" is superior to all else. 

Brother Wright who will be remembered as the defender of 
Episcopalian church views in the TOWER of last October 
related how a copy of Dawn loaned to him, had under God's 
blessing been instrumental in opening his eyes to see wonderful 
things in the Bible, and a beauty and fullness in God's character 
and plan, which lifted him out of the rut of churchly formalism, 
into heart fellowship and communion with the Heavenly Father 
and with our Lord who redeemed us. Long ago consecrated and 
earnestly desirous of doing the will of God, he had been misled 
by the low standard prevailing in the nominal churches. The 
traditions and customs of the churches had fettered and dwarfed 
him, but when the truth entered it proved his heart to have been 
warm, consecrated, "good ground" by the vigorous growth so 
soon attained. Though not one year has passed since DAWN 
was first loaned him, he has come to see the truth clearly for 
himself,— so clearly and strongly as to leave the Episcopal 
church and trust only in his membership with us and all the 
consecrated in THE CHURCH "whose names are written in 
heaven," and to outwardly symbolize, by immersion in water, 
his consecration long ago made, to be faithful even unto death in 
the service of God. 

In that short time, too, Bro. W. has sent to friends and 
acquaintances whom he trusted might have "an ear to hear" 
these glad tidings, nearly one hundred copies of DAWN, many 
of them accompanied by letters urging careful and prayerful 
readings. Some good fruit has already resulted among his 
insurance acquaintance: Brother Page who came over nine 
hundred miles to feast and commune being one of these. 



Bro. Page told us of joy, peace and renewed love toward our 
God within the last six months; how he had been an earnest 
consecrated child of God, but that as he began to use his God- 
given reason upon the plan presented by the churches, as the 
plan of God— to save a few and torment the great majority of his 
creatures to all eternity, he had become skeptical and worldly, 
though he still kept seeking after truth. He told us of how 
Spiritism, Swedenborgism, and other counterfeits, found him 
hungry and led him to study them, and that DAWN reached him 
just in time, as a helping hand stretched out by our great Head 
for his aid. Yet, when DAWN came to him through the mail 
(sent by our Lord through Bro. Wright), he glanced at it, and 
supposing it to be an "Adventist" publication, was about to put it 
into the waste basket, when another glance led him to take it 
home and read it. Bro. P.'s every word and tone witnessed to the 
fact that he had found the Lord again— found him more beautiful 
and lovable than he had ever before realized. Christ is reinstalled 
the Master of his heart, his tongue, his moments and his all. He, 
too, has been planted in the likeness of Christ's death-immersed 
in water in symbolization of his death with him. You will know 
of Brother Page's zeal for the Master and his honor, when we 
tell you that within the past six weeks we have sent him nearly 
one hundred copies of DAWN for loaning and mailing to his 
friends. We give these last two cases somewhat in detail, 
knowing how greatly you will appreciate their promptness and 
earnestness. Our prayers are with them and with all who are 
serving the truth and using whatever talents they possess. 

The afternoon discourse was upon Baptism, the substance of 
which may be presented in next month's TOWER: It was 
followed by the immersion of thirteen in water, in symbolization 
of their burial into Christ. -Rom. 6:3-5. 

The evening service was a precious season, as with simplicity 
we partook of the emblems of our Lord's broken body and shed 
blood, after considering their import as presented in the March 
TOWER. While rejoicing together and realizing that it was good 
to be there, the loved and scattered members of the one body of 
Christ were not forgotten, but were borne upon our hearts and 
lips before the throne of grace. 

The subsequent meetings were every one precious, and were 
devoted to the examination of various doctrines and topics as 
requested by those present. We trust that the sweet memories of 
those hours of communion, and those precious lessons and 
unfoldings of the word of truth learned at the Master's feet may 
comfort and cheer not only those present, but many others 
through them. 

A letter from Brother Tackabury came, just as the meeting was 
closing, telling us that he is sinking rapidly. The company 
unanimously desired that their love and sympathy be 
communicated to him. 



Letters since received from various quarters tell of a very 
general commemoration and of precious seasons. 

page 2 

A sister who has been loaning and selling DAWNS, hands us 
the following letter received by her lately:— 



Washington Co., Ohio. 

DEAR FRIEND:-You will remember me as one to whom, 
some months ago, you loaned Millennial Dawn Vol. I. After 
reading it once, I wrote to you, stating some difficulty in 
understanding some part, and that I wished to read it again. A 
friend also wanted to read it, so we concluded to buy it. I have 
read the book through a second time, and some parts of it many 
times over. I cannot tell you how I felt when reading "The Plan 
of the Ages" the first time. It was so new and startling, so 
different from what I had always believed the Bible taught, and 
yet so beautiful, it filled me with wonder and awe. And the more 
I read and studied the more beautiful it appeared. 

I have received several copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
and think they must contain the "meat in due season," they are 
so satisfying. It makes all other reading seem stale. I shall wait 
with impatience for Vol. H 

I would like to spend all my time selling "Millennial Dawn," if I 
had strength to do so, but I am not able. I have, however, made 
some effort, and have sold some. Hope I will be able to do more 
in future. Yours in spirit, MISS M. P. 

R1021 : page 2 



Washington, D.C. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-While out with Dawns I met 
and sold a copy to a young man, aged about eighteen years, 
whose father was very angry, and made some threats, that if I 
sold his boy a book I would be sorry for it, but as the book was 
delivered and paid for, I simply offered to refund the money if 
not satisfactory. The young man refused, saying he wanted the 
book. I left his store, thinking I would not care to ever enter it 
again, but after I had related to my wife what had transpired, we 
concluded the better plan would be to continue dealing with 
them as usual, unconcerned as though nothing had happened. 
Two weeks later the father apologized, saying that my actions 
surprised him, as he never expected me to come into his store 
again. But because I came back and spoke to him as though 
nothing unpleasant had ever occurred, he concluded to read the 
book, and did so, and was surprised to find it the grandest book 
he ever saw. He had decided to commit it to the flames, and had 
I followed my first inclination, he doubtless would have done 



so. He has since read the book and recommended it to others, 
and sold one for me, and last night ordered a cloth bound book, 
saying he would give the one he had to some poor person who 
was unable to purchase a copy. So please send me a copy of 
Dawn, cloth bound, at your earliest convenience. 

Yours in hope, C. A. H. 

page 2 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Please use this gold $5.00 for 
the Lord's poor in sending the TOWER to those too old and poor 
to pay for it, or in any way you see best. It has been treasured; 
but now I make it a small New Year's offering to the dear Lord, 
who has given me so much light and knowledge. Yours for the 
truth. 

A FRIEND. 



Bellmont, 111. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER:-We have reason to rejoice that our 
labor in the Lord has not been in vain. About two weeks ago a 
brother from Indiana, formerly of the Christian Church, stopped 
at my house to sell medicine, and on seeing the chart on the wall 
at my reading table, he said to wife, do you read what belongs to 
that chart? She answered, Yes, and understand it. He said he 
also was a reader of the TOWER. The tears of joy fell thick and 
fast. He enquired for me, and when we met I cannot describe my 
joy; he was the first one of this faith that we had met, and we 
had a feast of love for about one week. Send on the TOWER, 
also the balance of this five dollars in Millennial Dawn with 
some Arp Slips. 

The people are beginning to ask for this Bible teaching. Our 
hearts desire is to meet with you next March, to celebrate the 
Lord's Supper. If we cannot we will celebrate the Passover at 
home. 

Yours, 

W. M. Y. 



R1021 : page 2 



CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCE. 

"What is your experience, brother? Tell us what the Lord has 
done for you." These are expressions with which the majority of 
professing Christians are familiar; and the responses to such a 
call from the leader of a meeting are generally a narration of the 
feelings or sensations experienced; some very thrilling, and 
others exceedingly common place: in short- Christian 



Experience from a prayer-meeting stand-point has become 
largely a matter of sensation. A man or woman may have known 
the Holy Scriptures from a child and taken them as a guide, may 
have followed the Savior and lived soberly, righteously and 
godly in this world, and yet, if he or she cannot relate an 
"Experience" after the approved order, they are almost 
unchristianized by some. 

Do not misunderstand me. I would not belittle anything by 
which a believer has been brought into communion with his 
God, or any sensation that may be the legitimate outgrowth of 
such communion. 

I do believe, however, that this religion of sensation has been 
fostered and encouraged until it has reached an abnormal 
growth. Turning to the Word for light, we find that the term, in 
the sense in which 

R1022 : page 2 

it is now used, is unknown. The method in conversion as well as 
in practice has been completely revolutionized since the days of 
the Apostles. 

What is Experience? According to Webster it is "wisdom gained 
from practice;" and this definition is very appropriate for 
Christian as well as worldly Experience. In Rom. 5:3,4 we read, 
"We glory in tribulations also; knowing that tribulation worketh 
patience; and patience experience; and experience, hope. " 
Christian Experience is not merely sitting down quietly and 
letting the Spirit of God work in our hearts-it is eminently 
practical, and it is impossible to divorce experimental from 
practical Christianity. He who would relate an Experience of 
what the Lord has done for him must at the same time narrate 
what he has done for the Lord. It may do while we are nestlings 
to open our mouths with the incessant cry, Give! Give! but a 
time comes when we must put away childish things, and meet 
the stern realities of the new life. It is not sufficient to pray 
"Lord, what will thou have me to do?" unless, when the service 
is shown us we immediately perform the duty, and thus become 
doers of the word. 

Christian Experience is not the exaltation of feeling, or ecstacy 
that finds expression only when inspired by the ardent songs, 
prayers and exhortations of Christian fellowship; and he who is 
dependent upon such "means of grace" for his vitality, is but an 
infant in experience. 

Christian Experience is "putting off the old man with his deeds, 
and putting on the new man which is renewed in knowledge 
after the image of him that created him. " 

Christian Experience is growth- "To grow in grace and in the 
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ;" to be rooted 



and grounded in Love, and grow up in all things like unto Him 
who is our Head. 

Christian Experience is to build up a character, "adding to faith 
virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; 
and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to 
godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity." 

Christian Experience is to be laborers in the Lord's vineyard, 
workers together with God; and it is to be soldiers of the Cross 
armed cap-a-pie with the whole armor of God, following the 
Captain of our salvation. 

Christian Experience is visiting the widow and fatherless in their 
affliction, and keeping ourselves unspotted from the world. As 
an example of true Christian experience the reader is referred to 
the experience of Paul as recorded in 2 Cor. 1 1 and 12. 

It is in such schools as these that the Christians gain Experience; 
and this is the true Experience that worketh hope that maketh 
not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our 
hearts. -Word of Truth. 



R1022 : page 2 

ROMANISM AND THE SCHOOLS. 

The Christian Herald says:- 

"An attack on the Public School System is reported from the 
Northwest. The Roman Catholics are endeavoring to so curtail 
the efficiency and development of the public schools as to fill 
sectarian schools with the children for whom the public schools 
have no provision. The Evening Post mentions several 
movements of this character. At Barton, Wis., the Roman 
Catholics attended the annual meeting in force, and passed a 
resolution that no public school should be maintained for a year. 
At Melrose, Minn., the priests succeeded in getting the public 
school year shortened, thus giving the parents the option of 
letting the children remain idle or sending them to the Romanist 
schools. And in Stearns county, Minn., the Romanist catechism 
is openly taught in the schools in defiance of the law, while 
religious instruction is given by the priests either at the opening 
or closing of the schools." 

An English writer of some note, H. G. Guinness, writes thus:- 

"Fifty years ago there were not 500 Roman priests in Great 
Britain; now there are 2,600. Fifty years ago there were not 500 
chapels, now there are 1,575. Fifty years ago there were no 
monasteries at all in Great Britain; now there are 225. There 
were even then sixteen convents, but now there are over 400 of 
these barred and bolted and impenetrable prisons, in which 
15,000 English women are kept prisoners at the mercy of a 



celibate clergy, who have power unless their bequests are 
obeyed, to inflict on these hapless and helpless victims torture 
under the name of penance. Fifty years ago there were but two 
colleges in Great Britain for the training of Roman Catholic 
priests- i.e. of men bound by oath to act in England as the 
agents of a foreign power, the one great object of which is 
avowed to be the dismemberment of our empire and the ruin of 
our influence in the world; now there are twenty-nine such 
schools. And, strangest of all, England, which once abolished 
monasteries, and appropriated to national use the ill-gotten gains 
of Rome, is now actually endowing Romanism in her empire to 
the extent of over five million dollars per annum. " (The exact 
amount is L. 1,052,657.) 

The chief result of Home Rule is to be the extirpation of 
Protestantism in Ireland. Catholic Progress says: "The woes of 
Ireland are due to one single cause— the existence of 
Protestantism in Ireland. The remedy can only be found in the 
removal of that which causes the evil. Would that every 
Protestant meeting-house were swept from the land! Then would 
Ireland recover himself, and outrages be unknown. " 

That this attempt would be made is not to be questioned. 
Cardinal Manning insists that it is a sin, and even "insanity," to 
hold that men have an inalienable right to liberty of conscience 
and of worship, or to deny that Rome has the right to repress by 
force all religious observances save her own, or teach that 
Protestants in a Catholic country should be allowed the exercise 
of their religion. "Catholicism," says a Roman magazine, "is the 
most intolerant of creeds; it is intolerance itself. The impiety of 
religious liberty is only equaled by its absurdity. " 

A most important point to be borne in mind in consideration of 
this question is, that Romanism is not a religion merely, but a 
political system. We are of course bound to allow to Roman 
Catholics the liberty of conscience which we claim for 
ourselves; but we are not bound by any law, human or divine, to 
allow them the right of conspiring for the overthrow of our 
liberties, government, and empire. Adam Smith well says: "The 
constitution of the Church of Rome may be considered the most 
formidable combination that was ever formed against the 
authority and security of civil government, as well as against the 
liberty, reason, and happiness of mankind. " 



R1022 : page 2 



JEWISH AWAKENING IN SIBERIA. 

The awakening among God's ancient people, like the stirring of 
the dry bones in Ezekiel's valley of vision, cannot fail to 
command the attention of thoughtful Christians. It has been 



rather customary among some religious teachers, wherever they 
could find a curse in the Bible, to hand it over to the Jews, 
while, when they came across a blessing there, they would 
coolly appropriate it to the Gentiles. But the Lord usually has his 
own way, and fulfills his own word, and as his threatenings have 
been fulfilled, so no good thing which he has really promised 
will fail to be accomplished in due time. Hence, while we guard 
against one-sidedness and prejudice in all directions, we may 
watch with interest and hail with joy every token of blessing 
upon the long scattered and afflicted sons of Jacob, "of whom, 
as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all blessed for 
evermore. " 

The Presbyterian Witness says: "News comes from ice-bound 
Siberia of a gospel movement essentially the same as that of 
Rabinowitz. The leader is Jacob Scheinmann, a Polish Jew, who 
twenty years ago, through independent thought, came to the 
conclusion that the Messiah, the Son of David, was the true 
Savior. The strict Talmudic Jews got him transported to Siberia, 
where for fifteen years he labored, almost unheeded, to awaken 
faith in his fellow-exiles. Among the uncalled-for mail matter 
which he found at Tomsk, where he was engaged in business, 
was a pamphlet by Rabinowitz, with whom he at once 
communicated. He has been busy disseminating his views 
through pamphlets called 'The Voice of One Crying in the 
Wilderness.' Delitzsch's Hebrew translation of the New 
Testament is being eagerly read and studied by the Siberian 
Jews. It is said that fully 36,000 copies have been thus used."- 
Armory. 



R1022 : page 2 

"THE man whose honor cannot be trusted in a business 
transaction is an infidel, though he superintends a dozen 
evangelical Sunday-schools, presides at the noonday prayer- 
meetings, and is accounted the most polished pillar of the 
church. " 



R1027 : page 2 



A THOUGHT. 

To-day I seem to understand 
That pain and struggle, grief and care, 
Are chisels in an unseen Hand 
That round us into statues fair. 



-A. P. Miller. 



R1023 : page 3 



UNFINISHED MUSIC. 

I sat alone at the organ, 
At the close of a troubled day, 
When the sunset's crimson embers 
On the western altar lay. 

I was weary with vain endeavor, 
My heart was ill at ease, 
And I sought to soothe my sadness 
With the voice of the sweet toned keys. 

My hands were weak and trembling, 
My fingers all unskilled, 
To render the grand old anthem 
With which my soul was filled. 

Through the long day's cares and worries, 
I had dreamed of that glorious strain, 
And I longed to hear the organ 
Repeat it to me again. 

It fell from my untaught fingers 
Discordant and incomplete. 
I knew not how to express it, 
Or to make the discord sweet; 

So I toiled with patient labor 
Till the last bright gleams were gone, 
And the evening's purple shadows 
Were gathering one by one. 

Then a Master stood beside me, 
And touched the noisy keys, 
And lo ! the discord vanished 
And melted in perfect peace. 

I heard the great organ pealing 
My tune that I could not play, 
The strains of the glorious anthem 
That had filled my soul all day. 

Down through the dim cathedral 
The tide of music swept, 
And through the shadowy arches 
The lingering echoes crept; 

And I stood in the purple twilight 
And heard my tune again, 
Not my feeble, untaught rendering, 
But the Master's perfect strain. 

So I think, perchance, the Master, 
At the close of life's weary day, 
Will take from our trembling fingers 
The tune that we cannot play; 



He will hear through the jarring discord 
The strain, although half expressed; 
He will blend it in perfect music, 
And add to it all the rest. 



-M. E. Kinney. 



R1023 : page 3 



SHALL ACCOMPLISH 
THAT WHICH I PLEASE. 

"For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways 
my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the 
earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts 
than your thoughts. For as the rain cometh down, and the snow 
from heaven, and returneth not thither but watereth the earth, 
and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the 
sower and bread to the eater: so shall my word be that goeth 
forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it 
shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the 
thing whereto I sent it. For ye shall go out with joy and be led 
forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall break forth 
before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap 
their hands. Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and 
instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be 
to the Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign, that shall not be 
cut off. "-Isa. 55:9-13. 

It will be observed by reference to the preceding verses of this 
chapter that the world, and not the saints, are here addressed. 
Their ways and thoughts are not as God's ways and thoughts. 
But it is the privilege of the saints, the meek and fully 
consecrated children of God, who have laid aside their own 
ways and their own thoughts, to both know and walk in God's 
ways, and by thus knowing and coming into sympathy and 
harmony with him, and viewing all things from his standpoint, 
to thus think his thoughts. Thus it is written (Psa. 25:9) "The 
meek will he guide in judgment; and the meek will he teach his 
way. " 

Some accept this text as unquestionable proof of the Calvinistic, 
or rather fatalistic doctrine of unconditional election, claiming it 
to be a part of God's plan that the eternal destiny of each 
individual was unalterably fixed, long before any of them were 
brought into existence. Those who hold this opinion differ to 
some extent as to what that destiny may be; but this is no part of 
the question under consideration. 

Those who so confidently quote the above words— My word 
shall not return unto me void, but shall accomplish that which I 
please, etc., should very carefully study God's purpose and see 



what it is that God designs or pleases to accomplish by sending 
forth his word. Though the assertion is true of God's purpose or 
plan as a whole, the part of his purpose to which particular 
reference is made in this connection, is clearly shown by the 
following verses to be the great restitution— "For ye shall go out 
with joy and be led forth with peace, etc." No special reference 
is here made to his purpose for the church, since the world, and 
not the church, is here addressed through its type, the nation of 
Israel. As surely as the Lord hath spoken it, his word shall not 
return unto him void, but shall accomplish his purpose in 
sending it. God nowhere says that he sends his word to 
individuals with a determined purpose to accomplish their 
conversion to him; and that because he sent it for that purpose, 
the conversion of those individuals is sure to follow sooner or 
later. Nor does he say that he sent it to some other individuals 
with a determined purpose to accomplish their eternal ruin. Read 
the parable of the sower: The seed was sown abundantly, and for 
a particular purpose; but that which fell by the wayside and was 
quickly devoured by the fowls, did no injury to the wayside: it 
left it just as it found it. That which fell on stony ground, where 
because it had not much depth of earth it withered away, did no 
injury to the stony ground. And that which fell among thorns 
and was choked by them, did no injury. Neither did the seed 
sown do any good in such places. It simply left them as it found 
them. But the sower should spend no special effort to sow the 
seed in such hopeless places. As the parable indicates, he should 
be sowing it in prepared ground so far as he is able to judge. 
Otherwise, his first efforts should be to help to prepare the 
ground preparatory to the sowing of seed, and this should be 
done in the seasons most favorable— while most impressible. 

But though the seed did no harm where it brought forth no fruit, 
the good and prepared ground which received it was richly 
blessed with an abundant and glorious harvest; and in this, the 
purpose and only expectation of the husbandman was fully 
accomplished. He did not expect a harvest from the rocks, 
among the thorns, or on the wayside. Nor was the seed of truth 
so scarce that he needed to order the sower to sow with such 
scrupulous care that not a grain of it should fall in such places— 
"There is that scattereth and yet increaseth, and there is that 
withholdeth more than is meet, and it tendeth to poverty. The 
liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that watereth shall be 
watered also himself." (Prov. 11:24,25.) So then neither the seed 
nor the sower has anything to lose by the scattering broadcast: 
nor is the unfilled ground injured. And this applies to the sower 
of truth, as well as in the figure to the sower of grain. We know 
that the truth will bring forth good fruit only in good hearts, yet 
we are to preach the good tidings to all who are willing to hear. 

"Do not cast your pearls before swine," one quotes. No, of 
course not: Do not give the precious pearls of deep spiritual 
truth which none can receive save the consecrated, for whom it 



was designed, to those who love to wallow in the mire of sin, 
and root after that which will satisfy the cravings of their fallen 
nature. To do so is only useless, and they will turn and rend you. 

God's word shall not return unto him void. It shall accomplish 
that whereto it was sent in this age, viz., the gathering out from 
among the mass of mankind a peculiar people— the meek of the 
earth, a little flock begotten by the word of truth, that they 
should be a kind of first fruits of God's creatures. (Jas. 1:18.) By 
the sending out of his truth during the prevailing darkness and 
opposition with which it meets on every hand, God seeks out, 
develops, tests and separates this peculiar class, which is to be a 
peculiar treasure unto him above any fruit which shall be 
gathered in any other harvests. They are his jewels, the chaste 
virgin of Christ, and soon shall become his glorious bride. And 
this purpose shall be fully accomplished within the appointed 

R1024 : page 3 

time, in the end of the Gospel age; for it was the work mapped 
out for this age only. 

But this age is not the only sowing and reaping time: another 
plowing with the plow of trouble, and harrowing with the 
harrow of affliction and pain, has during our time of 
development been making the world ready for a grand sowing 
and growing during the Millennial Age, with a great and good 
harvest of ripe and fully developed human fruitage in the close 
of that age. Just as surely as the mouth of the Lord hath spoken 
that his word shall not return unto him void, but shall 
accomplish that whereto it was sent, so surely shall that harvest 
yield abundant fruit. Has He not said as forcibly and as clearly 
that "The knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth, as the 
waters cover the sea," that "All the families of the earth shall be 
blessed" through the Christ, and that "all nations shall come and 
worship before him;" as that during the Gospel age his purpose 
has been to "take out" of the world a peculiar people— a little 
flock? Can one part of his word fail more than another? Surely 
His word shall not return void, but shall accomplish all his 
glorious purposes. 

In the great and unparalleled time of trouble by which the 
Millennial age is introduced, the whole field, "the world" (Matt. 
13:38), will receive its final and most effective harrowing, after 
which will follow the sunshine— for the Sun of righteousness 
shall rise with healing in his wings-and the refreshing showers 
of divine grace upon penitent and contrite hearts. Thus prepared, 
the whole world will be good and hopeful soil. That will be the 
grandest sowing time the world has ever seen, and as a 
consequence, the world will soon be filled with the knowledge 
of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. Mankind shall spring 
forth and grow up in restitution from death to life; they shall go 
out with joy and be led forth with peace by the "Prince of Life, " 



the "Prince of Peace. " Redeemed of the Lord, they shall return, 
and come to Zion [The Church-the Kingdom] with songs and 
everlasting joy upon their heads-they shall obtain joy and 
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shalt flee away. In coming 
they shall say: "Come! let us go up to the mountain [kingdom] 
of the Lord, and he will teach us his ways and we will walk in 
his paths." (Isa. 2:3.) They shall be led forth from sin, 
condemnation and death, with peace, from grace to grace, and 
from victory unto victory, along the grand highway to 
perfection, to the glorious inheritance redeemed for them by the 
precious blood of Christ. 

The mountains and the hills [the ruling powers] shall break forth 
into singing; and all the trees of the field [the people] shall clap 
their hands. (Isa. 55:12.) The accomplishment of this glorious 
purpose of the restitution of a fallen race to perfection, and 
crowning them with eternal glory, "shall be to the Lord for a 
name, and for an everlasting sign" of his justice, wisdom, love 
and power, which shall not be cut off. 

Throughout all the intricate workings of this divine plan, not a 
single principle of the divine character, nor of human free 
agency, has been or will be violated. Herein consists the glory of 
that plan. Had God designed to ignore human free agency, it 
would have been much wiser to have done so in the very first 
instance -in preventing man's fall into sin. Or had he designed 
to let his love override his justice, it would have been better had 
he excused the sin at once, without a redeemer and the long six 
thousand years of human suffering and death, and begun the 
work of restitution at once. 

But such was not God's purpose, and the glory of his plan 
consists in the vindication of his righteous character, the display 
to all his creatures of the harmony of his various attributes and 
of the firmness of those principles of justice, and righteousness, 
and love, and power, in which all his willing creatures may 
eternally rest; and in the joy and blessing of all creation and 
their establishment in righteousness for the eternal ages to 
follow. 

Let praise and honor and glory and power and dominion be unto 
our God forever and ever. His thoughts are not as men's 
thoughts, nor his ways as men's ways; but thanks be unto God 
who hath brought us to his own glorious standpoint of 
observation, and is teaching us his ways. 



R1024 : page 3 



MOTHER EVE'S TEMPTATION. 

There is a lesson in our mother Eve's transgression which we 
presume few have carefully considered and profited by. In a 



recent number of the TOWER (March '87) attention was called 
to the manner in which the serpent beguiled Eve by his 
sophistry, and also to Paul's warning to the Church, the 
prospective bride of the Second Adam, lest she be beguiled in a 
similar manner. Further thought upon the subject leads naturally 
to the question, Where did the tempter's power over Eve begin? 
and did God leave her subject to such a deceptive, ensnaring 
temptation, without sufficient knowledge to show her at once 
the absurdity and falsity of the arguments used? 

The adversary chose a deceptive and attractive form in which to 
present the temptation, and Eve was young, innocent and 
inexperienced. She had never been deceived, nor had any 
experience with evil. The tempter came unbidden, and with 
malicious design. Whether he believed that God was able to 
inflict the death penalty or not; or whether he questioned God's 
firmness, thinking his love for his glorious creature would be 
strong enough to cause him to ignore the penalty of his broken 
law, there is room to question. 

The tempter first suggested the question to his unsuspecting 
victim— "Hath God indeed said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of 
the garden?" "And the woman said, We may eat of the fruit of 
the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree which is in the 
midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it; neither 
shall ye touch it, lest ye die. " 

"And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye will surely not die; 
for God doth know that on the day ye eat thereof, 

R1024 : page 4 

your eyes will be opened and ye will be as God, knowing good 
and evil. " 

"And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and 
that it was pleasant to the eyes, and the tree was desirable to 
make one wise, she took of its fruit and did eat, and gave to her 
husband and he did eat. " 

Now where did the danger of Eve begin? True the argument 
looked plausible. Satan first stated that, if she should partake of 
the forbidden fruit, she would not die, and then suggested that 
God was depriving them of privileges which they ought to be 
enjoying, treating them ungenerously and as though they were 
dependent upon him and under his authority. This calumny upon 
God's goodness, Eve failed to resent, as she should have done. 
She should have replied at once, that God had been so good to 
them, and had so abundantly showered his blessings upon them, 
that it would be base ingratitude to harbor such a thought of him 
even for an instant, and that she had no reason whatever to doubt 
his truthfulness; that he never had deceived them and therefore 
they had no reason to believe he ever would, and that his 
authority was rightful, since he was their Creator and generous 



benefactor; that such authority was an evidence of his love 
exercised over them for their good, his wisdom and knowledge 
and experience being most necessary for their protection and 
continuous welfare. And with this repulse she should have 
utterly refused to hear or heed one whose suggestions were so 
disloyal. 

Had she thus repulsed the very first suggestion of evil, instead of 
harboring a suspicion for which there was no cause, further 
suggestions would have been warded off. She should have 
obeyed the impulse of benevolence, promptly refusing to harbor 
suspicion of evil from a source whence nothing but goodness 
had flowed. Continued and unchanged manifestations of love 
and justice and goodness leave no room for reasonable suspicion 
of evil. And such suspicion whenever and by whomsoever 
harbored is wrong and leads to evil. There, then, Eve's danger 
began -in consenting to harbor suspicion as to the truthfulness 
of God. God's command had been so explicit and positive that 
there was no mistaking his meaning: They were neither to eat of 
the tree, nor to touch it. It was most plainly labeled, HANDS 
OFF. And any suggestion to the contrary should not have been 
entertained for a moment. The penalty for violation of this 
command was to be death— a most just penalty; for if, after all 
God's goodness and favor in giving them existence and every 
blessing, they would not gladly obey his just and loving 
authority exercised for their protection and well-being, they 
were surely unworthy of continued existence. And God wisely 
and justly deprived them of it, when they had so disobeyed. 

Since, the apostle Paul has forewarned the church of an effort of 
the very same adversary, to beguile the second Eve, the 
prospective bride of the second Adam, in a very similar manner; 
and that the temptation would assume its most deceptive and 
ensnaring form in the last days of the Gospel age, when the 
church is nearest to the glorious consummation of her hope, it 
behooves all the consecrated therefore to be on guard, awake 
and watchful. We need not for a moment be in doubt as to what 
is the present counterpart of Eve's temptation. It is as Paul 
suggests (2 Cor. 1 1 :3), a temptation to depart from the 
simplicity of the doctrine of Christ, and to accept the theories of 
"the enemies of the cross of Christ," whom Satan seduced into 
his service, who "transform themselves as angels of light" 

R1025 : page 4 

(2 Cor. 11:14,15), who represent themselves as messengers of 
truth, wresting the Scriptures and perverting them to establish 
another gospel, which indeed is not another.-Gal. 1:8. 

It has been the constant effort of the TOWER, since its first 
observance of this special effort of the adversary to undermine 
the foundation, and then overthrow the faith of the saints, to 
assist the church in putting on the whole armor of God that they 



might be able to withstand the sophistry of error, and to thus 
stand approved of God, firmly established upon the only 
foundation of the gospel-Redemption through the precious 
blood of Christ-rooted and grounded in the faith. Indeed, this 
was the very cause in the interest of which the TOWER was 
started. 

Let the consecrated ones apply the lesson of Eve's temptation 
and fall, as Paul suggests, that they may not be overcome as she 
was by the art and sophistry of the tempter, even though his 
messengers appear as messengers of light (truth). 

Led, like Eve, mainly by curiosity, many have given valuable 
time and attention to following up these no-ransom theories, 
until they are lost in a labyrinth of confusion, uncertain as to 
what they believe on any subject. This is most plainly noticeable 
in the confusion of those journals which advocate these various 
theories. Driven by the queries of their correspondents and their 
endeavor to make their theories appear plausible, and to twist 
and distort the Scriptures into an appearance of conformity with 
their theories, they are continually involving themselves deeper 
and deeper in the labyrinths of error, and shutting and barring 
themselves in to their false conclusions by pride and self-will. 
And those who are following them, giving time and attention to 
their false and foolish imaginings, as they attempt to build upon 
premises known at the outstart to be false, are step by step 
drifting away from all truth, when they should be growing in the 
knowledge of the truth, if the same time and effort were spent 
not in seeing how many ideas can be built upon no foundation, 
but in building wisely and carefully upon the only foundation 
for faith, "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for 
all." 

Many will say, Well, I cannot understand their teaching exactly, 
but I am not afraid to read anything. I will read and hold on to 
what is good in their teaching and let the rest go. It cannot hurt 
me. But they forget that it can and does hurt them. It is with 
them as with mother Eve; the power of the temptation is in their 
inexperience. Those perfect in experience, as well as perfect in 
mental powers, can doubtless fully meet and repulse the tempter, 
no matter by whom represented or how deceptive the arguments, 
but for all others the sure way and the only way to escape is to 
say: Get thee behind me Satan, because thou savorest not of the 
things that be of God, but of men. 

But how can investigation of anything injure the honest 
searcher? In the first place, it consumes the time which might 
otherwise be spent in gaining a more thorough acquaintance 
with the real plan of God, in building up themselves and others 
in the truth. And while they are pursuing these false theories, 
they are losing sight of and forgetting the true plan. And the 
mind thus filled with false doctrines, and set to work in a vain 
endeavor to understand them and to see how they can be made 



to appear consistent, even with themselves, cannot at the same 
time be occupied in meditation upon God's truth. Such therefore 
must measurably cease to be guided by the spirit of truth into 
more and more truth, and strengthened and confirmed in the 
truth already gained; and thus they are constantly losing both the 
truth and the spirit of it, while imbibing error and the spirit of 
error. Yes, they have confidence in themselves, that they can 
discern and will accept only the truth, advanced by false 
teachers, and reject the error; and this is much of their difficulty- 
-they have too much self-confidence and not enough of the 
meek, child-like spirit which listens for the Father's voice and 
trusts his plan and not its own philosophising. Very soon they 
find themselves befogged and bewildered in the maze of 
confusion and they have forgotten, "let slip" (Heb. 2:1), so much 
of the truth with which they should be armed, that they seem 
utterly incapable of reasoning, or of rightly applying the 
Scriptures on the most simple subjects; so distorted and colored 
do the plain teachings of the Scriptures become under a false 
light. 

But need we seek for truth in such polluted channels? Does God 
anywhere tell us that, if we would find the pure waters of truth, 
we must wallow in every miserable gutter, because there is a 
little water in it; or that we should try to filter the polluted mass 
to get the little bit of good Satan permits to remain in it as a bait 
for the unwary? No, never! You will find a fragment of good in 
every false system under the sun. But God never gave you the 
hopeless task of filtering all or any of those muddy streams to 
find the truth. He sends you to the pure, unmixed fountain of 
truth-his Word; and though among his consecrated children he 
has appointed some apostles, and some prophets, and some 
evangelists; and some pastors, and teachers, for the perfecting of 
the saints for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the 
body of Christ... that we might be no more children tossed to and 
fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight 
of men and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to 
deceive" (Eph 4:1 l-14)-he would have us test all their 
teachings by his Word. We must diligently and faithfully prove 
all things for ourselves, as our attention is called to them by 
faithful teachers. As heretofore stated in the TOWER, (See 
March '85 No.-"Theories True and False") the mission of the 
faithful teacher is to stand as an index finger helping the 
household of faith to trace for themselves, on the sacred page, 
the great principles, as well as the minor details, of the divine 
plan. And no faithful student thus assisted, and guided by the 
spirit of truth, which is meekness and true holiness-a desire to 
know the truth that he may obey it and work in harmony with 
the divine plan-can fail to recognize the truth, and to be 
convinced of and established in it. And those thus guided to the 
end are the elect, whom it is "impossible to deceive." 



Why impossible? Because their spirit of meek obedience and 
fidelity to God will not permit them to give heed to seducing 
spirits and doctrines. They first look well to the foundation upon 
which any teachings claiming to be the gospel rest, and if the 
foundation be any other foundation than that which the 
Scriptures have laid so broad and deep, viz. : Redemption 
through the precious blood of Christ (1 Cor. 15:3; Eph 1:7), 
they have no further interest in it, except to point it out to others 
as a snare and trap of the great enemy. 

Let all the dear household of faith take heed, lest as the serpent 
beguiled Eve by his subtilty, so your minds be corrupted from 
the simplicity of the doctrine of Christ. God had plainly said 
they should not eat of that tree; neither should they touch it, lest 
they die. Therefore those who fall are without excuse. Had they 
remained obedient to God, they would never have had anything 
to do with that tree, except to warn their children against 
partaking of or touching it, and to inform them of the prescribed 
penalty in case of violation of that command. So the saints 
should give no heed to those who invite them to build their hope 
of salvation upon any other than the true foundation, nor handle 
their pernicious doctrines in an attempt to build up another plan 
in opposition to the plan of Jehovah. Those full of the spirit of 
obedience will refuse to take these steps and will never fall. The 
Word of God to Eve was clear and explicit, and so now it is to 
the prospective bride of the second Adam. It clearly tells her that 
the death of Christ was the "propitiation" [satisfaction] for her 
sins, that "he died for our sins," "the just for the unjust," and that 
"by his stripes we are healed," "being justified freely by his 
blood:" that "by him we have redemption, even the forgiveness 
of sins." It repeats this testimony in hundreds of forms, and 
shows her how it was illustrated for centuries in the thousands of 
Israel's sacrifices, and bids her beware of false philosophies 
which would pervert this gospel and lead her into error "as the 
serpent beguiled Eve," and it points out that the willful rejection 
of the precious blood leads to the second death. 

It should be the Christian's rule to give no heed to any theory 
built upon any other foundation than that laid down in the 
Scriptures. And that foundation is so simply and clearly laid 
down therein, and so oft repeated-being mentioned, and 
emphasized, and referred to, on every page and in every possible 
instance, from Genesis to Revelation— that none could fail to 
recognize it, save those led captive under the blinding influence 
of the great enemy. If any teacher, no matter how good or wise 
he may seem— yea, if an angel from heaven (Gal. 1:8.) should 
present a theory of salvation ever so plausible, and quote ever so 
many scriptures to make it appear so, yet built upon any other 
foundation than that laid down in the Scriptures- "Redemption 
through the precious blood of Chrisf'-reject it promptly. Resent 
the insult against your faithful God, and give no heed to the 



seducing spirit of error, though it come to you as a messenger of 
light. 

Another notable feature of the temptation of Eve which has its 
counterpart here was her deception as to the penalty in case of 
her violation of God's command -"Thou shalt surely not die." 
So all these false teachers who deny the ransom, loudly proclaim 
this same lie— "Thou shalt surely not die." They talk loudly of 
the love of God, but have little to say of his justice, and boldly 
teach that the second death which God has warned all to shun, is 
the greatest blessing that men could desire. 

"Take heed: " let Eve's tampering with the evil one, and 
harkening to, and heeding his suggestions, and her lack of faith 
in the Word of God, be a lasting lesson to the church. "Let him 
that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall. " Beware of the 
first encroachments of the enemy. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



"To HIM that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life."— 
Rev. 2:7. 



R1026:page5 

SPURGEON'S INCONSISTENCY. 

Further information from London confirms the fact that Mr. 
Spurgeon has withdrawn from the Baptist Union, and now 
stands free and independent, directly associated only with the 
congregation to which he ministers. But these advices prove also 
that though Mr. Spurgeon is with us in defence of the Bible 
doctrine of atonement only through the precious blood of Christ; 
and that with us he expects the kingdom of God at our Lord's 
second advent, as the fifth and universal empire of earth and 
though he has made a long and good step into personal liberty, 
yet he is still bound by that dark and terrible error of Babylon, 
that everlasting torture is the provision which God premeditated 
and designed before the foundation of the world, as the 
everlasting state of all his human creatures except the small 
handful chosen in Christ and called out from the masses during 
this Gospel age. 

We very much regret that one free in many respects is still 
bounden by this, the meanest, most God-dishonoring and 
blasphemous error to which the "dark ages" gave birth. He will 
search in vain for this doctrine in the writings of the apostles, 
and find that the passages supposed to favor it are among the 
parables and dark sayings of our Lord and the symbols of 
Revelation, and that the apostles never expounded any of these 
as they are commonly misinterpreted to-day. 



Mr. Spurgeon's view of the atonement is utterly inconsistent 
with his view of the everlasting torment of all except the church. 

Mr. Spurgeon, we are happy to see, still acknowledges that our 
Lord was our substitute, and bore in our room and stead the 
penalty for sin, which was against us. Should he not then see 
that if the penalty against us had been everlasting torment, our 
Lord to have been our substitute, ransom or corresponding price, 
would of necessity have to suffer eternal torment for us? But we 
know that he did not, does not, and will not suffer this for us, 
hence we could thus know, if not otherwise, that everlasting 
torment is not the penalty to which we were condemned. 

Again, if we find what penalty our substitute paid, we can surely 
know what the penalty was from which believers escape, and to 
which unbelievers are still condemned. Our Lord became a man, 
was "made flesh," and "gave himself a ransom for all." But he 
did not give himself to live in torment, he "died on our behalf- 
he "died for our sins," he "died for the ungodly," etc., are Bible 
expressions. 

As the gentleman well knows, we could multiply citations 
proving that our Lord died for us, but not one passage could be 
produced from Scriptures to prove that he either should or did 
go into everlasting torment for our sin. "He bore our sins in his 
own body on the tree," but not to all eternity in a lake of fire. 
Though Episcopalians recite that our Lord "descended into hell," 
it is surely well known to Mr. Spurgeon, and all men of 
education, that hades does not signify a lake of fire, but signifies 
the state of death, and is the Greek synonym for the Hebrew 
word sheol (grave) of the Old Testament. 

This penalty which our Lord underwent as our substitute, 
ransom or corresponding price, was exactly what the Bible 
everywhere represents as the wages of man's sin. See Rom. 
5:12-"By one man [Adam] sin entered into the world, and 
DEATH by [or, as the penalty of] sin. " If life in torment were 
the penalty, would the apostle be justified in making such a 
statement? In speaking of what was the result of sin he could do 
no less than mention the worst results. So everywhere the 
penalty of sin is described as destruction. "The soul that sinneth, 
it shall DIE"— not live at all. "The wages [or penalty] of sin is 
DEATH." Thus saith the Scriptures, which alone are competent 
authority with us. We must not accept the twistings and turnings 
of these plain Scriptures by a self-constituted "clergy" of the 
dark ages, nor permit their vaporings about death meaning life, 
to influence us in any degree, but must take God's Word in its 
reasonable and obvious sense. To do otherwise is not only to 
make the Word of God a lie, but to represent our gracious 
Creator as a most terrible fiend- worse than any human friend 
that ever lived, and more detestable and inexcusable because 
man fallen and depraved is to some extent excusable. 



We hope that Mr. Spurgeon will use his liberty and search well 
the Scriptures on this subject and not permit previous inferences 
to hinder full investigation. We are in the "time of the end," 
wherein it was promised that knowledge should be increased. 
The light is shining more and more clearly on all subjects than 
ever before and the Word of God is reflecting upon itself its own 
glorious light by means of Concordances, and thus, much of the 
gloom and error of the "dark ages" is being dispelled. When the 
issue is squarely met, all must see that either the doctrine of 
atonement for sins by the precious blood of Christ, or the 
doctrine of eternal torment-one or the other-must be false. 
Take your Concordance and by its aid search the Word, and you 
will find atonement by the blood everywhere,— as some one has 
said, It is upon every page of the Bible. It runs through the entire 
Bible as a stream, growing broader and deeper from Abel's 
sacrifice down to "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain," in 
Revelation. It is the basis of every argument by every apostle, 
and the foundation of every promise from the one to Abraham 
down to the last promises of the Lamb, who says, "I am he that 
liveth and was dead. " Note, too, that all these references to the 
blood and death of our Redeemer, in no sense refer to, or 
symbolize everlasting torment, but all fit perfectly when applied 
to his death-once for all. 

Let the same Concordance then be consulted to see how many 
times everlasting torment is mentioned, and it will not once be 
found. The nearest approach to it is the term "everlasting 
punishment." (Matt. 25:46.) This is in connection with a parable 
which relates to the next age, and shows the final outcome to 
willful sinners. It does not here say what the nature of the 
punishment will be. But it is elsewhere stated that "The wages 
[punishment] of sin is death. " These scriptures throw light upon 
each other, and do not contradict each other. God does not 
change the wages of sin, and though he provided through our 
Lord Jesus a recovery from the penalty pronounced against all in 
Adam, yet such as shall willfully reject the favor, will die again- 
-the second DEATH. So far from premeditating and 
foreordaining his creatures to everlasting torture, our gracious 
Creator declares of those who will suffer the second death even, 
that he willeth not the death of him that dieth, but would [prefer] 
that all should turn unto him and live.-Ezek. 19:32. 

Of course, for these truths to be firmly held and publicly 
proclaimed, requires great grace, and implies great humility, as 
well as great boldness. Mr. Spurgeon's boldness and courage 
have been attested to a considerable extent by his general 
ministry, and now by his recent firm stand against error, and in 
defense of the doctrine of the ransom; by his withdrawal from 
the Baptist Union. His humility as a minister of Christ has 
shown itself by his refusal to apply to himself the title of 
Reverend, and his failure to seek and obtain the further title of 
Doctor of Divinity, both of which are so "highly esteemed 



among men," but ill-fitted and disapproved in the sight of our 
truly Reverend Lord, who declares to all saints- "All ye are 
brethren," and "One is your Master." Grace "sufficient" is 
promised each of us for every step, as we walk in the path of the 
just which shines more and more UNTO THE PERFECT DAY; 
but we may be assured that those steps will lead us down from 
any pinnacle of earthly glory we may once have occupied. Thus 
it was with our Lord and with the apostles, and thus it must be 
with us- "Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of 
God, and he may exalt you in due time. " 

Of course, being prominent, like Saul of Tarsus, a bold stand for 
this truth of the ransom in the face of the worldly-wise, who are 
now rapidly rejecting it, will forfeit their esteem, and bring their 
opposition and scorn-this Mr. Spurgeon has already 
experienced. The rejection of everlasting torture would cut off 
from him the sympathy and praise, and bring instead the 
denunciation and contempt, of that other large class of Christian 
people, who do not yet see the inconsistency of their position 
and are trying to believe that the wages of sin is everlasting 
torture and yet that the death of our Redeemer paid our 
corresponding price— that, 

Jesus died and paid it all 
Yes, all the debt I owed. 

The cost from a human standpoint is great-to be scorned by 
both Pharisees and Sadducees. Yet like Paul, every truly earnest 
soul may have supplies of grace, whereby each can rejoice to 
count all such things but "as loss and dross for the 
EXCELLENCY OF THE KNOWLEDGE of Christ" -that we 
may suffer rejection, contempt, etc., with the Master, if by any 
[such] means we might be accounted worthy of a part in the 
First Resurrection-among the overcomers the joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom. 

As the eyes of our understanding more clearly recognize the 
King in his beauty -the true greatness and grandeur of his 
character— as we become more and more intimate with his plans 
as revealed in His Word, we are prepared to see in many 
passages of the Bible a fulness of love and mercy which the 
smoke of Babylon's errors has long obscured. "This is the true 
light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world" -can 
no longer be understood to mean, one in ten thousand, but as it 
says, "every man." "He is the propitiation [satisfaction] for our 
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world." (1 John 2:2.) -This, too, is seen to mean just what it 
says, when no longer nullified by the 

R1027 : page 5 

theory of everlasting torture. "One mediator between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all — 
TO BE TESTIFIED IN DUE TIME." (1 Tim. 2:6.)-This 



passage, too, comes to have a full glorious meaning to all who 
see it: that the ransom covers all, and must be a benefit to ALL; 
and to benefit all, must be testified to ALL, and in such a time 
and manner that ALL can and shall "come to a knowledge of the 
truth." 

This general opening of blind eyes, and general testimony of the 
ransom belongs to the next age; the work of the age now closing 
is to select the Church, the Bride, the members of the Body of 
the Christ, who with their Head and Lord shall be exalted, 
glorified and empowered to bless (restore and teach) all the 
families of the earth, thus testifying and making available to all 
in God's due time-the precious Blood of the Lamb which taketh 
away the sin of the world. 

A hope so much divine 
May trials well endure. 



R1027:page5 

FOSSIL THEOLOGY. 

A lump of coal showing on its surface, in delicate tracery, the 
form of a fern or fish, is prized by the geologist as a specimen of 
the vegetation or fauna of a very remote period in the day of 
creation. Such a fossil is valuable as a connecting link between 
the dead past and living present, possessing no other value 
except to be burned. 

In the world of theology we find many such relics of bygone 
ages fossilized in the form of liturgies, creeds, confessions of 
faith, etc., many of them originating in the Carboniferous period 
of religious knowledge, the "dark ages," which, apart from their 
value as antiquities, representing the mind and practice of the 
religious systems of their day, are of no use whatever, except as 
fuel. 

For what so fiercely burns 

As a dry creed that nothing ever learns? 

It is remarkable that in this age of progress and development, 
men of education and intelligence should shape their thoughts 
and teachings after the pattern of these Theological Fossils, 
which are as devoid of life as the petrifications that we find in 
the museum duly classified and labeled. 

In the advanced light of medical science of to-day, the physician 
who would follow the old system of bleeding, pilling and 
blistering, and confine his patient in a dark, illy- ventilated room, 
would be denounced not only as an "old fogy," but as a fool, 
since medical colleges are continually experimenting and 
opening up new avenues of knowledge as to the causes and cure 
of disease. In strong contrast with this, sectarian theology has 



learned nothing, neither can it learn anything so long as the 
minds of its teachers are moulded and shaped by the petrified 
dogmas of their ancestors. He who receives his credentials as a 
denominational teacher is not a free man. He is bound to accept 
as the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, the 
complications of doctrines as handed down to him from the 
"fathers" of his denomination. What those men, hundreds of 
years ago, with minds perhaps befogged with superstition, 
declared to be truth is truth, to which nothing can be added, and 
from which nothing can be taken away. No matter what light 
advanced scholarship may have thrown upon the inspired Word; 
no matter what science may have revealed; no matter what new 
truths the servants of God may have brought forth from the 
store-house: the religious instructor of to-day must shut his eyes 
to the light, and stop his ears from hearing strange or new 
sounds, and submissively bow to the teachings of antiquated 
theologians, priests, prelates and parsons, as though their voice 
were the voice of God. There is no idolatry that has more 
submissive devotees than has this worship of the stocks and 
stones of Fossil Theology; there is no tyranny more oppressive 
than is the tyranny of creed. 

How is this accounted for? Very easily. Denominations are 
formed about the teachings of some man or set of men. These 
teachings are accepted as the quintessence of truth; preachers are 
instructed in these doctrines, and ordained to teach them; 

R1027 : page 6 

colleges are endowed to perpetuate them, and the graduates 
from these schools, before being authorized to preach, must 
subscribe to the system of practice and doctrine taught, and 
agree to teach the same. He is not a free man. He dare not turn 
either to the right or to the left under penalty of losing his 
commission, and with it the means of gaining a livelihood. 
Instead of building upon the foundation of the prophets and 
apostles, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief corner-stone, the 
foundation is human; and the divine injunction applies with 
terrific force: "In vain do they worship Me, teaching for 
doctrines the commandments of men. " 

Witness the recent trial of the professors of Andover College as 
an illustration of the despotic power of creed. It was not a 
question, Did these men teach truth? The only question 
considered by the judges was, did they teach contrary to the 
Confession of Faith, and established traditions of the 
denomination. And in a score of instances that might be cited of 
ministers brought before ecclesiastical tribunals, they are always 
tried by the same antiquated law, and required to pronounce the 
sectarian Shibboleth. 

There is little wonder that spiritual deadness is characteristic of 
the churches everywhere, with fussy Uzzas reaching out their 



hands to steady the ark of the Lord; with inquisitorial 
ecclesiastics snuffing out the light of truth as soon as it shows its 
first feeble rays, and then compelling those who hunger and 
thirst after righteousness and truth to accept their dead forms 
and creeds, or else look elsewhere to have their cravings 
satisfied. Thank God that His truth is not committed to such 
hands, but is free as the water of life to all who will go to the 
fountain and drink. Divine truth is not in dead forms and 
compiled dogmas, but it is liberty and life in Christ Jesus. - 
Words of Truth. 



R1027 : page 6 

THE PAPAL POWER. 

The Catholic says: 

"Protestant religious sheets inform us that Blaine is in Rome 
coquetting with the Pope. The secular press asserts that 
Gladstone is guilty of the same misdemeanor, but denies it in the 
next breath. They all agree that Salisbury is guilty of the most 
pronounced coquetry with the Papal Power. This is certainly a 
strong straw. It discloses the current of modern thought on a 
question which is undoubtedly wedging its way to the front of 
political questions in European circles. The dormant potency of 
the third ring in the Papal Tiara [third crown in the Pope's hat] 
breeds unrest, and well founded fear, in the hearts of kings and 
Kaisers. 

"The spirit of the world, and emperors and kings, have battled 
against temporal power, because they understand from history 
that the Papal Power is the strongest menace against lustful 
brutality, and violent oppression and tyranny. It has humbled 
kings, it has disgraced emperors, it has throttled tyranny, and it 
has earned the everlasting enmity of the world for its civilizing 
influence. The world bends to the powers that smote it in the 
past, and disfigured its fair face with rapine and pillage, and 
ravishings and blood waste, and fears the universal sovereign 
who cemented the discordant elements of paganism and 
barbarism into one grand, unitive civilization. 

"The Papacy will regain its temporal sovereignty, because it is 
useful and convenient to the Church. It gives the head executive 
of the church a fuller liberty, and a fuller sway. The Pope can be 
no king's subject long. It is not in keeping with the divine office 
to be so. It cramps him and narrows his influence for good. 
Europe has acknowledged this influence, and will be forced to 
bow to it in greater times of need than this. Social upheavals, 
and the red hand of anarchy, will yet crown Leo or his successor 
with the reality of power which the third circle symbolizes, and 
which was once recognized universally. " 



R1028 : page 6 

RECONCILED BY HIS DEATH 
AND SAVED BY HIS LIFE. 

"If then, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by 
the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be 
saved by his life. "-Rom. 5:10. 

That we were actually enemies, and yet at the same time 
reconciled to God, seems at first sight a contradictory statement. 
But remembering that the whole race were reckoned and treated 
as enemies —condemned to death because represented in the 
transgression of their father Adam— we can see how the death of 
Christ, who as Adam's substitute took his place in death, 
reconciled thereby not only Adam but all his race to God. The 
penalty of sin was death- "In the day thou eatest thereof, dying 
thou shalt die"-a most just penalty! It is not eternal torture and 
misery of any kind, but simply the taking away of the abused 
privilege of living. And since in life man failed to show himself 
worthy of life, it is evident that when dead, destroyed, he could 
do nothing to recover himself. 

But when the Son of God became partaker of our nature, and 
then as a man took Adam's place in death never again to rise as a 
man, the man Adam could justly be released, his life being thus 
redeemed or purchased. And as all his posterity lost life through 
his fall, so they all regain life through his redemption by the man 
Christ Jesus, who thus gave himself a ransom— a corresponding 
price-a substitute for all. 

The great majority of the race who are yet living are still in 
opposition to God; and the vast majority of those who are dead, 
died without being converted (turned) to God. But nevertheless 
they are all reconciled to God by the death of his Son, as the 
above text asserts. 

And if reconciled to God by the death of his Son WHILE THEY 
WERE YET ENEMIES, it was obvious that they were not 
reconciled to God by being converted to God, else they would 
have ceased to be enemies, and the death of his Son would have 
nothing to do with it. It is evident also that they were not 
reconciled to God by the good example of his Son; for Adam 
and millions of his posterity were dead before his Son came, and 
millions since have died without knowing of or heeding his 
example, and yet all were reconciled to God by the DEATH of 
his Son; and therefore, "as through Adam all die, EVEN SO, 
through Christ shall all be made alive"-having been reconciled 
to God, having regained the privilege of living, through Christ 
who redeemed them by his death, by substituting himself for 
Adam in death. 



But let us consider further the doctrine which Paul proceeds to 
build upon this foundation, which he accepts as sure. He adds: 
"Much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. " 
Seeing that the plan of our reconciliation by the death of his 
Son, while we were enemies, is affirmed by Jehovah by the 
mouth of all his Apostles and Prophets, and that it is reasonable 
and just, and in perfect harmony with the righteous character of 
our God, it is even "much more" evident that in his own due 
time we shall be saved. How? "By his life." But how saved by 
his life, if he became our substitute in death? 

Thus it was his life as a man that he sacrificed on our behalf 
forever; but since that sacrifice was made in obedience to the 
Father's will, it pleased the Father to resurrect, or re-create our 
Savior. And since he could not resurrect him as a man without 
undoing the ransom, he raised him to another nature. Without 
interfering with our ransom, God could have raised him to any 
other nature, either higher or lower than human; but as a reward 
for his obedience and humiliation, God "highly exalted" him, 
even to the divine nature. Had our Lord like Adam forfeited his 
right to life by sinning, he could not have been raised to any 
nature, but having in loyal obedience sacrificed his life as a man 
(which was all the life he possessed) God could and did raise 
him to another nature. And now he ever liveth as a divine being, 
with all power and authority in heaven and in earth to 
accomplish the remainder of the plan of our Father, who so 
loved us, even while condemned sinners, as to give his only 
begotten Son to die for us-"the just for the unjust." 

And if the Son so loved us as to die for us while we were yet 
enemies, will he not in the Father's appointed time use his great 
power to awaken from death the millions whom he purchased 
with his own precious blood? And will he not exercise his 
authority and power as a wise father [life-giver] for the training 
of those awakened millions, leading them step by step, by wise 
and wholesome discipline and instruction, gradually up, up, up 
to perfection? And only those who refuse to take the steps will 
fail to reach perfection and everlasting life. The boon of eternal 
life in perfection and glory will be forced upon none, but, 
"Whosoever will may take the water of life freely, " while those 
who will not, shall die the second death, from which there shall 
be no redemption and no resurrection. 

After such affirmations and evidences of Jehovah's benevolent 
designs, and our Lord's obedient and benevolent execution of 
them, have we not the fullest assurance that all the redeemed 
race shall be "saved by his life"? and that only those who will 
not obediently hear (heed) that Prophet-Jehovah's Anointed- 
shall be cut off from the blessed privilege of eternal life-die the 
second death? (Acts 3:22,23.) Surely, Just and true are thy ways, 
Lord God Almighty: Thy love is fathomless; thy wisdom is as 
deep and broad as thy love; thy justice is firm as thine eternal 



throne. Haste the blessed time when all shall know thee from the 
least to the greatest, and when thy love, fully comprehended, 
shall call forth a loving response from every worthy heart; when 
the willful evil doer shall cease, and when every creature in 
heaven and in earth shall with united voice ascribe "blessing, 
and honor, and glory, and power unto him that sitteth upon the 
throne, and unto the lamb forever and ever. " 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1028 : page 6 

'"GIVE me neither poverty nor riches,' said Agur; and this will 
ever be the prayer of the wise. Our income should be like our 
shoes, if too small they will gall and pinch us, but if too large 
they will cause us to stumble and to trip. Wealth, after all, is a 
relative thing, since he that has little and wants less, is richer 
than he that has much and wants more. True contentment 
depends not upon what we have; a tub was large enough for 
Diogenes, but a world was too small for Alexander." 



R1028 : page 6 

THE TITHING CUSTOM. 

In God's dealing with "Israel after the flesh," a part of their law 
was that for collecting tithes. A tithe signifies a tenth, and all 
Israelites were thus taxed one tenth of their yearly income for 
the support of their religious government, etc. 

Seeing the immense and constant flow of wealth which such a 
system of taxation secures, has led to various imitations of this 
Jewish custom among later religionists. In all countries where 
the Roman Catholic church holds political control, she exacts 
tithes; for instance, in France she collected tithes until the 
Revolution of 1790: and in some parts of Italy they continued to 
be collected until a few months ago, when they were abolished 
by the present king (who, however, provided for the living 
expenses of the Catholic clergy, whose income from private 
estates is insufficient, out of the national taxes). Against this 
abolition of tithes, Catholic journals here, whose publishers are 
not obligated by it, protest loudly, yet it is doubtful whether it is 
not a part of an understood arrangement between the king and 
the pope. Doubtless the growing civilization of the Italians 
makes these tithes yearly more meagre and more difficult of 
collection, and the shrewd Leo, foreseeing the end of this 
income, has preferred to see its collection taken from him, while 
at the same time the civil rule, by appointing for the 
maintenance of the clergy out of the general tax, has made its 



income more certain and reliable, both for the present and 
future. 

Various denominations of Protestants, while not insisting on the 
one tenth, nevertheless often refer to the Jewish tithes, and 
without saying that the same Law is binding upon their faithful, 
they certainly often give that impression to their hearers. 

Tithing is probably the secret of the success of the Mormons and 
"Seventh-day Adventists." The constant flow of money into 
their treasuries— one-tenth the earnings of all their people- 
permits the prosecution of their proselyting work far and near, 
pays the salaries and traveling expenses of many missionaries, 
and engages talent in writing and publishing which otherwise 
would lie dormant. 

But what-Are we under this law of tithes? Nay, verily! "Ye are 
not under the law, but under grace." (Rom. 6:14.) The tithing, 
like all other features of the Law, was given, not to the "new 
creatures in Christ Jesus" of this Gospel age, but to the Jews, 
who as minor children were under arbitrary, fixed laws, and not 
under grace. (See Gal. 4:1-7.) But what does it signify to be 
under grace in this matter of our giving to the Lord's work? It 
does not mean that there is less need of money than formerly, 
nor that the grace of God will provide the money in some other 
and miraculous manner. It merely means, You are no longer 
bound or obligated by command to give one-tenth of your 
income, but are left free in this regard that your grateful hearts 
may find opportunity for manifesting their love and gratitude to 
the Lord by liberality even when at the cost 

R1029 : page 6 

of self-denial. This is the grace or liberty bestowed upon us as 
matured children of God, over and above the servant or 
childhood estate of the previous dispensation. 

Is this, our liberty, a reason for devoting less than one-tenth to 
the Lord's service, because he does not command it of us, but 
leaves us free to act for ourselves under the influence of love for 
the truth? Would not the command generally be the very least 
that would be reasonable? and indicate that proportion of our 
income as 

R1029 : page 7 

the Jew was privileged to give as much more than a tithe as he 
pleased. 

In this as in all the features of the Law given to Israel, we find 
that the letter of it, as they understood it, is less than what would 
be our reasonable service under grace. When Bro. Adamson met 
us, after seeing some features of the truth and getting 
acquainted, we were pressing home upon his attention the Bible 
doctrine of full consecration, and he, supposing us to refer to 



money matters, at once replied, "For years I have given a tithe, a 
tenth of my earnings to the Lord's service. " We admired and 
loved the earnestness which this indicated, and told him so, but 
at the same time pointed out that one-tenth was only the measure 
or limit placed upon God's people under the law in the servant 
age. Bro. A. was surprised that any one thought one-tenth too 
little, well knowing, as we all do, that few give one-fourth of a 
tenth of their income. When, however, we pointed out that full 
consecration means ten-tenths, the whole, he saw it at once and 
began to do that. Now he sees with us that entire consecration of 
all we possess— time, talents, money, all,— is our 
"REASONABLE SERVICE." From that time on, he has been 
considering all that he has as fully and forever given up to the 
Lord, and he himself appointed of God the steward or executor 
to use all, according to his ability, to the glory and honor of him 
who called us out of darkness into this marvelous light. Brother 
Adamson, as you all know, considers that he can best use his 
time and talents to God's glory by selling DAWN, and he is 
doing with his might what his hands find to do. 

So, it is for each one who has presented himself fully and 
entirely to God, "a living sacrifice," to consider how he can most 
fully and efficiently use his all in the great service to which he 
has consecrated it. Such, therefore, cannot decide their course by 
their likes and dislikes, their fears, preferences, or conveniences; 
it is their own preferences that they agreed to give up, their own 
wills that they agreed to ignore, and reckon as dead,— this was 
the "living sacrifice" (Rom. 12:1), which all the truly 
consecrated laid upon God's altar, to be consumed in the service 
of God, a sacrifice of sweet savor. It is well that the consecrated 
should each carefully scrutinize his own heart, and consider well 
whether he serves himself or God, whether he is a living 
sacrifice to God, or to business, to family, to society, or worst of 
all to selfishness and indolence. 

Even aside from our covenant of entire consecration to the 
Lord's service, we should gladly and of willing hearts do if 
possible ten-fold more in the service of the truth, from love, than 
we ever did from fear, in the service of error. Nay, more; 
looking back and remembering what we have unwittingly done 
in past years to spread error, to bind and blind God's children, 
and to dishonor and misrepresent our Heavenly Father's plan 
and character, we should, remembering that "the time is short," 
strain every effort to at least undo the mischief we helped to 
work, that perchance in the reckoning time when we give our 
account we may be able to see, as our works pass in review, that 
we have not more dishonored than honored our Lord. 

His servants ye are to whom ye render service, is an evident 
truth. So we see that for a long time we, though like Paul honest, 
and verily thinking that we did God service, were really in a 
measure servants of the devil, forwarding error, ignorantly 



opposing truth, and dishonoring God and his Word. Oh! how 
glad we should be that we did not die while ignorantly fighting 
against God and blaspheming his holy name (by misrepresenting 
his character and plan), and helping to teach others to thus 
blaspheme. God knows that in ignorance we did it, and would 
have accepted of us through our dear Redeemer; but oh! what 
shame and confusion would have been ours, to find that life had 
been more than wasted, in opposing him whom we loved and 
sought to serve. See 1 Cor. 3:14,15. 

But thanks be to God, though "the time is short" it is very 
favorable to us, that we may not only undo much of our past 
misdoings, but, besides, do more— do something to honor the 
Lord, do some good and acceptable work upon the good 
foundation, work which will abide and which our Lord will 
acknowledge and reward, saying "Well done, good and faithful 
servant, enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." Yes, now is the 
most favored time, and this should encourage us. In the past, our 
efforts and expenditures of time and money in the service of 
error yielded but slight returns compared with what the same 
time, talent, and money used now, backed by the truth and the 
love of it, will do. 

This should encourage us all, and time and talent and money 
should be spent as never before in the spread of the truth- in 
letter writing, in talking, in preparing, translating, printing, 
loaning, selling, etc., reading matter; and in every way lifting up 
the truth, the standard of the Lord before the people-Isa. 62:10. 

We are glad to note the sentiments of some of the brethren and 
sisters that 1888 A.D. shall be one of greater effort in the 
Master's service, in the service of the truth, than any before. We 
say, Amen! and trust it will be the sentiment of all the saints, the 
consecrated. We pray that God will grant us each the needed 
grace whereby to overcome the selfishness and smallness of our 
"earthen vessels," that our ambitions, hopes and affections may 
be lifted from the groveling, earthly things, to the heavenly 
things promised to such as are faithful to the end of life's race. 
How many will appreciate the privilege of laying up honors and 
treasures in heaven, at the cost of treasures and comforts and 
honors earthly? Some— the "overcomers," who delight to do 
God's will, and who count all things earthly but as loss and dross 
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord. 

Ask yourselves, you who have tasted "the good word of God," 
How much better is it than the error which once beclouded love 
and hope with fear, and which, instead of real faith, gave 
ignorant, unreasoning, unsatisfying, blind credulity? How much 
(trying to put a money value on that which is more precious than 
rubies— yea, than much fine gold)— how much more is the truth 
worth than the error you formerly held? You paid liberally for 
the error, we all know. If you did not give hours of time and 
thought in preparing for and attending upon the fairs, suppers, 



socials, treats and what not, of some sect, you at least gave time 
to hearing the preaching of error, and money to pay for that 
preaching at home as well as in foreign lands. It is safe to 
estimate that if you were a member of any of the sects of 
"Christendom, " in good and regular standing, it cost you not less 
than five hours of time (including time for dressing, etc.) and 
from fifteen cents to one dollar in money each week. (In this we 
include the usual collection taken at every Sunday service, 
besides the special collections for Home and Foreign Missions, 
and for Bible and Tract Societies; also pew rent and 
expenditures in connection with fairs and socials.) This 
calculation is very moderate, many giving five times as many 
hours, and ten times as much money, yet this, our moderate 
estimate, shows that error and blindness and fear cost you, in 
fifty-two weeks of each year, 260 hours of time and from $7.80 
to $52.00 per year in money. 

Now ask and answer to yourself the questions-How much more 
is the truth worth than the error? and How much more time and 
money am I spending in spreading the truth in my own heart, 
and in the hearts of others? If you are not satisfied with your 
course in view of your own calculation, begin at once to show 
the Lord, yourself, and your family, how highly you appreciate 
the truth above error. Act at once, for "the time is short. "-See 
Feb. '87 TOWER. 

We are taking for granted, of course, that you have stopped your 
contribution of time, talent and money formerly given cheerfully 
to the spread of what you now see to be error, but which at the 
time, Paul- like, you "verily thought to be God's service." No 
doubt God accepted your good intention while blinded by error, 
but now you see, and now you are responsible as a steward of 
God's blessings -time, talent, money, etc. -and can neither 
waste them upon yourself, nor use them to spread error, without 
having in due time to plead guilty, as unfaithful servants. We 
have great light, and should remember that "Where much is 
given much will be required. " 

Instead, therefore, of being willing to transfer merely the same 
amount of money, and time and influence from the spread of 
error to the spread of truth, we all should feel as we sometimes 
sing- 

Truth-how precious is the treasure! 
Teach us, Lord, its worth to know. 



R1030:page7 



JUSTIFICATION. 



To justify is either to make just and right that which is wrong, 
or to prove and show to be just that which is free from blame. 



"Justification by faith" is well known to be a Scriptural doctrine, 
yet we think its real meaning and scope are not fully understood 
by many who profess to have been so justified. 

The tendency of the times is toward a still more unscriptural 
idea, and while we doubt not many have been saved in the past 
who did not understand it, in this age and land it becomes more 
than ever our duty to "grow in the grace and knowledge of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. "--2 Pet. 3:18. 

Paul's statement of the case is as follows:— In the first two 
chapters of Romans he shows that all mankind are sinners; that 
the natural tendency is downwards; that neither the Gentiles 
with the light of nature, nor the Jews with the light and law of 
Moses, are able to free themselves from sin and sinful 
tendencies. When he reaches Rom. 3:21, he thus explains God's 
simple yet wonderful provision for the race. "But now apart 
from law a righteousness [justness] of God hath been 
manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets; even 
the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ unto all 
them that believe; for there is no distinction: for all have sinned, 
and fall short of the glory of God; being justified freely by his 
grace through the REDEMPTION that is in Christ Jesus: whom 
God set forth to be a mercy-seat through faith in his blood, to 
show his righteousness in passing by the sins formerly 
committed, during the forbearance of God: and to a showing of 
his righteousness in the present time, in order that he may be 
righteous [just] while justifying him who hath faith in Jesus." 

Mark the following points :— 

1. All have sinned, are unjust, therefore need justifying— that is, 
to be made just or right. 

2. Neither Nature nor Law can justify the sinner. 

3. God remains strictly just himself, while justifying the sinner. 

4. God's method of justification has been witnessed [attested] by 
the Law and the Prophets. 

5. It is granted us through redemption made by Christ Jesus. 

6. It is attained through faith in his blood. 

7. It accomplishes the passing by (so canceling or crossing off) 
of former sins, and the restoration of the sinner to favor. 

Statement No. 1 is admitted by the class we wish to talk to; 
those who do not believe it are out of our present reach, but will 
be reached effectually by the judgments of the coming age. 

No. 2. As to the light of nature. The ante-diluvians had that light 
with evidently better physical and mental natures than we to 
work with, but they developed characters that even Noah's flood 
could not wash out and leave them living. Sodom and Gomorrah 
and the cities about them had this light, but a fiercer flame 



overtook them. The Amorites and other nations of Canaan had 
this light, but it led them to destruction. (Deut. 18:9-12; Gen. 
15:16; 2 Kings 17:29-41.) And it has been true all down the ages 
that "The dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of 
cruelty. " 

As to the Jew, if the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, 
and the giving of the law, and the service, and the promises 
(Rom. 9:3-5), and all the light of Sinai could not save them, how 
say some among you that the heathen may be saved by the light 
of nature? That there have been remarkably noble specimens of 
humanity among the heathen-considering their surroundings- 
there is no doubt; and through the plan of mercy God has 
provided, such will have a reward: even the giving of a cup of 
cold water will not be forgotten. (Mark 9:38-41.) Some even to 
this day retain more of the original Adamic nature or character 
than others. We see this both in civilized and barbarous lands. 
Lingerings of the original noble, generous nature that God 
created in Adam (His own likeness) reassert themselves, and 
come up, sometimes in families, and sometimes in individuals, 
and sometimes under circumstances that least favor such a 
character. 

But such a character could not, and can not now save a man 
whose life is already forfeited. Can any little kindness done to 
his fellow-prisoners by a man under sentence of death, and 
waiting the day of his execution, legally save his life? So the 
human race who have been under the dominion of death ever 
since the day of Adam's transgression, whatever good they may 
do, are powerless to save themselves from the penalty. 

Paul in Rom. 3:9-20 first states clearly this helpless condition of 
both Jew and Gentile, and then points out the plan of 
justification that the God of Love has provided. 

No. 3. But this plan cannot interfere with God's justice and 
integrity. He cannot, as some claim, withdraw his sentence, and 
by a sovereign will to do as he pleases, forgive whom he will, or 
even those who seek his forgiveness. Having enacted a law and 
pronounced its penalty 

R1030 : page 8 

upon a race who had been brought under its condemnation, He 
cannot eat his own words, speaking humanly, and reverse his 
decree. His justice, his holiness, his unchangeableness of 
character (Mai. 3:6,) must remain perfect. 

In that beautiful 55th chapter of Isaiah we read: "As the heavens 
are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, 
and my thoughts than your thoughts. For as the rain cometh 
down and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither [in 
vain], but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, 
and giveth seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; so shall my 



word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return 
unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it 
shall prosper in the thing whereunto I sent it. " 

Our loving Father, then, had a wise purpose in making his 
decree which brought such condemnation; and when it has 
accomplished his will, we will see that his LOVE is equal to his 
JUSTICE, that his WISDOM devised the plan, and that his 
infinite POWER was nowise taxed to carry out his purpose 
without confusion or clash. Let us study His "way" in the light 
of our next point: 

No. 4. What did the Law witness in reference to justification? 
Emphatically that "without shedding of blood there is no 
remission." (Heb. 9:22.) Every sacrifice, day by day, and year 
by year, proved this. 

But why blood? Some people seem to have a terrible horror of 
coupling blood with salvation. Any subject, perhaps, may be 
made a tiresome hobby, but the allwise God has seen fit to use 
blood as a symbol and as an instrumentality, and we may not 
instruct HIM. 

"Through one man sin entered into the world, and death through 
sin: and so death passed unto all men, for that all sinned: "-being 
of the Adamic nature. Life being forfeited, life only could 
redeem; so the Lord tells us, "The life of the flesh is in the 
blood: and I have given it to you upon the altar to make 
atonement by reason of [being] the life."- Lev. 17:11,14; Gen. 
9:4; Deut. 12:23. 

Did these sacrifices day by day make the Jews perfect? No, says 
Paul (Heb. 10:1-4), else having been cleansed once for all, they 
might have ceased their offerings. But he says "In those 
sacrifices there is a remembrance made of sins year by year." 
What were they then, and what for? Inspiration answers "a 
shadow of the good things to come, not the substance of the 
things themselves."— Syriac. But the shadow must be a true 
outline of the substance, so they pointed to the complete and 
perfect justification from sin by the "better sacrifice," the "body" 
that the Father himself prepared; offered once for all [time].- 
Heb. 10:5,10. 

The Prophets [Ps. 22, Isa. 52, 53, 63, etc.,] testified to the same 
truths. Both describe a vicarious or substitutionary justification; 
that is, the guilty one is freed by an act done, or a price or 
penalty paid by some one else. 

But why some one else, why not the one really guilty? Because, 
as before shown, the penalty being death, i.e., his right to life, he 
had no equivalent to redeem it with. Having lost his all, what 
had he left to buy it back with? But as we have seen, a "body" 
has been prepared, a sacrifice well pleasing to God has been 
made, a Redeemer is found. 



No. 5. John the Baptist was the divinely appointed herald of this 
divinely appointed Redeemer, and his words of introduction 
were:- "Behold the LAMB of God, which taketh away the sins 
of the world." (John 1 :29.) How could those Jews understand 
such a declaration only as referring to one who was to be in 
some way offered up, as a sacrifice in the place of some one else 
who had sinned. 

A new school of wise (?) men have arisen who say: "Away with 
this talk of Christ's death atoning for us, and of his blood being 
required to satisfy the Father, as if the Father was a Shylock 
demanding his pound of flesh. It was not his death, but his life 
that was efficacious; his pure self-denying life; giving us an 
example that we should follow in his steps." 

No doubt this sounds very sensible to some extremely esthetic 
religionists of today; but it is sophistry, nevertheless. 

We appreciate that spotless life. We believe that short as it was, 
it was without a parallel in nobility, wisdom and blessing; we 
believe too that only those who make it their pattern, and that 
glorious 

R1031 : page 8 

character their highest ambition, will be privileged to become 
members of that Divine body of which he will be the Head. 

There was a grand purpose in his life; there was one— even more 
necessary— in his death. 

Imagine an athlete finely developed and bounding with life, 
coming to a dying man whose every power was hopelessly 
shattered, who could at most live but a few hours, saying to him: 
"Look at me, see what I am; my system of exercise not only 
keeps me in full health but I believe will add years to my life. " 

Would not this be mockery? Have we not seen that the whole 
race passed under the dominion of death when Adam fell? Rom. 
5:12. "Death reigned from Adam to Moses." The law was given, 
but it only revealed man's weakness; so death continued to 
reign. Jesus came. His body was a miraculous fornication of the 
Father in the womb of Mary. (Heb. 10:5.) His life came directly 
from heaven (Heb. 1:5, Luke 1:35,) and he was therefore, 
though human, yet free, both from Adamic sin and its penalty, 
death. 

He was the second man, perfect, sinless, in the likeness of God. 
The first one, Adam, had failed in the test, and falling carried the 
race (yet in his loins) with him. 

The second one, Jesus, had come to REDEEM this lost and 
ruined race. He must first stand the test to show to angels and to 
men that he was the peer, the equal of the first Adam then, not 
before, he paid the redemption price,-a life for a life. Having 
first redeemed Adam, and all the race in him, his example, his 



character, became available to them as a pattern of the way of 
obedience; the reward of which is eternal life. 

But eternal or any measure of life could not come to those under 
the dominion of death, i.e., these whom death had a claim 
against, until they are first released from this claim;— redeemed, 
as had been clearly shadowed forth in the types of the Jewish 
covenant. 

Redemption under the law could be made only by an estimated 
equivalent value. In some cases (Lev. 25:25-31; 27:14-34; Num. 
3:44-51) it might be made with money; in most cases, and where 
sin was involved, only blood could atone, or justify. (Heb. 9:22.) 
Peter refers to this and clearly shows what justified us. 
"Knowing that ye were redeemed not with corruptible things, 
with silver or gold;. ..but with the precious blood of Christ; as of 
a lamb without blemish and without spot; who was foreknown 
indeed before the foundation of the world, but was manifested at 
the end of the times for your sake."-l Pet. 1:18-20. 

No. 6. This justification [salvation] is attained by faith in his 
blood. "O yes," says some one, "blood again, always blood. Do 
not the Scriptures clearly teach that we are saved by grace, that 
is favor? How then by blood, and by a purchase? Is it a favor to 
receive that which is bought and paid for?" 

If we were without means and starving or freezing and a 
passerby should find us, and go and get food and help and 
rescue us, it might or might not be a favor to him, it would 
certainly would be a great favor to us. But because it is of favor, 
it is not less "by faith; " nor because by faith is it less "through 
blood. " It is all three- by faith in the blood ransom provided by 
the favor of God, who "was in Christ reconciling the world unto 
himself." 

In turning away from the distorted view of the sacrifice 
presented in some hymnbook theology, let us be careful that we 
do not turn away from the Scriptures of truth. If our theories do 
not agree with the words of inspiration, we had better search the 
Word for a more harmonious theory; better void the theology 
than avoid the Scripture. 

No. 7. How are these sins passed by? Suppose as was once 
possible a man got badly in debt and could not pay. Having 
nothing, he himself is sold and afterward put in prison. A friend 
discovers him and asks to be shown his account. It is brought 
and the friend says, "Here is the amount, mark that paid. Now, 
turn over a new leaf— so passing the old account by. Write my 
name at the top, he is my slave, whatever he needs give him and 
charge it to me. " Having done this the friend makes him free, 
but the man filled with gratitude, while rejoicing in his freedom, 
gladly yields willing obedience and service to his new and kind 
master. 



Thus to the world, whose millions have been enslaved to Satan 
and his minions, the picture illustrates Sin's tyranny and 
degradation, and God's love and deliverance and favor as 
perhaps nothing else would. 

The Law, with its sacrifices and typical justification; its jubilee 
cycles, enslavement and purchased redemption (Lev. 25:8-28.) 
etc., were all given as pictures, as object lessons to illustrate 
God's wonderful plan of salvation. A blind Church has neglected 
God's pictures, (failing to see them clearly herself) but under the 
restored Levitical priesthood, in the coming age, enlightened by 
that of the order of Melchisedec, these illuminations will be 
powerful instrumentalities in the accomplishment of the work 
they were really intended for: great index fingers pointing 
unerringly to the justification and redemption and 
RESTORATION of the race of slaves (of Sin and Satan), by 
Jehovah's way— through the blood of the world's Redeemer and 
Master, Jesus Christ our Lord. 

W. I. MANN. 



R1031 : page 8 

C. H. SPURGEON in a sermon on Rev. 5:10 said: "Do you 
know I am a fifth monarchy man? In Cromwell's time some said 
there had been four monarchies and the fifth would come and 
overturn every other. Well, I never wish to do as they did; but I 
believe with them that a fifth monarchy shall come. There have 
been four;-and there never shall be another until Christ shall 
come.... I am afraid we cannot hope for much better times until 
the Lord Jesus Christ comes a second time. Often do I cheer 
myself with the thought of His coming.... For that day do I look: 
it is to the bright horizon of that second coming that I turn my 
eyes." 

THE Protestant Churchman says: "What is the view we are to 
take, and the duty to which we are called?... To take the view of 
earth which the Lord's word suggests, Till the glorious coming 
of the Saviour we may anticipate nothing but successive 
overturnings of men and earthly things... The history of men, in 
the closing period of the times of the Gentiles, is a history of 
warfare and revolution, until the Saviour appears in the power 
and majesty of His coming. Thus are we to look at the coming 
state of the world and men, till He appear to take the kingdom. " 

"WE are living in the very age towards which all eyes have 
been directed as those of the closing days of the church's 
conflict, as long ago as the time of Luther. "-Samuel Garratt. 



R1031 : page 8 



"A VERY unpleasant complication has arisen in a wealthy and 
fashionable church in Cincinnati. For some time past a woman 
of previously doubtful reputation has been a constant attendant 
at the services of this church. She has frequently been affected 
to tears by the sermons, and in other ways manifested a great 
interest in religion. The prominent members of the church, 
however, and especially the ladies, are indignant at her for 
venturing to sit among respectable people, and the pastor has 
been requested to inform her that she is not wanted. Thus far he 
does not appear to have done this, and a number of people talk 
of leaving the church, unless this woman is made to do so. 
Wonder if these ladies ever read the eighth chapter of John, 
from the third to the eleventh verses. Probably not, or if they 
have, it is very likely they don't believe in any such spirit as that 
shown by Jesus the Christ. "~Sel. 

WHOSE is this fastidious? "Church;" Whose spirit has it? 
Surely the church founded by Christ included Mary Magdalene. 
The great fashionable congregations of the worldly have its 
spirit, which is against (contrary to) Christ's spirit. -W. M. 
WRIGHT. 


