A Helpful Series for Our Ministry
 1. The series “A Conversation With a Neighbor” has what twofold objective?
1 From time to time, the public edition of The Watchtower features the series “A Conversation With a Neighbor.” This series has a twofold objective—to present Bible teachings in an appealing way and to show us how we might reason tactfully on certain subjects. (1 Pet. 3:15) How can we make good use of these articles?
 2. How can we use this series of articles in our ministry?
2 Use Them in the Ministry: You might save extra copies of issues of The Watchtower that include an article from this series. When a householder, interested person, or Bible student asks a question or raises an objection that has been addressed in one of these articles, give him a copy of that article and offer to discuss it. If you do not have a printed copy of the magazine that featured the article, perhaps you can download it from jw.org.
 3. How might we discuss one of the articles with a householder?
3 How might you discuss one of these articles with someone? Some have invited the person to read aloud the words of the neighbor, while they read the words of the Witness. This third-person approach can be effective because it allows the individual to examine our beliefs in a way that does not make him feel uneasy.—Deut. 32:2.
 4. How can we use the articles in this series to train ourselves?
4 Train Yourself and Others: As you read through these articles, take note of the scriptures, illustrations, and lines of reasoning. Notice the tone of the material. Then try a similar approach in your ministry. (Prov. 1:5; 9:9) One sister observed, “Reading these articles is like learning from a ‘perfect’ pioneer partner—one who always knows just the right thing to say!”
 5. How can we help our Bible students prepare for the ministry?
5 You can also use these scripted examples to help your Bible students prepare for the ministry. Read the information together, allowing the student to play the role of the publisher. In this way, Bible students can practice expressing their beliefs in a tactful manner. (Col. 4:6) Truly, these articles are one of the many ways that Jehovah helps us “fully accomplish” our ministry.—2 Tim. 4:5.

