Take as a Pattern the Prophets—Hosea
 1. What question may you have asked yourself?
1 ‘What sacrifices am I willing to make for Jehovah?’ Perhaps you have asked yourself that question when meditating on his abundant goodness and mercy. (Ps. 103:2-4; 116:12) Hosea willingly did what Jehovah commanded him to do, even though it required personal sacrifice. How can we imitate Hosea?
 2. How can we imitate Hosea’s fine example of persevering in the preaching work?
2 Preach in Troublesome Season: Hosea’s message was directed primarily toward the ten-tribe kingdom of Israel, where true worship had nearly been stamped out. King Jeroboam II did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes and perpetuated the calf worship initiated by Jeroboam I. (2 Ki. 14:23, 24) The succeeding kings continued the spiritual decline of the ten-tribe kingdom until it was finally destroyed in 740 B.C.E. Yet, in spite of the prevailing false worship, Hosea faithfully served as a prophet for at least 59 years. Are we similarly determined to preach year after year, even when facing apathy or opposition?—2 Tim. 4:2.
 3. How did Hosea’s life illustrate Jehovah’s mercy?
3 Focus on Jehovah’s Mercy: Jehovah instructed Hosea to marry “a wife of fornication.” (Hos. 1:2) Although his wife, Gomer, bore him a son, she apparently later gave birth to two illegitimate children. Hosea’s willingness to forgive his wife illustrated Jehovah’s great mercy toward wayward Israel when they repented. (Hos. 3:1; Rom. 9:22-26) Are we willing to put aside personal preference in order to make known Jehovah’s mercy to people of all sorts?—1 Cor. 9:19-23.
 4. What are some sacrifices that we might make for Jehovah?
4 Some servants of Jehovah have sacrificed lucrative careers in order to devote more time to the ministry. Others have remained single or childless to pursue Kingdom interests. When reflecting on the life of Hosea, we may think to ourselves, ‘I could never do what he did.’ However, as we grow in appreciation for Jehovah’s undeserved kindness and rely upon his holy spirit for strength, we may be used by him in ways we never thought possible, just as Hosea was.—Matt. 19:26; Phil. 2:13.

