Attend Meetings “All The More So”
1 Meeting together has always been vital for Jehovah’s people. The Israelites had the temple and their synagogues as centers for true worship, divine education, and joyful association. Similarly, the early Christians did not forsake gathering together. As pressures and trials increase in these critical last days, we too need the spiritual strengthening that our congregation meetings provide​—and we need it “all the more so.” (Heb. 10:25) Note three reasons why we attend meetings.
2 For the Association: The Scriptures admonish us to “keep comforting one another and building one another up.” (1 Thess. 5:11) Godly association fills our minds with good thoughts and motivates us to do good works. But if we isolate ourselves, we are apt to entertain foolish, selfish, or even immoral ideas.​—Prov. 18:1.
3 For the Instruction: Christian meetings provide a continual program of Bible instruction designed to keep the love of God alive in our hearts. They give practical direction in applying “all the counsel of God.” (Acts 20:27) Meetings train us in the art of preaching and teaching the good news, skills that are needed all the more so now to experience the unspeakable joy of finding and assisting those who will accept Bible truth.
4 For the Protection: In this wicked world, the congregation is a real spiritual refuge​—a haven of peace and love. When we are in attendance at congregation meetings, God’s holy spirit has a powerful influence on us, producing the fruitage of “love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control.” (Gal. 5:22, 23) Meetings fortify us to stand firm and solid in the faith. They equip us to be prepared for the trials ahead.
5 By regular meeting attendance, we experience what the psalmist described, as recorded at Psalm 133:1, 3: “Look! How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!” Wherever God’s people serve and meet together today, “there Jehovah commanded the blessing to be, even life to time indefinite.”

