Magazines Announce the Kingdom
1 As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we are well-known for our zealous preaching about God’s Kingdom. The Watchtower and Awake! magazines we distribute play a powerful role in helping millions of people to learn about God’s purposes. The message they contain is indeed good news, for it announces God’s heavenly Kingdom as the only hope for mankind.
2 The magazines come to grips with the real needs of people​—emotional, social, and spiritual. With morals and family values collapsing all around, The Watchtower and Awake! help people improve the quality of their lives by showing them how to apply Bible principles. It will be our pleasure to feature the magazines during April and May.
3 They Have Real Appeal: The Watchtower and Awake! are available in the languages of virtually all the world’s population. Because of this, our magazines are well-known. Here are some reasons why people are attracted to them:
▪ As journals of integrity and truth, they clearly show the difference between good and bad.
▪ They give hope of a righteous paradise to come, based on God’s promise to bring the earth under his Kingdom rule.
▪ A wide variety of timely subjects are presented, appealing to people of all backgrounds and cultures.
▪ The articles are concise, educational, factual, and free from prejudice and compromise.
▪ The eye-catching illustrations create immediate interest, and the clear writing style makes the magazines easy to read.
4 Distribute Them Widely: Effective magazine distribution depends largely upon our diligence in preparing our presentations, scheduling our time, and organizing our preaching activity. Practical suggestions were offered in the September 1995 and October 1996 issues of Our Kingdom Ministry, which would be good to review and apply.
5 Acquaint Yourself With the Magazines: As you read each issue, think of someone who would appreciate having a copy. Look for specific points or scriptures that you can quote in your presentation. Think of a question you can ask to initiate a conversation and stimulate interest in the subject.
6 Adapt the Presentation to the Person: Prepare a simple, flexible presentation that can be adjusted for a man, a woman, an older person, or a youth, whether an acquaintance or a stranger.
7 Be Watchtower and Awake! Conscious: Since the magazines easily fit into a bag, a purse, or a pocket, we can carry copies with us when traveling or shopping. Offer them when talking to relatives, neighbors, coworkers, schoolmates, or teachers. Set aside a day each week for magazine witnessing.
8 Show Appreciation for the Magazines: They never lose their value. The passage of time does not lessen the importance of the message that they contain. Of course, if we make a special effort to place all the magazines we obtain, older issues need not accumulate on our shelves.
9 Street Witnessing Is Effective: This is one of the best ways to offer the magazines to a large number of people. Some publishers work busy thoroughfares at regular intervals on shopping days.
10 Business Territory Is Productive: When witnessing from store to store, we have few not-at-homes. Most business people are courteous, and many gladly accept the magazines. Feature articles that are appropriate for the particular business being contacted.
11 Magazine Routes Have Potential: Since the magazines are published semimonthly, it is only natural to call back on people who read them and to present the next issues. We should make regular return visits, not only to place magazines but also to develop the person’s interest in the Bible. Magazine routes are an excellent source of potential Bible studies.
12 Make the Most of April and May: The Watchtower and Awake! have won the confidence of millions of appreciative readers. They are so effective in announcing the Kingdom that we should make it a point to carry them with us and offer them at every opportunity. May the months of April and May prove to be outstanding ones for magazine distribution!

