Service Meetings for April
Week Starting April 6
Song 27
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Remind everyone of the place and time for the Memorial observance on Saturday, April 11. Theocratic News.
15 min: “Our Ministry​—An Expression of True Love.” Questions and answers. Include brief comments on February 1, 1987, Watchtower, pages 16-17, paragraphs 3-7.
20 min: “Magazines Announce the Kingdom.” Elder considers article with a panel of three or four publishers who are effective in placing magazines. Discuss the appealing features of the current journals, suggesting ways these points can be worked into our presentations. Consider how magazine distribution could be increased in the local territory. Using the current issues, point to articles that stir interest, such as those that concern social, family, or community problems. Have two or three brief presentations demonstrated. Each time, mention the matter of donations for the worldwide work.
Song 205 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 13
Song 90
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Attend Meetings ‘All the More So.’” Questions and answers. As time permits, review admonition found in Our Ministry book, pages 64-5. Give warm commendation to all who regularly attend meetings.
Song 119 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 20
Song 5
10 min: Local announcements. Explain that it is not too late to submit an application for auxiliary pioneering in May.
10 min: Question Box. A talk by an elder who kindly points out specific ways that improvement can be made locally.
25 min: “Wanted​—More Bible Studies.” Talk and audience discussion conducted by the service overseer. Review the Bible study activity locally. Give commendation where congregation has done well. Point out what more can be done in starting and conducting Bible studies, including family studies. Illustrate paragraph 5 by interviewing a parent who does well in conducting a family study. Read paragraph 8, and emphasize the eight listed points. Explain paragraph 13 by inviting a publisher who is effective in conducting studies to relate how it is possible to cover material without unnecessary delay. Include a well-chosen experience that shows how good results have been achieved locally.
Song 109 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 27
Song 100
12 min: Local announcements. Announce the names of those who will auxiliary pioneer in May. Outline the additional arrangements that are being made locally for meetings for service. Relate some helpful suggestions for preparing presentations that feature the current magazines.​—See October 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8.
15 min: How Christian Shepherds Serve You. A talk by an elder, based on March 15, 1996, Watchtower, pages 24-7.
18 min: Keep a Positive Attitude When Preaching in Frequently Worked Territory. An elder discusses this need with two or three publishers who have become discouraged because of minimal response in territory that is worked repeatedly. He reviews with them the July 15, 1988, Watchtower, pages 16-19, paragraphs 4-14. They talk optimistically about ways to apply these suggestions locally.
Song 191 and concluding prayer.

