
Conducting Effective Bible Studies




 1. What responsibility do publishers who conduct Bible studies have?
1 No one can serve God unless Jehovah “draws him.” (John 6:44) Even so, publishers who conduct Bible studies must do their part in helping people to draw close to their heavenly Father. (Jas. 4:8) This requires preparation. Simply reading each paragraph and asking the printed question is not enough to help our students grasp the message and make progress.
 2. What will an effective Bible study accomplish?
2 To conduct effective studies, publishers must help their students to (1) understand what the Bible teaches, (2) accept what the Bible teaches, and (3) put into practice what the Bible teaches. (John 3:16; 17:3; Jas. 2:26) It can take months to guide an individual through these steps. Yet, each step represents a stage in his developing a relationship with Jehovah and making a dedication to him.
 3. Why do effective teachers ask viewpoint questions?
3 What Is the Bible Student Thinking?: To discern if our Bible student understands and accepts what he is learning, avoid doing all the talking and encourage the student to express himself. (Jas. 1:19) Does he understand what the Bible says on the subject being considered? Can he explain the subject in his own words? How does he feel about what he has learned? Does he believe that what the Bible teaches is reasonable? (1 Thess. 2:13) Does he understand that what he is learning should make a difference in the way he lives his life? (Col. 3:10) In order to get answers to such questions, we need to ask tactful viewpoint questions and then listen.—Matt. 16:13-16.
 4. What should be done if a student has difficulty understanding or applying what he is being taught from the Bible?
4 Habits and thought patterns are often deeply entrenched and take time to unlearn. (2 Cor. 10:5) What if our student does not accept or put into practice what he is being taught? Patience is required to allow a reasonable amount of time for God’s Word and holy spirit to work on the student’s heart. (1 Cor. 3:6, 7; Heb. 4:12) Rather than pressuring him, it is often better to move on to another subject if the student is having difficulty understanding or applying a Bible teaching. As we continue to teach him patiently and lovingly from the Bible, he may in time be moved to make the needed adjustments.




