
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Demonstrating a Bible Study by Using the Bible Teach Book




Why Important: Many people may not understand what we mean when we say that we offer free home Bible studies. They may think that they have to join a study group or take some sort of correspondence course. Instead of simply offering a study, why not demonstrate a study? In just a few minutes, even on the doorstep, you can show a person what an easy and enlightening experience it can be to study the Bible.



How to Do It:
           After introducing yourself, ask the householder if he is concerned about the future.

            Mention that many people have similar concerns, and show him the table of contents in the Bible Teach book. Explain that this book has easy-to-understand lessons that show what the Bible teaches about the future and other subjects, and ask him which chapter he is interested in.

            Hand him a copy of the book, and direct him to the chapter that he selected. Explain that the questions at the beginning of the chapter are answered in the paragraphs that follow.

            Ask the householder to read the first paragraph if he feels comfortable doing so. Then read the question for that paragraph, and consider the answer together. Look up and discuss scriptures cited in support of the answer. Show him how you have highlighted the answer in your book.

            Consider the next paragraph, but this time ask the householder to try answering the question in his own words.

            Commend him, and make arrangements to return to complete the lesson.

            If appropriate, direct attention to the video on jw.org entitled What Happens at a Bible Study?




Try This During the Month:
            Pray for Jehovah to bless your efforts to start a new Bible study.—Phil. 2:13.

            Try to demonstrate a Bible study using the Bible Teach book or show the video What Happens at a Bible Study? at least once while engaging in the ministry.





