Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Jehovah Blesses Godly Zeal
JESUS had godly zeal. On seeing his godly zeal, his disciples recalled the prophecy concerning him: “The zeal for your house will eat me up.” (John 2:17) This zeal was manifest in his ministry: “And he journeyed through from city to city and from village to village, teaching,” and he told his disciples to ‘exert themselves vigorously.’ (Luke 13:22-24) Jehovah blessed the godly zeal of Jesus’ disciples then and he does so today, as the following experiences from Uruguay show.
□ Two women who were Jehovah’s Witnesses lived about 45 miles (70 km) from the nearest congregation. Since they were so isolated, they decided to hold weekly meetings in their own home, to which they would invite interested persons. They were very zealous despite their isolation. One conducted six Bible studies, and the other seven. When the circuit overseer visited them, 36 adults attended his talk. One of the sisters raised five children in the truth, and today all of them are zealously working in Jehovah’s organization. Surely, Jehovah blessed the godly zeal of these two sisters.
□ Another sister showed godly zeal by regularly walking with her children 7 miles (11 km) to attend congregation meetings, usually arriving an hour early. She never felt that since the book study was for just one hour, it would not be worth while walking that long distance when she could simply read the book at home. Today she counts her blessings. Her fine example of self-sacrifice, perseverance, and determination as a wife and mother has had a powerful effect on her children. All six of them are in the truth. One son who is a pioneer shows the same zeal by riding his bicycle 36 miles (58 km) to care for an isolated group. To do this he has to ford a river with his bicycle. Jehovah blesses his godly zeal too.
□ In 1982 one group of brothers worked a certain isolated territory and placed many books. The next year they returned to work the same territory. At one home they encountered a very unusual objection. After hearing their Bible presentation, the householder stated that he did not want to change his religion as he felt he already had the truth. He said: “You see, I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” He was overjoyed when he learned that his callers, too, were Jehovah’s Witnesses.
He explained that he was away from home when the brothers worked the territory, but his family had accepted literature. He read it, discerned that it taught the truth from the Bible, and began telling his neighbors what he had learned. The brothers made arrangements to help this new “sheep” progress to maturity and really become one of Jehovah’s people.
Yes, Jehovah blesses godly zeal for true worship. We are happy to be a part of Jehovah’s organization of brothers worldwide, and we want to manifest this godly zeal for the ministry. Being delivered from Satan’s wicked system and cleansed by Bible truth should encourage us to be “zealous for fine works.”​—Titus 2:14.

