Did You Know that It May Be Illegal?
CHAIN letters​—have you heard of them? In many countries individuals have participated in sending letters of request that are generally referred to as “chain letters.” Some persons view sharing in “chain letters” as an innocent pastime. But did you know that this may well be an illegal activity?
Usually someone receives an unsolicited letter that reads something like this recent one: ‘Below are listed four names. Within four days send $1.00 [or a gift or other item] to the first name on the list. Make four copies of this letter, eliminating the first name and putting your name last. Within twenty days you will receive $250.00 in bills. Do not break the chain.’ Often the letters contain some threat of tragedy for the recipient if he should break the chain.
This procedure is obviously contrary to Christian principles. Jesus stressed loving one’s neighbor and doing to others what you would want them to do to you. (Matt. 7:12; 22:39) A Christian cannot imagine Jesus forcing an unwanted and unnecessary obligation on his acquaintances and threatening harm or loss if they did not cooperate.
But another point of interest is that in some places “chain letters” are illegal. In the United States Government pamphlet Mail Fraud we read: “The Post Office Department warns against participation in chain-letter schemes. Any chain-letter that requires payment of anything of value, even if it is only a handkerchief or a dish towel, is illegal under the Federal lottery statute. . . . Many persons do not realize that in addition to violating the lottery law, chain-letters are also fraudulent in that they seem to promise the possibility of large returns for a small investment. A few persons starting the scheme may receive more than they put in. The great majority of participants receive nothing at all.”
With good reason, then, many persons who have received “chain letters” have simply thrown them into the garbage, not wanting to share in unchristian and possibly illegal activities.

