
Young People Ask
What Makes a Social Event Really Fun?

Below, put a ✔ next to the activity that you look forward to most at a social event.
  eating

  dancing

  playing games

  making new friends

  connecting with old friends

  other ․․․․․







MOST young people love getting together, and there’s nothing wrong with that. Social events are even mentioned favorably in the Bible.
Did you know?
  Job’s sons held family gatherings.—Job 1:4.

  Jesus attended a sizable wedding celebration.—John 2:1-11.

  Christians in the first century socialized in private homes.—Acts 2:46, 47.


There’s no denying that getting together with friends is fun. Sadly, however, some gatherings are anything but refreshing.
TRUE STORY “I was invited to a party with an open invitation, meaning anyone could come, and it was to be held at the house of a boy whose parents were out of town. I decided not to go, and I’m glad! The next day, I heard that there was alcohol everywhere and that some people got intoxicated. Three boys even passed out. Also, a fight broke out, and the police had to come and shut down the party.”—Janelle.
LESSON Don’t leave things up to chance! Whether you’re organizing an event or you’ve been invited to one, be sure you know the answers to the questions on the following pages. That way you’ll be much more likely to have great memories—and no regrets—once the party is over.



SUCCESS STORIES

“When my friend had a gathering, her mom knew where everyone was. Even when I went to the car to grab a jacket, she asked where I was going. Was she overcautious? Maybe. But I wasn’t offended because I realize it’s better to be safe than sorry.”—Kim.

“I’ve been to good events, and I think the reason why they were a success is that there was a variety of age groups there. Plus, the people giving the gathering had fun activities planned, so nobody was left to wander off and do his own thing.”—Andrea.




More articles from the “Young People Ask” series can be found at the Web site www.watchtower.org/ype

  “There are people who are good associates, and there are those who enjoy living ‘on the edge.’ The secret to a good social event is to be selective in your choice of guests.”

“I’ve been to successful organized gatherings where rules were enforced so that potential problems would be avoided. That made those events stress free and much more enjoyable.”



 Who will be there, and how large will the gathering be?
  “I think you should invite people you actually know and you should not make it an open invitation or tell those who are coming to bring a friend.”—Renee.

  “If the number of invitations isn’t monitored, a social event can get way out of hand. You invite 20 people, but then those 20 people invite another 10 people, and those 10 people invite more people . . . I’ve seen it happen!”—Colette.

  “Big social events are prone to get out of hand. I think it’s smarter to be with small groups of people.”—Alexis.

“He that is walking with wise persons will become wise, but he that is having dealings with the stupid ones will fare badly.”—PROVERBS 13:20



 What is likely to happen there?
  “If it’s your party and bad things happen, it makes you look bad.”—Bridget.

  “With proper precautions, a social gathering can be enjoyable for everyone. It all depends on the use of foresight.”—Seth.

TRUE STORY “I have a friend who told me that he doesn’t invite me to his gatherings because he knows my parents are going to ask him questions, such as, Who is going to be there? and How long will it last? He says he doesn’t like being monitored that way. That’s a big warning sign! If he doesn’t feel comfortable with questions, I don’t think his gatherings are the kind I want to attend!”—Ellen.
“Whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything else, do all things for God’s glory.”—1 CORINTHIANS 10:31



 What will you do if the event makes you feel uncomfortable?
  “I have an escape plan. When I go to a gathering, I always call my parents anyway to tell them what time I’ll be home. When I do that, they ask me if everything is OK. If I say no, that’s their cue to remind me of all the chores I need to do. After I get off the phone, I tell my friends that my parents want me home early and that I have to leave.”—Therese.

TRUE STORY “At one gathering, two boys who weren’t invited walked in, and one of them was known to be connected with drugs. It was really hard for me to make the decision, but I called my dad and asked him to come and get me.”—Mary.
“Sensible people will see trouble coming and avoid it, but an unthinking person will walk right into it and regret it later.”—PROVERBS 22:3, TODAY’S ENGLISH VERSION



 What kind of supervision will there be?
  “If mature people are there to make sure everything goes well, the gathering will most likely be a success.”—Mark.

  “I used to be embarrassed to have my parents at a gathering. But now I realize that they’re there to make sure things don’t get out of hand. Just because your parents are there doesn’t mean you can’t have a good time.”—Laura.

“Hold a good conscience.”—1 PETER 3:16



WHY NOT ASK YOUR PARENTS?
  Find out what kind of gatherings your parents enjoyed when they were your age. What, if anything, would they do differently with regard to the social events that they organized or attended?
PLANNING A GATHERING?
  Talk to your parents about it, and think carefully about . . .
                Who will be invited

                How many will attend

                Where the gathering will take place

                What type of supervision there will be

                What activities are planned




