From Our Readers
Lead Poisoning  I just finished reading the articles “Lead Poisoning​—Are You and Your Children at Risk?” (November 22, 1992) and would like to thank you for your timely, balanced, articles. I hope someday you can write a similar article about the connection between aluminum and Alzheimer’s disease.
D. C., Canada
This issue was already mentioned briefly in the article “Pollution​—Who Causes It?” in our May 8, 1990, issue.​—ED.
Youngest Child  I’m 13 years old and the youngest of five. The article “Young People Ask . . . Why Do I Have to be the Youngest Child?” (October 8, 1992) was greatly appreciated. I feel exactly like some of the kids you quoted, and I hope this article will benefit my entire family. Thank you for helping us young people.
C. M., United States
I’m the middle child, but a lot of what this article said applies to the way I feel. I too feel as if I’m paying for the mistakes my brother made. My curfew is something like nine o’clock because of him. My sister and I share a room, and I don’t have any privacy. Still, I’m glad I’m the middle child, with an older brother to learn from and a younger sister that I can teach. I’m never really alone. So thank you for writing such an article; I may not be the youngest child, but I benefited from it.
N. R., United States
Hands  As I read the article “Our Fascinating Hands” (August 8, 1992), I could not resist looking at my own hands. I had never given thought to how wonderful these tools are that Jehovah has given us. How can some believe that humans are the result of evolution? I believe many will change their mind when they read this article.
E. M., Brazil
Iron Lung  I am writing with my eyes full of tears after reading Laurel Nisbet’s story, “Not Even an Iron Lung Could Stop Her Preaching.” (January 22, 1993) Her faith is an example for all of us. It was moving to read how she was able to use her situation to help a number of others to get to know Jehovah. She was also determined not to violate the sanctity of blood and used all her strength to explain her position to her doctor, even when close to death. Thank you with all my heart for publishing her experience.
Y. C., Italy
Critical Parents  The “Young People Ask . . .” articles “Why Is Nothing I Do Ever Good Enough?” (November 22, 1992) and “How Can I Deal With My Parents’ Criticisms?” (December 8, 1992) came at just the right time. I was feeling depressed because my father always found something to grumble about. Now I intend to make a real effort to accept criticism calmly and not resentfully refuse it.
M. Z., Italy
The articles really hit home. I have always believed my parents criticized me because I couldn’t do anything right. Your article helped me see that their discipline is a product of their love and that they want me to succeed. Since I read your article, my parents have had a lot less to complain about.
S. P. United States
My mother is not a Christian, and nothing I’ve done has ever been good enough for her. But this article helped me to understand her better. The outcome of my effort? She listens now and has come to believe what I am telling her from God’s Word!
M. T., Philippines

