VOL. XXVII. MARCH 15, 1906 No. 6 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 83 

Is the Moral Supremacy of Christendom in 
Danger? 83 

Communism and the Bible 84 

Palestine Opened to Jews 84 

Signs of Depravity in Coming Generation 85 

Rifle Range Under a Church 85 

Spiritism is Aggressive 85 

One-Day Convention Reports 89 

The Chestnut Burr (Poem) 89 

Punishing Fellow-Members 89 

Infallibility and Church Eldership 90 

A Lesson on Temperance 92 

"Take Heed How Ye Hear" 92 

page 82 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 



PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3741 : page 82 

A PLEASING CORRECTION. 



In our issue of Feb. 15th, page 52, notice an article headed 
"VERY SAD IF TRUE," relating to President Faunce of Brown 
University. One of the brethren acquainted with the gentleman 
called his attention to it, and reports to us that the truth 
of the report is emphatically denied. We are glad of this, and 
will be very pleased if the brother will obtain from President 
Faunce a brief statement of his views of the Atonement over 
his own signature; we will be pleased to give it publicity in 
these columns. Our report, it will be noticed, was taken from 
the columns of "Watchword and Truth," a Baptist journal of 
good reputation, and seemingly in close touch with Dr. 
Faunce's opinions. 

COLPORTEUR WORK IS GREAT 



Evidently now is the special time for the promulgation of the 
Good Tidings of the Kingdom. Every avenue seems to be 
opening wider than ever before. The Colporteur work is 
showing remarkably: Much of this is due to some new methods 
very recently adopted. Now every laborer of zealous heart is 
being prospered. Still there is room! If you are free of 
earthly encumbrances or nearly so, and long for this service, 
write to us at once for our "Special Instructions." If you at 
one time tried the work and failed of success, put yourself under 
our present instructions and you will surely succeed. If 
possible send us your photograph: indeed, we now have a large 



photograph cabinet at the Bible House, and will be glad to have 
photos of all WATCH TOWER readers willing to send them. 
Write your name on back of photo. 



R3739 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

IS THE MORAL SUPREMACY OF CHRISTENDOM 
IN DANGER? 



FROM THE "HIBBERT JOURNAL" 

rf has become the plain duty of Christendom to 
realize that her hold on the moral supremacy of 
the world is not so secure as many of us imagine. 
There is room, nay, opportunity, for a rival candidate. 
That the Christian ideal of moral excellence is splendid, 
even unsurpassed, no one doubts. But no less certain, 
no less striking, is the failure of the West to justify 
that ideal, both in national and private life. The 
sense of dissatisfaction which this failure has produced 
has entered deep into the moral consciousness of 
Christians all the world over; and if the impression has 
been deep in the case of those who profess and call 
themselves Christians, it has been yet deeper with the 
multitudes who have turned their backs on the Church. 
I rate this feeling among the greatest of the forces now 
moving the minds of men. Other things may create 
a louder noise, but this works revolutions. The question 
of theological standards is being merged into 
that of the moral, and we are being summoned, as 
never before, to find the correspondence between our 
professions and our lives. Such a state of things exposes 
Christendom to a rival challenge, and marks the 
fitting moment for another claimant to appear on the 
scene. If outside the pale of Christendom there should 
arise the example of a saner, nobler, more rational, 
more joyous, more humane, more self-controlled way 
of life than the West has so far achieved, the minds of 
men are prepared to greet its appearance as no act of 

R3740 : page 83 

presumption, but as a divine fulfilment of the urgent 
needs of mankind. 



If any reader of this paper should conclude from 
what has been said that I regard the rise of Japan as 
the most important event in religious history since the 



call of the Gentiles, he will so far correctly understand 
my drift. 



The contention is that a serious challenge to the 
moral hegemony of Christendom is not, a priori, impossible; 
that such a challenge has actually been offered; 
that Buddhism, represented for the moment by Japan, 
is even now in the field as a claimant for that position 
which the vast majority of Christians regard as the 
indisputable birthright of their own religion. What 
verdict history will finally pass upon this claim no one 
can tell, no one should try to tell. Enough for the 
present that the claim has arisen; that it lacks no element 
of seriousness; that it has been forced on the attention 
of the world in a fact-language which admits 
of no mistake. 

The potentates of Europe will hereafter have reason 
to think twice before shaking their mailed fists in the 
face of the Far East. But not for her guns alone, nor 
the way she handles them, is Japan to be feared. The 
"Yellow Peril" is an ethical phenomenon. Far more 
significant than the efficiency of Japan in arms is the 
advent into the world's history of a people possessed 
of a disciplined will in combination with the highest 
order of intelligence. An observer has declared that 
the greatest brains in all the world are to be found 
at this moment in Japan. But a great brain is no guaranty 
of efficiency; isolated from other gifts, it may 
even become the ruin of its possessor. This, however, 
is not the case with Japan; her purpose and her intelligence 
are one. She has shown herself great not only 
in conceiving her end but in pursuing it. She has poured 
her energies into her ideals. Thus she rises up in possession 
of all that we mean by character; and it is in the 
strength of character rather than in the strength of 
arms that she now challenges the world. 

Praise of Japanese virtue is at this late hour admittedly 
superfluous. But none the less a prudent man 
will not cease to observe the facts, nor grow weary in 
his study of their meaning. He will be quick to notice 
that Japan has impressed Europe by qualities higher 
than those which pertain to martial valor. To very 
many persons— I think to the masses of the people— it 
appears that Japan in her hour of trial has shown a 
degree of calmness, moderation, self-restraint, and dignity 
which are strange to the working moral standards 
of Europe, and beyond what we have been accustomed 
to expect. Her armies and navies have taught the 
world many lessons in the making of war, and she has 
won an equal glory by showing how the people who 

R3740 : page 84 

stay at home should behave themselves while the war 



is being made. By what she has refrained from doing, 
no less than by what she has done, she deserves our 
respect. In no act of that appalling drama has she 
allowed herself to play to the gallery. She has not 
made a spectacle of her fight-for-life; she has encouraged 
no reporters to witness the shedding of heroic 
blood; but as though some terrible operation of surgery 
were in progress, she has repulsed the sightseer and 
locked the door. In all these respects she has not 
copied an example previously given, but set a new 
one to the civilized world. 



It will scarcely be doubted that the impression has 
gone very deep, and that great changes are bound to 
follow in many of our accepted ways of thought. The 
working classes of our own country in particular, never 
prone to rate too highly either the bona-fides of their 
religious instructors or the practical value of the instruction 
given, have undoubtedly found here a new 
reason for distrusting the moral efficacy of the Christian 
religion. And not among the working classes only, but 
everywhere one may observe a growing readiness to 
compare the respective moral harvests of the East and 
the West, with the result that Western society sees with 
cleared vision the scantiness of the domestic crop and 
the general nakedness of the land. A new point has been 
given to the arrows of the sceptic: has he not indeed 
been provided with a new poison for his barbs? The 
astounding divorce between the ethical ideals of Christendom 
and its normal practice, the liberty of interpretation 
with which the first principles of Christian 
morality are misapplied to our social life; the freedom, 
amounting to effrontery, with which one thing is professed 
and the opposite practised; the disgraceful sophisms 
by which the Christian conscience is taught to be 
blind to its own faithlessness— these and many other 
truths of a like nature, once apprehended only by a small 
and neglected company, have during the last three years 
been revealed in their true colors to tens of thousands 
of persons who never thought of them before. Who 
can doubt that the crisis which has so long been in preparation 
for Christianity has been brought appreciably 
nearer by these things— so near, perhaps, as to be even 
now at the doors? 

COMMUNISM AND THE BIBLE. 



"The relation of Christianity to Communism has become 
a question for thoughtful people to consider seriously, 
if they wish to preserve their intellectual candor and self-respect 
in adhering to the religion of Jesus." This statement 
is made by Prof. Henry Van Dyke in his new volume of 



"Essays in Application." The new type of communist, he 
says, is more insidious than the old, because, having "laid 
aside the red cap and put on the white cravat," he "discusses 
the problem of organization of society on ethical and religious 
grounds." The law of private ownership the communist 
denounces as "essentially immoral and irreligious, because 
it protects and rewards a form of selfishness." He 
further claims that the "teachings of the Bible are against 
it, and that the Spirit of Jesus, who was really a great Socialist, 
is altogether in favor of common ownership." Entertaining 
the contention for the sake of its implied conclusion 
the writer states that: 

"If property is theft, according to the teachings of Jesus, 
then the Church itself, like the Temple of old, has become a 
den of thieves. If the animus of the New Testament is distinctly 
communistic, then every honest Christian is bound 
either to give up his faith in the holy Scripture or to obey 
its doctrine, not only to the letter, but in the spirit, and to 
work with those who are seeking to establish a new order of 
society in which private possessions shall be unknown." 

The writer admits two cases possible of citation to prove 
that the Bible has at least a partial leaning toward the communistic 
theory. They are the Hebrew Year of Jubilee, 
"which is used as an argument for the nationalization of the 
land;" and the example of the members of the early Church 
at Jerusalem who "were together and had all things in common; 
and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them 
all, as every man had need." Considering these two cases, 
however, Dr. Van Dyke asserts of the first that, "looking at 
the Year of Jubilee as a possible model for legislation in our 
times, we see that it was simply an iron-clad law of entail, 
more rigid than England has ever known;" and the early 
Church "was a fraternal stock company for mutual aid and 
protection." The Old Testament, he declares, holds out scanty 
encouragement to the advocates of Communism. The Gospels 
seem to contain even less. He writes: 

"There was a man in Bethany named Lazarus, who had 
a house in which he sheltered the Christ whom the community 
had rejected. There was a man named Zaccheus, who 
was rich and who entertained Jesus at his own house. Is 
there any suggestion that the Master disapproved of these 
property owners? There was a man named Joseph of Arimathea, 
who had a garden and a new sepulcher in which he 
made a quiet resting-place for the body of him whom the 
people had despised and crucified. Was he a selfish robber? 

"Christianity never would have found a foothold in the 
world, never would have survived the storms of early persecution, 
had it not been sheltered in its infancy by the rights 
of private property, which are founded in justice, and therefore 
are respected by all lovers of righteousness, Christian or 
heathen. It is difficult to see how the religion of Jesus 
could have sanctioned these rights more emphatically than 
by using them for its own most holy purpose." 

More emphatically still the writer declares his belief in 
the antinomy that exists between the communistic creed and 
the doctrine of the Bible, and especially that assertion which 



declares that Christ was at heart a communist. He says: 

"There is a fundamental and absolute difference between 
the doctrine of the Bible and the doctrine of Communism. 
The Bible tells me that I must deal my bread to the 
hungry; Communism tells the hungry that he may take it for 
himself. The Bible teaches that it is a sin to covet; Communism 
says that it is the new virtue which is to regenerate 
society."— Literary Digest. 

PALESTINE OPENED TO JEWS. 



Our readers are aware that for fourteen years the Sultan 
of Turkey has kept Palestine closed against the Jews. 
None of the Jewish race was allowed to become a resident: 
a limited number were granted visiting privileges of about 30 
days and these were sometimes renewed, but no Jewish settlers 
were accepted. Now, according to the cablegram below from 
the public press, all this is changed and Jews may establish 
themselves in Palestine or elsewhere throughout the Sultan's 

R3741 : page 85 

dominions. No doubt this will mean a great rush of Hebrews 
from Russian persecution to the Holy Land, and just 
at the opportune time— "in due time," as our motto for this 
year has it. We quote the cablegram:— 

SULTAN OPENS PALESTINE TO JEWISH COLONISTS 

Constantinople, March 3.— The Sultan has opened the 
gates of Palestine to the wandering children of Israel, by 
signing an edict permitting them to establish themselves in 
any part of the Ottoman empire. 

As a sign of protest against the cruel treatment of Russia 
toward the Jews, the Sultan ordered the officers at the 
different boundaries of the empire to allow the Jews entrance 
with or without passports. 

The Russian Zionists sent a delegation to Turkey and 
Egypt to prepare everything for a systematic emigration 
from the Czar's empire into the new land of promise. 

SIGNS OF DEPRAVITY IN COMING GENERATION. 



"Paris, France.— Sociologists and criminologists are 
greatly worried at the many signs of depravity in the 
growing-up generation. Crimes among children are increasing 
at an alarming rate, and that not only among the 
children of the slums of the great cities, brought up 
among demoralizing surroundings, but even among the 
children of smaller towns and villages. Since January 
last 15 murders have been committed by children less 
than 16 years of age, one more shocking than the other." 



It would be as unfair to blame all the increased and 
increasing depravity of children upon the modern Sunday 
School, as to blame all the increase of crime and immorality 
amongst the young people of our day to the Epworth 
League, the Baptist Young People's Union and the Young 
People's Society of Christian Endeavor. 

ON WHAT, THEN, SHOULD WE LAY THE BLAME? 

It would seem hard, too, to charge these things to 
the fact that our Methodist friends are boasting that they 
are building more than a Church every day. It would be 
equally unfair to charge the great increase of crime 
throughout Christendom to the efforts of any other denomination 
or to any people who outwardly teach and 
favor good morals. 

Education surely opens the mind to greater opportunities 
for evil doing if the heart be unregenerate and 
wicked. But neither can we blame all on that which, 
rightly used, proves such a blessing to others. 

If we should conclude that none of these influences 
should be faulted, we at least must agree that the dear people 
of God connected with all these who have hoped that 
they would prove world-converting agencies have every 
reason to feel disappointed and to look more closely to 
the Lord's Word to see how he proposes to bring in the 
Millennium. When human hopes, ingenuity and efforts 
frustrated, defeated, result in chaos and anarchy, then 
man's extremity is to be God's opportunity, the Scriptures 
assure us. While therefore doing what we severally 
can to offset evil with good let us trust in the Lord and 
wait patiently for his time and way. 

RIFLE RANGE UNDER A CHURCH. 



The Rifle Club gospel is not confined to the elementary 
school and to secular education. When speaking lately at 
the men's meeting at Bloomsbury, Mr. Silas Hocking produced 
a photograph of a rifle range presented by the Mayor 
of Westminster, and arranged in the vaults under St. Martin's 
Church. "We are getting on," said Mr. Hocking. "We 
have the Gospel of Peace upstairs and the Gospel of War 
downstairs— the Crucifix in the chancel and the guns in the 
vaults below. The Church," he continued, "had surrendered 
to the spirit of the world." Christianity said: "Blessed 
are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children 
of God." The modern spirit said: "Blessed are the warmakers, 
for they shall be called patriots and Big Englanders." 
John Bright said force was no remedy, but pompous 
little people who posed as politicians to-day seemed to think 
it was the only remedy. Conscription was universal serfdom 



in the interests of the autocrats.— Herald of Peace. 



R3741 : page 85 

SPIRITISM IS AGGRESSIVE. 

TWENTY-FIVE years ago we pointed out the Scripture 
evidences that Spiritism would be one of the 
terrible deceptions of the end of this age. Evidences 
to this effect multiply daily. The outlook is so 
terrible that we must warn all within our reach to beware 
of everything connected with the occult— Hypnotism, 
Spiritism, etc. All they ask is INVESTIGATION- 
"they do the rest." The Bible is our only proper point 
of contact with the unknown spirit world, and it warns 
us to have nothing to do with the wicked spirits which 
deceptively personate the dead, who "know not anything." 
-Eccl. 9:5. 

By reason of having followed heathen fallacies and 
neglected the Bible, Christendom is peculiarly in danger 
along this line. Believing that the dead are not dead, 
but more than ever alive, they naturally expect personal 
interest in their affairs, and in the advice which deceptive 
spirits most cunningly offer to mislead them. This 
is one of the "strong delusions" of our day, which only 
the consecrated ones, guided by the divine revelation, 
will be able to resist steadfastly: and even "the very 
elect" would be deceived were it possible;— but God's 
providence makes this impossible. 

SAME METHOD AS IN EVOLUTION THEORY. 

Notice the method by which the Evolution theory 
led on to Higher Criticism infidelity, which now rules 
in one-half the pulpits of Christendom and is rapidly 
grasping the remainder and the rank and file of all the 
cultured. Did not noted scientists carry the torch and 
guide the way? And is it not the same now with 
Spiritism? 

While in Great Britain a prominent Episcopalian 
minister is relating to the public his experiences in 
spirit communication, even to the extent of having 

R3742 : page 86 

parcels transported for miles and delivered in an instant, 
in our own land the Rev. R. Heber Newton, D.D., 
declares that he has had sufficient proof to convince 
him that spirit-communication with the dead is possible 
and probable, and that he favors scientific research on 
the subject. And the Rev. I. K. Funk, D.D., one of the 
most prominent Methodists, declares that he has been 
and still is investigating spirit phenomena. 
Dr. Funk's latest pronouncement on the subject, 



published in the leading newspapers of January 22, is: 

"Dr. Richard Hodgson has kept his promise to the 
Psychical Society. I have had a most remarkable interview 
with him, and talked with him in his spirit form 
last night for ten minutes, as agreed upon before his 
death. I stood face to face with his spirit, and he told 
me all was well with him. No one can any longer 
reasonably doubt that the spirits of the dead communicate 
with the living." 

The account assures us that the interview took 
place very early Sunday morning between midnight and 
one o'clock. We wonder if Rev. Dr. Funk or others of 
the Psychic Society ever sought as persistently for the 
Truth in the Word of God! Yet it is still true, "He 
that seeketh findeth;" and the thing sought is generally 
the thing found. Let us not seek with those who have 
familiar spirits, but to the living God for our counsel. 
-Isa. 8:19. 

We quote from the public prints as follows:— 

'"It is true,' cried the Rev. Mrs. Pepper, exultingly, 
last night. 'The spirit relation with Dr. Hodgson 
has been established. From the dead he has come 
back, not in the material sense, of course, but he has 
actually communicated with us from the beyond as he 
promised. After weeks of trying we have succeeded. 
The world could ask for no greater proof.' 

"The seance at which Dr. Hodgson's spirit is said 
to have come back to earth to make good the promise 
made by him, was held shortly after midnight yesterday 
morning at the home of Mrs. Pepper, at No. 258 
Monroe street, Brooklyn. 

"Only the head of the Spiritualistic Church and Dr. 
Funk were present. For weeks the two had striven to 
enter into conversation with the dead man, but some 
atmospheric disturbance always caused failure. 

"Suddenly, Dr. Funk and Mrs. Pepper declare, the 
longed-for communication was established. It was 
while the minds of both were intensely concentrated on 
the subject. The room in which they were was absolutely 
quiet, and it seemed that the session must meet 
with failure, like the ones previous, when suddenly, 
they declare, Dr. Hodgson's spirit responded to the 
summons. 

'"My soul was filled with rapture,' Dr. Funk declared. 
I realized that I and I alone had been the fortunate 
one to receive Dr. Hodgson's long-promised 
message. It was unfortunate that Mrs. Pepper had to 
leave the room, else she, too, would have talked to him.' 

PSYCHIC STUDENTS INTERESTED 

"No more intensely absorbing problem has ever 
confronted the fraternity of the psychic societies at 
large and caused more curiosity on the part of the lay 
public who have been watching the case than Dr. Hodgson's 
promise to communicate with his fellows from 



the spirit world. 

"Dr. Hodgson was president of the Society for 
Psychic Research, and his promise aroused world-wide 
interest. Dr. Hodgson fell dead while playing baseball 
in Boston, on December 20. Four weeks passed and 
nothing was heard from him. Branches of the Psychic 
Society in various cities of the country were making 
constant effort to enter into spiritual communication 
with Dr. Hodgson. 

"In life Dr. Hodgson made every possible effort to 
communicate with those who had gone before. He approached 
every new manifestation of the supernatural 
with the mind of a skeptic. He would not believe in 
anything unless it could be proved to his own analytical 
mind. 

DEVOTED LIFE TO THIS PROBLEM 

"He dealt Theosophy the hardest blow it ever received 
by denouncing Mme. Blavatsky as a fraud, and 
proving that the so-called supernatural things which 
she performed were the simplest kind of artifices. 
Yet he firmly believed that he had many times communicated 
with the dead, and he devoted his life to the 
proof of the theory that intercourse between the living 
and dead was possible. Many times prior to his death 
Dr. Hodgson openly declared that he would certainly 
put the question to the proof by personally communicating 
with some member of the Psychic Society from 
the world beyond. 

"On Dec. 20, when Dr. Hodgson fell dead, he was 
at the Union Boat Club, apparently in the best of 
health. Heart disease took him off in the twinkling of 
an eye. When four weeks had passed and no word came 
from the mysterious bourne beyond the vail, some of 
the weaker members of the Psychic Societies began to 
doubt that the communication would ever be established. 
The stronger members of the cult declared that 
Dr. Hodgson had not yet got into complete accord with 
the spiritual world because he had not been dead long 
enough to have found the proper 'communicator.' 

"Dr. Hodgson in life usually communicated with 
the dead through Mrs. Leonora Piper, the noted Boston 
medium, who proved unsatisfactory to him occasionally, 
however, because but few of the spirits would 
send messages through her. 

"It had been expected by those who were the most 
intimate with the Boston psychist in life that his first 
manifestation, if ever made, would come through James 
H. Hyslop, former professor of logic, ethics and psychology 
at Columbia University. Prof. Hyslop was 
one of Dr. Hodgson's friends and intimate co-workers 
in the field of psychic research. Both served on the 
committee appointed to determine whether Mrs. Piper, 
America's most famous medium, really communed 
with the dead or was just a clever fraud. Both arrived 



at the same conclusion, that Mrs. Piper was all that 
she claimed to be. Dr. Hodgson and Professor Hyslop 
attended seventeen sittings at which Mrs. Piper demonstrated 
her power, and the report made by them was as 
follows:— 
'"The theory of fraud is not tenable in the case.'" 

THE CUNNING OF THE SCHEME 

Note the cunning of the "lying spirits." (2 Thess. 2:9.) 
They not only get hold of the most prominent 
men possible, but they use them well for world-wide 
advertising. For instance, the seance with Dr. Hodgson 
could as well have taken place the day after he 
died (or the day before, for that matter) as a month 
after, so far as the deceiving spirits were concerned; but 
the delay was to arouse curiosity and deepen interest. 
The delay of a month, the correspondence between the 
prominent people of the Society for Psychical Research, 
the questions, hopes, fears, midnight vigils with mediums, 
now called "sensitives," all whetted expectancy 

R3742 : page 87 

and made the matter ten-fold more notable than it otherwise 

would have been. Even now the message is to 

be held back awhile until the public is anxious for it. 

AUSTRALIA NOT OVERLOOKED 

The demon-spirits seem specially to angle for the 
English-speaking peoples. Thus far-off Australia is having 
its full share of attention, and some of the most pronounced 
manifestations of power yet made anywhere. 
Well-attested accounts are published to the effect that a 
Mr. Stanford, brother to Hon. Leland Stanford (deceased), 
founder of Stanford University, has recently found 
a "sensitive" through whom he was able to secure remarkable 
manifestations of spirit powers. The published 
accounts show that at seances covering several 
nights, and at which various prominent persons were 
present, miracles were performed by the spirits for the 
asking. For illustration, a sea-fish, still alive and wet 
with salt water, was deposited in a closed room by unseen 
spirit hands. Rare ancient coins, etc., of Egypt 
were deposited within a few seconds after the expression 
of the request. A bird on the nest with its young, 
the latter still asleep, was similarly presented, claimed 
to be from India. 

The curios from Egypt and India are claimed to 
have great value; and the newspapers have been kept 
busy telling that Mr. Stanford had offered the collection, 
free, to the College founded by his brother; that 
the President of the University had declined them because 
of the manner in which they were obtained (the 
conduct of the latter has been denominated bigotry); and 



finally the said Chancellor of Stanford University has 
publicly denied that the curios have yet been tendered. 
All this has stirred up talk respecting the occult as 
never before in modern times. Whoever is guiding 
these wicked spirits shows great sagacity and insight 
into human conditions. 

THE LONDON DAILY MAIL'S SAY 

The London "Daily Mail" of January 23 devotes 
nearly a page to this topic, "Are the Dead Really Communicating?" 
—heading it with the likenesses of "Three 
Famous Scientists Who Encourage Psychical Research 
—Sir Oliver Lodge, Dr. A. R. Wallace and Prof. Crookes." 
We give some extracts from the article as follows:— 

MENTAL, MORAL AND PHYSICAL EFFECTS OF SPIRITISM. 
ALL BAD. 

"It is daily becoming more and more evident that of 
all the problems that are at present agitating the public 
mind the one presented by spiritism and by modern 
psychical investigation is having the preeminence. 

"The interest in the subject, although for obvious 
reasons not very apparent in the surface-movements of 
life, is nevertheless a keen and a widespread one and is 
growing in intensity day by day. 

"In view of the unhesitating testimony recently 
given by savants of high standing and of European reputation, 
increasing numbers of skeptically inclined 
persons are reluctantly abandoning their attitude of 
reserve and are beginning to realize the seriousness of 
the subject and its far-reaching issues. 

R3743 : page 87 

"The consequence is that the study of occult subjects 
and the search and craving for phenomena is 
daily growing apace, and that a voracious appetite for 
literature in any way bearing upon these subjects is 
being created. In thousands of families the 'spirit circle' 
is an honored institution, and the reception of messages 
from 'departed friends and relatives' is becoming 
an everyday occurrence. 

"How very deeply these practices and the results 
flowing from them are affecting the mental and moral 
life of the community is only known to those who are 
intimately connected with the movement and who have 
opportunities of looking behind the scenes. And it 
must be admitted that, strange as such a phenomenon 
may appear at first sight, it is one at which we cannot 
be very much surprised. 

"When one bears in mind the natural tendencies 
and cravings of the human heart, the innate desire of 
most men to have some definite answer to the whence 
and whither of human life, the doubts on the other 



hand which recent research has aroused, and the general 
tendency of modern rationalistic thought to destroy 
belief in the supernatural, one can scarcely wonder 
at a universal and growing interest in phenomena 
increasingly believed to be a means by which the age-long 
question of man will be answered, and by which 
the fact of a future life will be established on a sound, 
scientific foundation. 

"Now what, briefly, are the facts of the case at this 
present time? 

SCIENTIFIC OPINION 

"English science, it is well known, has, broadly 
speaking, given its verdict. We have it on the authority 
of men whose veracity cannot be doubted, and 
whose scientific authority no one can reasonably call in 
question— who, moreover, have risked their reputation 
in giving their testimony— 

" 1 . That the much-disputed phenomena occur, 
and that many of them are of an objective and tangible 
character. 

"2. That they are often governed by intelligence 
—that intelligence in many instances extraneous in 
its nature and operations. 

"This testimony is being added to day by day by 
the published writings of eminent foreign scientists, 
and it is being confirmed by thousands of intelligent 
spiritists and of private investigators all the world 
over. The alleged facts,' writes Professor A. R. Wallace, 
'which the scientific world scouted and scoffed at 
as absurd and impossible now, one after another, prove 
to be real facts, and, strange to say, with little or no 
exaggeration, since almost every one of them, though 
implying abnormal power in human beings, or the 
agency of a spirit-world around us, has been strictly 
paralleled in the present day and has been subjected 
to the close scrutiny of the scientific and skeptical with 
little or no modification of their essential nature.' 

"It was, of course, to be expected that testimony of 
such a character, and coming from such unlikely quarters, 
would powerfully affect the public mind, and that 
it would, in the course of time, give rise to questions of 
the gravest possible import. 

ARE THE DEAD COMMUNICATING? 

"The greatest of these questions— and, indeed, the 
one which may be termed the burning question of the 
hour— is the one which has reference to the nature and 
aim of the intelligence which is displaying itself. Is it 
human in character— in other words, are the dead communicating 
and are we by these means receiving demonstrative 
evidence that there is life and a world 
beyond the grave? 

"It is impossible for those who are familiar with 



the subject and with the results of the most recent investigations 

to doubt that science itself is tending in 

the direction of an affirmative answer to this question. 

R3743 : page 88 

If a certain learned reserve still characterizes official 
statements, it is difficult not to read between the lines 
and to see what the ultimate verdict is likely to be. 

"The pronouncements of individual scientists, 
speaking in their private and personal capacity, can 
leave no room for doubt in the matter. And the cry 
which they have sent forth has found an echo in thousands 
of human minds, and has given an impulse to 
the spiritistic movement, the effects of which are but 
too plainly and painfully visible in every sphere of our 
social life. Indeed, so strong are the impressions created 
that the utmost impatience is being exhibited 
toward those who would raise a note of warning and 
who cannot join in the exultant cry of the multitude. 

"Ignorance, prejudice, religious bigotry, and narrow 
mindedness are the epithets applied to persons 
who, while admitting the actuality and intelligence of 
the phenomena, nevertheless deny that it has been 
shown to be that of the dead. 

A DISSENTIENT VOICE 

"And yet it is manifest from the evidence at our disposal 
that there are incontrovertible facts pointing in 
this direction, and that this is an aspect of the subject 
which should awaken in thoughtful minds the most serious 
considerations. I can but briefly indicate what an 
experience of nearly twenty years has taught me, and 
why I cannot share the popular view as to the nature of 
the mysterious phenomena under consideration. 

" 1 . It is certain that the identity of the communicating 
intelligences has not been established. Although 
it is admitted that in practically every instance the entities 
claim to be the spirits of departed men and 
women it is certain that that claim has invariably broken 
down in the presence of real test conditions. The 
most recent psychical research in this direction has 
yielded wholly negative results. Those whose names 
were best known in spiritistic and psychical research 
circles and who have practically spent their lives in the 
search for such evidence, have, after death, been unable 
to furnish it themselves. They have not found it possible 
to supply what may be termed the missing link of 
the spiritistic hypothesis. 

"2. It is a known and admitted characteristic of 
the intelligences that they attempt to personate deceased 
individuals. Indeed, so constantly does this 
characteristic display itself that it constitutes the chief 
difficulty in the way of satisfactory investigations. We 
meet with fraud and trickery on every side and with 



the most heartless deception that the imagination can 

conceive. The most trusted "spirit friends or relations," 

sometimes after years of intercourse, and often on 

their own admission, turn out to be masquerading entities 

who have culled the information needed for the impersonation 

from the passive minds and memories of 

the experimenters, and who by some slip or some unusually 

bold manoeuvre in the end turn the tables 

against themselves. 

THE SPIRIT INTELLIGENCE 

"3. The moral character of the manifesting intelligence 
is invariably of a low order. This fact is 
and must be admitted by all unprejudiced inquirers 
who have an accurate knowledge of the subject and 
who have themselves observed and experimented for a 
sufficient length of time. In numerous instances, of 
course, this moral depravity is not immediately apparent 
—indeed it often remains hidden for years under a 
mass of platitudes and of high-sounding phrases, but 
it almost always discloses itself in the end. I know of 
instances which are appalling in character, and a recent 
publication of mine has placed material in my 
possession strongly confirming and illustrating the 
truth of this statement. A great ecclesiastic sent for 
me not long ago and told me instances which had been 
privately communicated to him and which had caused 
him such alarm that he was anxious to enter upon an 
active crusade against spiritistic practices and 
teachings.... 

SPIRITISM AND LUNACY 

"4. As to the moral effects of these practices a big 
volume might be written, and even then the half would 
not have been told. I have in my possession communications 
from former spiritists which throw a lurid light 
upon the subject, and which suggest the gravest possible 
considerations. As far back as 1877 Dr. L. S. 
Forbes Winslow wrote on 'spiritualistic madness.' 'Ten 
thousand unfortunate people are at the present time 
confined in lunatic asylums on account of having tampered 
with the supernatural. ...I could quote many 
instances where men of the highest ability have, so to 
speak, neglected all and followed the doctrines of spiritualism 
only to end their days in a lunatic asylum.' 
And grave and weighty are the warnings more recently 
given by Professor Barrett, a former president of the 
Society for Psychical Research, and by Dr. Van Eeden, 
a Dutch physician, who has devoted much time and labor 
to the study of psychical phenomena. The latter 
tells us that in this unexplored region lie risks of error 
more serious than in any other department of science, 
and not merely of error, scientific and intellectual, but 
also of moral error. And it is this which seems to him 



'to justify the orthodox religions in condemning the 
evocation of spirits as immoral, as infringing upon secrets 
hidden from man by the Eternal.'... 

"5. The teaching imparted by the intelligences is 
wholly contradictory in character.... There is unanimity 
on one point only and that is as regards the fundamental 

R3744 : page 88 

doctrines of Christian faith. It is as a medium, 
or seer, or human being of exceptional power 
and degree of development, that they seek to present 
Christ, and it is the subversion of faith in him as a 
divine person that the spirit messages ultimately aim 
at. The truth of this statement is fully established by 
the writings of the best of our modern spiritists. From 
personal letters which have reached me it is evident 
that the writer had in each single instance lost his faith 
in Christianity, and was suffering the keenest grief and 
disappointment in consequence. 

AN ENEMY IN THE HOME 

"It is for the reasons thus briefly stated that I cannot 
share the popular view respecting the interpretation 
of the phenomena of spiritism. On the contrary, I 
am thoroughly convinced that a terrible deception 
lurks behind these phenomena and that a grave and 
daily growing peril is menacing society. A dangerous 
and subtle enemy is silently creeping into our homes 
and families, and the astonishing thing is that our 
pastors and teachers are so strangely silent on the subject 
and are doing little or nothing to warn the people. 
I am personally strongly convinced that the policy of 
silence on the subject, so frequently adopted with a 
view to the avoidance of greater peril, is no longer a 
safe and a wise one. 

"In my opinion our safeguard lies in taking every 
opportunity of conveying accurate information, and 
above all things stating all the facts of the case. It is 
the one-sided presentation of the subject and the scientific 
support which is being given to it that are doing 
all the mischief and that are hourly increasing the 
spread of evil. 

"Let it once be clearly and fully known that these 
'dear friends' on the other side of life ruin and desolate 

R3744 : page 89 

homes, that they drive men and women to destruction 
and to the madhouse, that they undermine religious 
faith and confidence, and that in a thousand instances 
they bring about an utter weariness and a detestation 
of the duties of the present life, and thinking men will 
abandon their intercourse with such beings and will 
seek for the interpretation of the problems elsewhere 



than in scientific records." 



R3744 : page 89 

ONE-DAY CONVENTION REPORTS. 
CANTON, O. PITTSBURG, PA. 

THE convention at Canton, O., was a decided success 
so far as human judgment could determine. 
Nearby towns were well represented— as many 
as twenty-three came from Cleveland. The morning 
text was, Mark 9:47,48. Many of you received the daily 
press report of that discourse. The afternoon session 
for the public was well attended. The Opera House 
was crowded— about 1500 persons gave close attention 
for two hours to our discourse on "To Hell and Back." 
The friends at Canton must have advertised extensively, 
for the day was not favorable for a large attendance. 
The friends of the Allegheny Church thought that 
Pittsburg ers should have a chance to hear on the subject. 
They secured Pittsburg Carnegie Hall and advertised 
liberally a meeting for Sunday evening, March 4, 
for the topic, "To Hell and Back." They did nobly, and 
on a stormy night packed the house with a most intelligent 
audience, which gave closest attention and in various 
ways indicated deep interest in what they heard. 
The official count of the attendance was 2,614. A 
number of friends were present from surrounding 
towns. The regular afternoon service was held in 
Bible House Chapel: the discourse of that occasion 
you have in the secular press. 



THE CHESTNUT BURR. 
"IN DUE TIME" 

Behold, these burrs a story tell; 

One closed, the other opened wide: 
And should we heed the story well, 

Great things to us it may betide. 

We note with thorns that each is armed; 

The one its secret will not broach. 
The wise by this are fully warned, 

Forbidding thus a close approach. 

The other opened wide to view, 
Discloses rich, sweet fruit within; 

Yet once 'twas like the first one too, 
And held its secret safe from men. 

What wrought this change? Pray bring to light 



Why one should yield its fruit so fair, 
And one remain unopened quite, 

Absorbing God's pure light and air? 

Ah! There's the key, my brother true; 

For when the Sun completes its task, 
Its kernel then will come to view, 

In God's own time. Who more can ask? 

For God has times and seasons too, 
And all shall be as He has said; 

Tho' this is known to but the few, 

Who to the world are "reckoned" dead. 

Just as the burr so slowly grew, 

Knowing the seasons in their round, 

To God's appointed time was true, 
Its open petals then were found; 

Thus Truth shall yield her fruits to men, 
When ripened in God's own fixed day; 

Her portals firmly closed 'til then, 

Nor yield to aught that men may say. 

Shall we not profit then by this? 

With patience wait 'til He reveals 
His times and purposes to men, 

Withdrawing that which now conceals? 

But we are told in His own word, 
The "wise" alone shall understand. 

Then make us "wise," most gracious Lord, 
To know what cometh from thy hand. 
-A. J. MORRIS. 



R3744 : page 89 

PUNISHING FELLOW -MEMBERS. 

SOME of the dear brethren earnestly striving to conform 
their lives to the divine Word are noticing 
from the reading of MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI., 
more clearly than ever before the divine regulations respecting 
methods of procedure as set forth in Matthew 18:15. 
Some of them need to be reminded that it is not necessary 
for them to follow out all the regulations there 
set forth. If they choose to overlook the brother's 
fault it is their privilege; but if they cannot overlook 
the fault, if it continues to injure them, they may not 
speak of the matter to others but must follow the Lord's 
direction there given as the only method by which 
they can seek redress. 

Some inquire respecting the kind of punishment 
to be meted out to those who are contumacious, who 



will neither heed the private cry of the brother against 
impositions nor heed the counsel of two or three brothers 
nor heed the voice of the Church— what punishment 
should be applied to these, we are asked. Our reply 
is that we are not at liberty to punish our brother at 
all. The Lord proposes to do that; and tells us that at 
the present time we are not competent to judge the 
degree of each other's weakness according to the flesh, 
and consequently the degree of each other's responsibility 
as the Lord would justly measure it. It is ours 
to forgive, but not ours to punish; it is our privilege 
to seek to stop the injury which is being done us, but 
we may not execute any penalty on account of things 
of the past. 

The whole lesson of the Lord's direction in Matthew 18:15 
is to the effect that we are to strive thus to 
regain our brother's love, and to stop him from further 
injuring us. If we succeed in so doing in the same 
measure we regain him as our brother, we recover him. 
It is not the thought then that the brother should be 
brought before the Church to be punished, but merely 
that as a last resort he be brought before it for reproof, 
for correction, that he may see the error of his course 

R3745 : page 90 

and acknowledge it and cease to do wrong. The effort 
at every step should be to turn the brother to a right 
course, not to expose him, not to injure him, not to 
punish him, for the Lord has said, "Vengeance is mine; 
I will repay, saith the Lord." 

The very most that the Church could do according 
to this Scripture would be that, after having vainly 
endeavored to get the brother to repent and reform, it 
should withdraw special brotherly fellowship from him 
until such time as he would express a willingness thereafter 
to do right. Then he should be received again. 

Even treating the brother for a time as "a heathen 
man and a publican" would not mean to do him injury, 
to castigate him, to pillory him, to expose him to shame 
or contempt before the world. We are not permitted 
to do any of these things to heathen men or publicans. 
He may merely be treated in the meantime in the kindly, 
courteous way in which it would be proper for us to 
treat any publican or Gentile, withholding the special 
rights or privileges or greetings or voting opportunities 
that belong to the Church as a class separate from the 
world. 



R3745 : page 90 

INFALLIBILITY AND CHURCH ELDERSHIP. 

Question.— Brother Russell: I received not long 



since a letter which set forth that you could not be considered 

infallible, because the writer alleges that you 

have changed your views respecting the propriety of 

the various gatherings of the Lord's people choosing 

from amongst their number Elders for the oversight of 

the Lord's work. The writer of the letter I mention was 

at one time, I believe, an elder in the St. Louis Church, 

but being no longer elected by the congregation he disfellowships 

them as "Babylonish." In the letter I 

mention he purports to give an extract from an old 

WATCH TOWER, which makes it appear that at that time 

you considered the election of Elders unnecessary. He 

then quotes from more recent WATCH TOWERS and from 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI., your words recommending 

the choosing of Elders and offering suggestions respecting 

the Scriptural qualifications of such. 

My question is, Is this true? Have you changed 
your view on this subject, and if so may I ask, Why? 

Answer.— First of all I hasten to assure you that I 
have never laid claim to infallibility. I do not expect to 
be infallible until by the Lord's grace I shall share a part 
in the First Resurrection; then, that which is perfect 
having come, that which is in part shall be done away; 
we shall see as we are seen and know as we are known. 

We accept the writings by the twelve apostles as 
being so supervised of the Lord as to be free from any 
error. He himself said of the writers, the apostles, 
Whatsoever ye shall bind, enforce, on earth will be that 
which is recognized as bound or enforced in heaven, 
and whatsoever ye shall loose or release from on earth 
shall be loosed or released from in heaven. Hence we 
may regard the presentations of those twelve men, intended 
of the Lord to be his special representatives under 
the holy Spirit's dispensation, as being infallible, true, 
inerrant. But there is no ground for believing that any 
others than the apostles have been so miraculously 
holden by the power of God as were those twelve, or 
that we have any authority in the Word of God for 
considering the words and writings of others as being 
above or beyond testing and proving by the Scriptures. 
This has invariably been our presentation. It has been 
our endeavor to present the Word of God faithfully as 
he has given us to understand it— to our own Master we 
stand or fall. Nevertheless we trust that our course 
has the approval also of such of the Lord's dear people 
as, led by his Spirit, are now walking in the light of 
present truth. 

OUR VIEW IS DIFFERENT 

We do not deny growing in knowledge, and that we 
now see in a slightly different light the will of the Lord 
respecting Elders or leaders in the various little groups 
of his people. Our error in judgment was in expecting 
too much of the dear brethren who, coming early into 
the Truth, became the natural leaders of these little 



companies. The ideal view of them which we fondly 
entertained was, that the knowledge of the Truth would 
have upon them a very humbling effect, causing them to 
appreciate their own insignificance, and that whatever 
they knew and were able to present to others was as 
mouthpieces of God and because used of him. Our 
ideal hopes were that these would in every sense of the 
word be examples to the flock; and that should the 
Lord's providence bring into the little company one or 
more equally competent, or more competent, to present 
the Truth, that the spirit of love would lead them in 
honor to prefer one another, and thus to help and urge 
one another to participation in the service of the Church, 
the body of Christ. 

With this thought in mind we concluded that the 
larger measures of grace and truth now due and appreciated 
by the Lord's consecrated people would make it 
unnecessary for them to follow the course outlined by 
the apostles in the early Church. Our mistake was in 
failing to realize that the arrangements outlined by the 
apostles under divine supervision are superior to anything 
that others could formulate, and that the Church 
as a whole will need to have the regulations instituted 
by the apostles until, by our change in the resurrection, 
we shall all be made complete and perfect and be directly 
in association with the Master. 

Our mistake gradually dawned upon us as we beheld 
amongst dear brethren to some extent the spirit of 
rivalry, and on the part of many a desire to hold the 
leadership of meetings as an office instead of as a service, 
and to exclude and hinder from developing as leaders 
other brethren of equal ability naturally and of equal 
knowledge of the Truth and competency in wielding the 
sword of the Spirit. From various little groups of the 
Lord's people I received kindly worded inquiries as to 
what should be done in the case of a brother who wished 
to lord it over God's heritage— who wished to run the 
Church as though he were infallible and as though the 
brethren generally were of inferior cast. We uniformly 
advised moderation, especially that the offending brother 
should be judged leniently, reminding the friends of the 
Apostle's intimation that prominence in a teaching 
capacity is especially dangerous, and that they should 
in correcting such a brother remember their own weaknesses 
and dangers in the same direction. But with no 
uncertain sound we assured them that in the divine 
order as well as in the rational order the entire congregation 

R3745 : page 91 

of the consecrated was to seek and to determine 
the will of the Lord respecting its leadership, and should 
not permit any man to usurp this function of the Church 
and to decide for it that he was the one and only choice 
of the Lord for the service. 
We advised on the contrary that the very evidence 



of a self-seeking spirit and desire to be greatest was an 
indication of unfitness for the position, and that to continue 
a "heady" one in leadership would not only be injurious 
to the congregation but injurious also to the 
leader, because we have the Scriptural assurance that 
God resisteth the proud, the self-seeking, and showeth 
his favors to the humble. And the Apostle's exhortation 
is, "Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty 
hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time"— when 
the perfection of the new body in harmony with the 
new mind shall have fully taken the place of present 
imperfections of the flesh. 

You have mentioned the St. Louis Church, and I 
recall that the little company there had difficulty on 
the score of leadership— and probably with the very 
writer of the letter you mention. He became offended 
with the whole company because he was not permitted 
to manage all the affairs of the Church. He wrote to 
me insisting that he knew that God had appointed him 
to that position, and intimating that the congregation 
had nothing whatever to do in the matter except to 
support him, and in supporting him to support the Lord 
and the Lord's will. He urged that he should not be 
elected, should not be voted for, but should be accepted 
by the congregation as of divine appointment. 
He wished me to urge this upon the congregation. 

I demurred, and, in as gentle a manner as I could, 
pointed out to him that the voice of the Lord as respects 
our individual conduct is to be sought in our own minds 
through the aid of the Scriptures, and his voice in respect 
to the Church is to be sought through an expression 
of the sentiments of all the consecrated members, each 
seeking to express to the best of his or her ability the 
mind of the Spirit as secured from the Word. 

The brother evidently felt hurt that I did not recognize 
his divine appointment, and now after several years 
the resentment, I presume, is showing itself through the 
letter you refer to, copies of which, I understand, have 
been sent to others as well as to you. 

Such facts and experiences demonstrated to my 
mind not only the wisdom of the apostolic method in 
respect to "Elders in every city" (Titus 1:5) but also the 
necessity for such a course— that otherwise the Lord's 
people would not make the proper progress in knowledge 
and in the graces of the Spirit, nor come to fully appreciate 
the liberty wherewith Christ makes free, and 
the equality as brethren of one cast, one class, one company, 
one body, of all who are trusting in the precious 
blood of Christ and fully devoted to his service. 

I am neither ashamed of the position I first took 
nor of my present position on this question. It does 
not surprise me that I did not grasp the full situation, 
that I did not make due allowance for the ambitions and 
selfishness which still pertain to the flesh of the friends 
even after the begetting of the Spirit and the setting of 
affections on things above and the endeavor to be governed 



by the wisdom from above. 

Without instituting a comparison as between myself 
or any one else at the present time as mouthpieces 
of the Lord and those twelve special mouthpieces so 
marvellously guided of the Lord at the beginning of 

R3746 : page 91 

this dispensation, I venture to call attention to the fact 
that even amongst the chiefest of those times was required 
to realize the mind of the Spirit on various subjects: 
for instance, the Apostle Peter needed a vision 
and subsequent experiences before he could learn the 
lessons that the middle wall of partition between Jews 
and Gentiles had been broken down, so that now under 
the terms of this Gospel dispensation there is neither 
Jew nor Gentile, bond nor free, who have any special 
prominence or preference in respect to the Lord's favors. 
Peter had a vision of one kind to show him the truth 
on that subject; I had a vision of another kind— a lesson 
of experience coming to me from the various little 
congregations of the Lord's people, which drove me 
to the apostolic method and convinced me that it is still 
necessary for the proper development and upbuilding 
and progress of the Church which is the body of Christ. 

PRACTICALLY NO CHANGE 

As I understand you, the brother's letter implies 
that the fact that the little churches choose their own 
leaders instead of the leaders choosing themselves proves 
that we have become sectarian, Babylonish. Well, it 
is difficult to tell how things will appear to those who 
begin to lose the spirit of the truth and who begin to 
go into darkness. As a matter of fact, we never did 
advocate that the Church should recognize a leader 
merely because he said he thought himself divinely appointed. 
Our thought was that the Lord's spirit prevailing 
amongst those possessing the Truth would so 
actuate them all that with one heart and one mind each 
would be glad to yield opportunities and render service 
to the others to the best of his ability, and that thus 
the Lord's will would be accomplished. The whole 
mistake was in expecting too much of fellow servants, 
neglecting to follow the apostolic method of selecting 
the latter by the "stretching forth of the hand," or 
using other means of ascertaining the opinion of the 
consecrated respecting the Lord's mind on the subject. 

NO ORGANIZATION NOW 

Those who declare that we have formed a sect or 
a denomination misrepresent the facts. A sect is a 
split off, and we split off from nothing. Our endeavor 
is to bring all of the people of God into heart-relationship 
and fellowship with the Lord and with each other. 



We accept all as brothers who trust in the precious blood 
as their redemption price and who profess and evidence 
a full consecration to the Lord's service. We bar no 
one from Christian fellowship along these lines, whatever 
may be his theories on outside and less essential 
subjects. 

We are not a denomination either, for we accept no 
name but that of our Lord Jesus Christ. We are Christians, 
no more and no less. We accept all names given 
to the Church in the Scriptures, not even taking one of 
them as a distinctive title as do our friends of the Christian 
denomination. Each individual has his relationship 
to the Lord, and because related to the Lord is related 
to all others similarly related, because the body 
of Christ is one. This, our union with the Lord, is the 
union of the Scriptures, and the only one: and so far as 
we know no other company of the Lord's people take this 

R3746 : page 92 

position in its entirety nor stand upon it fully. By the 
Lord's grace we hope to thus stand until he shall say 
"Well done!" and shall receive us into his glorious 
Kingdom. 

THE TERM "BABYLONISH" 

The word Babylonish, as we have frequently pointed 
out, signifies confusion. Not confusion as respects 
organization, for the various departments of Babylon, 
its various denominations, have very strict organizations 
that permit of no confusion whatever. Babylon's confusion 
is in her doctrines, which are unscriptural, confusing, 
contradictory, many of them erroneous. We 
fear that the brother whose letter you quote from is 
the one who is in danger of getting into a Babylonish 
condition— his ideas are certainly quite confused in respect 
to the question of Elders. In insisting that he and 
other Elders should rule the Church by divine appointment 
and without any human appointment he is getting 
to even a more extreme position than does the Pope of 
Rome, whom we think to be Babylonish enough; for 
even the Pope of Rome does not attain his position 
by a usurpation, but by an election by the 
Cardinals. 



R3746 : page 92 

INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSON REVIEW. 

-MARCH 18.- 

Golden Text:— "And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their 
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all 



manner of sickness."— Matt. 4:23. 

R3746 : page 92 

A LESSON ON TEMPERANCE. 

-PROVERBS 23:29-35.-MARCH 25.- 

Golden Text:— "At last it biteth like a 
serpent and stingeth like an adder."— v. 32. 

THE Bible contains numerous cautions against intemperance, 

and declares that no drunkard shall enter 

into the Kingdom of Heaven. It follows that this 

must be a proper portion of the meat in due season. However, 

since probably only a very small minority of the 

"saints" are thus endangered, we need not give the subject 

great prominence in this journal. We do desire, however, to 

let all know that we are in sympathy with temperance in 

respect to intoxicants and "in all things." 

We are in sympathy with the spirit of "total abstinence," 
too, though we cannot subscribe to all that is said 
and done and hoped for by its advocates. All true "saints" 
would surely be glad to forego their own liberty that thereby 
they might promote the general welfare and fulfil the 
advice of the Apostle, that— "We that are strong ought to 
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves." 
Seeing the terrible injury being done by strong drink 
throughout the civilized world, surely every reader of this 
journal is now and always will be a temperance advocate- 
especially by example— while telling the "good tidings of 
greatjoy." 

Among the many things for which the people of this 
land may well thank God is the temperance sentiment which 
prevails here as nowhere else in "Christendom." (Strange 
to say, "Christendom" is far behind Heathendom on this 
question.) Throughout all Europe the blight of intoxication 
is awfully prevalent. The statistics of Great Britain, France, 
Russia and Germany show conditions very much worse than 
prevail here. 

Germany has long boasted that her people, even the 
children, drink wine and beer freely without injury; but 
changed conditions show changed results now. Mark the 
following report: 

CHILDREN HABITUAL DRUNKARDS 



TEMPERANCE WORKERS IN GERMANY FIND STARTLING CONDITIONS 
PREVAIL. 

Berlin January, 6.— Friends of temperance reform in 
Germany have been collecting some startling statistics regarding 



the habitual use of alcohol by school children in 

the Thuringian States, where their investigations were mainly 

pursued. They found in one class of forty-nine children 

of the average age of seven that thirty-eight of these regularly 

drank wine, forty regularly absorbed schnaps, and all 

of them drank beer. In the higher class of girls, twenty-seven 

out of twenty -eight regularly drank wine, fourteen 

schnaps and all beer. Of these twenty-one admitted that 

they had been more or less intoxicated on the occasion of 

weddings, birthdays, etc. In the town of Ortelsburg, in East 

Prussia, the condition of affairs is very bad. In one school 

fourteen children were found with brandy bottles in their 

pockets, which they had received from their parents. Boys 

nine years of age had to be sent home because they were 

drunk. 



R3746 : page 92 

"TAKE HEED HOW YE HEAR." 
-MATTHEW 7:15-29.-APRIL l.~ 

"Be ye doers of the Word and not hearers only."— Jas. 1:22 

OUR lesson follows the Sermon on the Mount, and was 

evidently intended as a parable, to impress upon the 

minds of the Lord's people the importance of what 

they had heard— the importance of obeying as well as hearing 

the good tidings. It sets forth the good results of careful 

obedience, in contrast with the unsatisfactory results to 

those who would fail to obey. It is evidently not evil surmising 

if we are on the lookout for false teachers, who our 

Lord declared would come amongst his sheep to mislead 

them. Neither can it be evil speaking to call the attention 

of the sheep to such false teachers. The Master and the 

apostles foretold and forewarned against them and so 

should all who are faithfully following the Master's 

example. 

R3747 : page 93 

But we are to distinguish them in the manner which 
our Lord and the apostles clearly indicated: however 
smooth, polished, educated, gentle, they may be on the surface, 
we must get to know them better than by surface indications 
before we may dare trust them as leaders of the 
flock— we must become intimately acquainted with them, 
their motives, ambitions, private life. This our Lord intimates 
by telling us to beware of them if they are ravenous, 
greedy, selfish, even though outwardly they may have a 
sanctimonious air. The Apostle speaks of these, saying that 
"grievous wolves shall enter in among you, not sparing the 
flock": "And through covetousness shall they with feigned 
words make merchandise of you": "even denying the Lord 



that bought them. "--Acts 20:29; 2 Pet. 2:1,3. 

We are to balance the matter, however; and while 
vigilant to detect and resist the wolves in sheep's clothing, 
as well as out of it, we should remember our Lord's teachings 
on the other side of the question— that those who are 
not against us are on our part, and that we should neither 
reprove as wolves nor disown as brethren those whose hearts, 
whose characters, give evidence that they belong to the Lord, 
even though they follow not with us in respect to his service, 
the promulgation of his message, etc. In other words, 
we are to love all and wish God-speed to all loving the 
Lord and manifesting his Spirit, whether they associate with 
us or not. In a word, the divine rule is very broad and 
very narrow at the same time. It is narrow as respects discipleship 
and character: faith in the redeeming blood, consecration 
to the Master, and a manifestation of his Spirit are 
the lines of discipleship— broad within themselves, but narrow 
as compared to the lines of the world. 

"KNOW THEM BY THEIR FRUITS" 

Anticipating our query respecting how we may know the 
true from the false our Lord says, "Ye shall know them by 
their fruits." He illustrates this by suggesting that grapes 
are not to be expected on thorn-bushes nor figs on thistles, 
although it is said that there is a thorn-bush in Palestine 
which grows a fruit somewhat resembling grapes, and a 
kind of thistle with heads shaped like figs. Nevertheless, 
no one was in danger of being deceived thereby, nor should 
any among the Lord's people be in doubt respecting the 
character and the fruitage of the life of those who are the 
followers of Christ. 

The thought is that the Lord's true people are of such 
a kind that the fruit of their lives is nourishing and refreshing 
toward all who have fellowship with them. On the 
other hand there are persons who, thistle-like, are always 
scattering seeds that will cause trouble— false doctrines, 
evil surmisings and errors; and there are some who, like 
thorn-bushes, instead of bearing refreshing fruit, are continually 
reaching out to impede, to irritate, to annoy, to vex, to 
poison, to injure, those with whom they come in contact. 
The intimation clearly is that the Lord's people ought to 
have little difficulty in distinguishing between the false 
teachers who would mislead them and the under-shepherds 
who gladly lay down their lives in the service of the flock. 
The one class are continually mischief makers, underminers, 
destroyers. The other class are helpers, builders, strengtheners, 
peacemakers. 

Not content with giving us a word-picture distinguishing 
between wolves and sheep, between injurious plants and 
fruitful ones, our Lord next institutes another illustration 
still more searching— contrasting a healthy fruit-tree with a 
diseased or evil one, contrasting a healthy Christian with a 
perverted and misguided one. He declares that a sound 
tree brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt or diseased tree 
brings forth undesirable, evil fruit. How we have all witnessed 



this in nature— the sound apples come from good 
apple trees that are in healthy condition. The knotty, 
wormy, unsatisfactory fruit comes from trees that are diseased, 
under-nourished, uncared for, unpruned, attacked by 
worms, etc. 

In this illustration our Lord seems to refer to the fact 
that those who are his disciples, sound and proper enough 
to begin with, might become evil, might lose their spiritual 
strength and fruitfulness— their carefulness. Lack of nourishment 
in the soil would expose a tree to disease, blight. 
So the Christian who would add to his attainment in knowledge 
is liable to decline in spirituality unless he have spiritual 
nourishment of the right kind. As without pruning the 
tree would develop suckers, which would corrupt it and 
ultimately destroy its fruitfulness, so the Christian needs the 
disciplines, the prunings, that he may develop in character 
and the graces of the Spirit. Our heavenly Father is the 
great husbandman and has promised us the proper care, 
yet it is not exactly with us as with the trees; for because 
of our higher endowment, our godlike quality of individuality, 
will, we are dealt with differently. 

To a considerable degree it is for us to determine what 
nourishment we will have. The Lord supplies the good soil 
of Truth, the refreshing showers of grace, and the nourishment 
of precious promises, but it is for each of his people to 
use these and thereby to grow in grace, knowledge and love. 
We cannot, then, blame the Husbandman if we come short, 
and be unfruitful from lack of nourishment. None of his 
good promises can fail; whatever failing there may be must 
be in ourselves. Likewise with the pruning— the Lord will 
send the chastisements, trials, difficulties; but with our independent 
will it is possible for us to pass these by and, failing 
to use them, fail to correct the weaknesses, shortcomings 
and wrong developments of our nature. It is possible with 
us, notwithstanding all the development or pruning we may 
receive, to set our affections on houses, lands, or earthly 
aims, objects or individuals, which, like the suckers in the 
illustration, would draw away our vitality and hinder our 
bearing of acceptable fruit. 

The sound tree cannot bear poor fruit, nor the corrupted or 
decayed tree bring forth good fruit. While each of the Lord's 
people is to examine himself before the mirror of God's Word, 
to ascertain his own character, disposition, likeness or unlikeness 
to divine standards, nevertheless, in this matter of deciding 
about fruit, whether it be good or bad, each of the 
Lord's people is called upon to exercise judgment in regard 
to others as well as to himself— what are the results, the 
fruitage, the token of my own life, and what is the fruitage, 
results, token of my brother, my neighbor. Our Lord's intimation 
is that these tests are specially applicable to those 
who would be leaders of his flock. They should all be examples, 
bearers of good fruit, and these good fruits should be 
looked for as a test of good, sound character— a character 
fully in harmony with the Lord. True, all are imperfect, 

R3747 : page 94 



and with the best of intentions we cannot do all that we 
would, but the weakest of the Lord's brethren must bear 
some fruits that other brethren could discern, and these 
fruits should be accepted by the brethren according to 
the divine standard, viz., not of the flesh but of the spirit, 
the will, the intention. So, then, every true child of God 
should manifest before the brethren and before the world 
honesty, faithfulness of intention, a consecrated heart, mind, 
will, which would seek in all things to do the will of the 
Father in heaven. 

In Palestine, to this day, fruit trees are taxed, and 
hence a tree which will not bear, whose fruitage is poor, 
cannot be tolerated, for it would entail a loss instead of a revenue. 
Similarly, the assurance that the Lord will ultimately 
cast away every unfruitful one— "every branch in the vine that 
beareth not fruit he taketh away"— while every branch that 
beareth fruit is purged, that it may bring forth more fruit, 
is a further lesson along the same line. 

Our Lord used a fig-tree to represent the Jewish nation, 
and pointed out that it was not bringing forth the desired 
fruitage, and that therefore it would be cut down and destroyed. 
The symbolical "fire" which utterly destroyed the 
Jewish nation made an end of their tree. The Jews will 
indeed receive a further blessing at the hand of the Lord, 
but, as he declares through the prophet, it will be "not by 
your Covenant." The blessing to come to Israel and all 
the nations in the future will be the New Covenant. Similarly, 
in the end of this Gospel age, not only will there be 
an individual test of the Lord's people as respects good and 
bad fruit, but Christendom as a whole, as a system, will be 
found unfruitful, unsatisfactory; and when the true saints 
of the Lord shall have been gathered out and glorified, the 
tree, the system as a whole, will go down, in the great time 
of trouble with which this age shall close and the new dispensation 
begin. Christendom will indeed be favored and 
blessed under the New Covenant of the Millennial age, but 
its special privileges and opportunities of the present time 
under the Abrahamic Covenant will be forever gone. 

"I NEVER KNEW YOU" 

Continuing his discourse, our Lord implies eventually a 
great number of nominal followers devoid of his Spirit, not 
bringing forth the fruitage that he desires, not members of 
his called and chosen and faithful class, though outwardly, 
nominally, all of these. Of this class he says there shall be 
many. He points down to our day, saying, "in that day"— 
in the closing of this age, in the testing time, in the time 
when he shall come to make up his jewels and to glorify 
them as his Bride, his members, his associates in the Kingdom. 
Many at that time— in our day— will profess that 
they know the Lord, that they are prophesiers or teachers, 
that they are casting out devils, opposing sin and multitudinous 
forms of evil, and that they are carrying on mighty 
works, benevolent institutions, colleges, seminaries, etc., in 



his name. The Revised Version gives, "by thy name," intimating 

R3748 : page 94 

that the name of Christ is used rather as a charm, to 
conjure by. 

How true is this picture to the conditions of our day! 
How many take the Lord's name in vain, associating it with 
their enterprises, which are often in direct conflict with the 
Master's Word and Spirit. Why do they use his name? 
Simply as a talisman to conjure by, to increase their influence, 
to satisfy their own minds, to make themselves believe 
that in doing their own wills they are working the will of 
God. How true this is in respect to nearly all religious institutions 
of our day! Take the churches, for instance, recognizing 
more or less clearly the divine opposition to their 
sectarian spirit and creeds and methods and organizations— 
they, nevertheless, are not satisfied unless they somehow connect 
the name of Christ with their institutions and 
arrangements. 

But the testing time is near— the Lord will inquire respecting 
the fruit of these systems; he will not be deceived; 
yea, he will expose the bad fruit, that all may see that 
his judgment is just. It will be manifest that neglect 
of his Word has led to degeneracy, decay— that the 
suckers of worldly ambition, pride, wealth, show, etc., 
have been cultivated, notwithstanding all of the trying 
experiences which might have served to prune these. 
It will be shown that many of the prophets of Babylon 
are false prophets, whose teachings have misguided the 
people and, instead of blessing, have done injury, instead of 
enlightening have blinded. It will be manifested that many 
of them are ravening wolves in sheep's clothing, hungry with 
ambition for fame and prominence and honor of men, and 
willing to barter the interests of the flock for their personal 
aggrandizement. It will be shown that much of this conjuring 
in the name of Jesus has been merely a cloak under 
which, deceiving and being deceived, sectarian fruitage, and 
not the love, joy, peace and holy Spirit, have been cultivated. 
The day will declare it, will show it, will manifest it. The 
whole world shall be witness eventually that God's name 
was proven a dishonor, and his Word misrepresented, because 
false teachers were looking every one to gain from his 
own quarter— his own denomination.— Isa. 56:11. 

The Lord never knew the sects— he never recognized 
them, he never authorized them; they are of men, and for 
men, not of the Lord nor for the Lord's glory. Claiming 
that all there is of Christianity is due to themselves, they 
are proud and boastful and realize not that the Lord's true 
cause would have flourished far better without them in the 
simplicity of the early Church, one in redemption through the 
precious blood and in consecration to the Redeemer. The 
gathering out of the Bride class and the leaving of the remainder 
will be saying in effect, "I never knew you, never recognized 
you, never authorized you;" and these unauthorized 
sects will go down in the great time of trouble. We are glad, 



however, that the thousands and millions who have been deceived 

by these false systems will have a glorious opportunity 

during the Millennial age to come to a knowledge of 

the Truth and a right understanding of the character of 

God as revealed in the fulfilment of his gracious plan. 

Thus many who miss the great prize may still have a glorious 

opportunity for the lesser prize or favor of God in restitution, 

etc. 

"DEPART FROM ME, YE THAT WORK INIQUITY" 

We believe that there are active workers in the sectarian 
systems called "Babylon" who will yet be reached by 
the knowledge of the Truth and delivered. Our Lord intimates 
this, saying, "Come out of her, my people." Some of 
his people evidently are in Babylon, and it is our present 

R3748 : page 95 

mission in the name of the Lord to call these out— through 
the presentation of the Present Truth, which will show to all 
who are truly the Lord's where they stand, and their duty. 
Others of the active workers in the iniquitous systems, which 
are counterfeits of the true, misrepresenters of God's message 
and binders and enslavers of the Lord's people, because not 
at heart loyal to him, will not come out of Babylon, and 
therefore will share in the condemnation coming upon her. 
They will go into the great time of trouble, and for a season 
at least be cut off from all fellowship with the Lord. These 
workers of iniquity will have their hands full of the trouble 
which they have helped to bring upon the world of mankind 
by their misrepresentations of the divine character and 
plan. It will be a terrible chastisement, and our hope for 
them is that "when the judgments of the Lord are abroad in 
the earth all the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 
-Isa. 26:9. 

ON THE ROCK OR ON THE SAND 

This picture or parable of one house built upon the 
rock and the other house built upon the sand refers not to 
the Church and the world, but to two parties in the Church. 
None are in the parable except "those who hear these sayings 
of mine." The world hears not our Lord's message at 
all. As the Apostle declares, the world is both deaf and 
blind to spiritual things. Those who hearken to and appreciate 
the Lord's sayings represent at least a nominal Church, 
and amongst those of the nominal Church are some who are 
obedient to the Lord's Word while others are disobedient. 
The obedient are built upon the rock, the disobedient upon 
the sand. 

Those who build upon the rock our Lord explains to be 
such as not only hear his message but are obedient thereto 
to the extent of their ability. Let us remember the words to 
which he refers— they are the words or message of the Sermon 
on the Mount, which show the things which are blessed 



of God in contradistinction to the things which would not 
have his approval. Those who do, who strive for, who to 
the best of their ability obey these divine teachings, the message 
from heaven, are laying the foundations which will be 
permanent, which will guarantee them against all the storms, 
difficulties and trials of the present life. 

Those who hear the Master's words and say, "Yea, 
Lord," but who do not put the Master's teachings into practice, 
are not built properly upon the rock of Truth, upon 
Christ. They are building their hope, their faith, their 
trust upon a foundation which will not stand. When the 
adversities of life come upon such their hopes will be undermined, 
their faith will collapse. Thus does the Lord teach 
us that it is not merely to know his will, to be doctrinally 
informed, but that he is looking for such character development 
in us as will bring us into full harmony with his teachings, 
into heart harmony, and, to the extent that we are able, 
to obedience in all the affairs of life. The other, whose 
faith is built upon knowledge without obedience, without 
growth in grace, will not be accepted to the Kingdom, will 
not be members of the Bride class, will not be joint-heirs 
with God's dear Son. 

"THE FIRE OF THAT DAY" 

In this lesson our Lord describes not only the trials 
and tests which come upon all Christians throughout this 
Gospel age, but especially the great test in the close of this 
age— in the "harvest" time. Here his figure is that of rain, 
floods, and winds beating upon the faith structure of his 
professed followers, overthrowing the faith of those not properly 
constructed in accordance with his teachings, but unable 
to harm those founded on the rock of Truth. A mighty 
downpour of Truth throughout Christendom is in progress. 
The great storm is already raging. The various denominations 
are trembling under the shock. Their foundations on 
human tradition, creeds, theories, ignorance, superstition of 
the "dark ages," are realized to be unsatisfactory. Ere long 
the storms of Truth will move the quicksand foundation 
upon which nominal Christendom is built, and her wreck 
will follow. Only the true people of God will be able to 
stand the great storm of "that day"— already beginning. 

This is the same storm and flood mentioned by the 
Lord through the prophet Isaiah— "The hail shall sweep 
away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the 
hiding places. ..when the overflowing scourge shall pass 
through, then shall ye be overthrown by it. From the time 
that it goeth forth it shall take you; for morning by morning 
shall it pass through, by day and by night: and it shall be 
a vexation only to understand the report [the message, the 
Truth]. "-Isa. 28:17-19. 

The same day of trial is pictured under another figure 
by the Apostle Paul when he says, "The fire of that day 
shall try every man's work of what sort it is." He pictures 
true believers built upon the rock, the true foundation, but 
points out to us the necessity of having a proper house, or 



faith, as well as a proper foundation. He pictures one 

faith structure built of wood, hay, stubble, combustible materials, 

which will shortly be destroyed in this day when the 

fire of divine judgment shall test every doctrine and destroy 

every error. He pictures also the proper building constructed 

of gold, silver and precious stones, the divine promises, 

and how these will stand every test. 

The lesson as a whole is, first, that we must be on the 
rock foundation to have either part or lot in the matter— to 
be able to stand any test; second, that of those upon the 
rock, trusting in Christ, loyal to him and his atonement 
work, there will be two classes— the "little flock," faithful 
to the Word and upheld by it and protected, and the "great 
company," not sufficiently diligent and careful respecting 
the divine promises, and who will have a faith structure 
largely composed of error, which will be consumed. Respecting 
this latter class the Apostle declares, "the same shall be 
saved, yet so as by fire." This fitly describes the deliverance 
of the great company, who will "come up through great 
tribulation and wash their robes and make them white in 
the blood of the Lamb."~l Cor. 3:12,15; Rev. 7:14. 

R3749 : page 95 

"DOERS OF THE WORD" 

Our golden text is well chosen— "Be ye doers of the 
Word and not hearers only." To be honored with a knowledge 
of the divine will and plan is a great boon, a great 
blessing; but it brings a great responsibility: "to whom 
much is given of him shall much be required." We who 
have heard the voice of him that speaketh from heaven, 
speaking peace through Jesus Christ; we who, on the strength 
of this message of forgiveness of sins, have been accepted in 
consecration as members of the body of Christ, we have 
greater responsibility than have others. To attain the glorious 
things to which we have been invited we must not merely 
have this honor but must make use of the privilege and 
show our appreciation by obedience to the terms of the Covenant 
—presenting our bodies as living sacrifices to the divine 
service, in faithful obedience to righteousness, and in 
endeavoring to assist others in the same course. 



page 97 

SEMI-MONTHLY 