Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Maintaining Faith in a Divided Household
THE apostle Paul admonished Christians: “Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Stay by these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.” (1 Timothy 4:16) In one Oriental land, ‘staying’ by Bible teachings resulted in marvelous blessings to Mrs. L​——​ after she became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Mrs. L​——​ and her husband both came from Hindu families. She was visited by Jehovah’s Witnesses in 1959, and after studying the Bible with them, she accepted the truth of God’s Word. Then she witnessed to her husband and other relatives. (Compare John 1:40, 41.) Her husband showed no interest, but her fleshly sister R​——​ joined the study. In 1961 she and her sister were baptized in symbol of their dedication to Jehovah. As Sister L​——’s children grew up, she studied with them and took them to meetings. When the oldest daughter, S​——, left school, she dedicated her life to Jehovah, was baptized, and married a Witness.
Sister L​——​ kept on witnessing to her relatives. Another fleshly sister became interested, but her husband opposed her bitterly, even destroying her Bible and books. She was not allowed to take her three children to meetings, but she studied with them at home. In time she too made a dedication and was baptized, in the face of strong opposition from her husband. Eventually, all three of her children became dedicated and baptized Witnesses.
Meanwhile, Sister L​——​ continued witnessing to her fleshly relatives. When she spoke with her brother and his wife, the brother showed no interest, but his wife listened. After gaining sufficient Bible knowledge, she dedicated herself to God and symbolized this by water baptism.
Sister L​——​ witnessed to another fleshly brother, who opposed the truth. But his wife, along with their daughter, began to study. The daughter was sent to Canada for further secular studies but continued her Bible study and association with the Witnesses there. Eventually, she also took her stand for the truth and was baptized.
Results of Witnessing to Her Family
The faithful efforts of Sister L​——​ were blessed by Jehovah. In time her youngest daughter gave up her well-paying job, took part-time work, and started serving Jehovah as a full-time minister. The youngest son also became dedicated and was baptized and then took his stand on the neutrality issue. (Isaiah 2:4) He was sentenced to three years in a military prison, but through it all he gave a powerful witness before the tribunal of judges. His father, Sister L​——’s husband, was so impressed by the stand that his son took that he now became interested and began attending meetings.
Indeed, how satisfying and rewarding have been Sister L​——’s 29 years of faithful service in a divided household! She now rejoices to count some 18 family members and fleshly relatives who have been baptized. May this experience be a source of encouragement and comfort to many of our brothers and sisters who, under similar circumstances, have to endure and maintain faith in divided households.​—1 Peter 2:19, 20; 1 Corinthians 7:12-16.

