Building Faith in Others
1 Faith in Jehovah God and in his Kingdom rule through Christ Jesus is greatly to be desired. It makes possible a favorable relationship with Jehovah and gives one the wonderful prospect of everlasting life. But solid faith rarely comes easily. Many persons desire faith but find obstacles in their way to putting full confidence and faith in what they have learned about the truth. Can we do something to help them?—2 Thess. 3:2.
2 Each year at the Memorial of Jesus’ death, we see many interested persons come to the Kingdom Hall. No doubt the extent of their faith varies but at least they were willing to make an effort to come on this important occasion. Can they be helped to make further spiritual progress? Perhaps you are just the one who could be of assistance. Even Jesus’ disciples at one time said to him: “Give us more faith.” (Luke 17:5) We can be helpful to such persons today in aiding them to build a solid faith. This faith comes by hearing a discussion of the word of God by a person of faith. As Romans 10:17 says, “Faith follows the thing heard.”
3 Do you know someone that might be helped to grow in faith in Jehovah’s purposes, in Jesus’ ransom sacrifice, in the wonderful prospects of the new system of righteousness? Then let them hear the word of truth from you. Encourage them to read material that will help them to build their faith; The Watchtower especially could be presented to them during this month. But try to help them to find material that will be of interest and that will build their faith. For example, what may be holding back the person from spiritual progress? Is it lack of confidence in the Bible? Is he inclined to believe in evolution? Or is it some doctrinal teaching of Babylonish religion that hinders him from understanding Jehovah’s purposes? If you know what it is, you will be in a better position to call to his attention some of the fine material that has been published on such subjects as well as discussing what the Bible says on these points.
4 Since faith is a fruit of the spirit, it will grow in the right soil when God’s inspired Word is allowed to influence the individual. If you do what you can to get regular discussions or a Bible study started using one of the booklets that are so well designed to overcome common objections, then Jehovah will help you in getting the seed of truth to grow. But which booklet should be used? This depends on the individual.
5 For example, the booklet There Is Much More to Life! discusses the question of evolution, how life began, the reasons for the world’s problems and the way to survive for eternal life. The booklet A Secure Future—How You Can Find It appeals to the common desire for security, but it gives some fine Bible background, showing that only God can provide what man really needs, who Jehovah is, his qualities, what the Bible tells us about the reason for insecurity today and how a secure future is possible. The booklet Is There a God Who Cares? answers questions that hinder the faith of man such as: Is God to blame for the present problems we face? How did wickedness begin? Why has it been permitted for so long? And what is God’s purpose regarding a righteous new order?
6 Select the material you think would be most helpful to the persons you would like to help. You might make a list of persons you would like to visit during the month. Take along a copy of The Watchtower that you think might be of interest and encourage them to subscribe in order to build up their own faith. But whether they subscribe or not, try to get a Bible study started. Take a personal interest yourself in these persons, talking the truth to them and encouraging them to discuss the Bible with you. Our objective is to build faith that leads to life as we share with people who are searching for the truth the knowledge we have already received.—Rom. 1:17.

