Presenting the Good News—By Conducting a Helpful Bible Study
1 On the average during the last service year there were 1,339,466 Bible studies conducted regularly world wide, some with several persons attending. It is a work that brings much joy.
2 You too can have a share in this work if you have the desire and are willing and able to put forth the time and effort. Disciple making is a work Jesus said should be done and conducting Bible studies is a way to do this. Do you conduct such a study with your own family? Could you also study with someone else?—Matt. 28:19, 20.
3 It is clear, as the interesting experience in the August 1976 issue of Our Kingdom Service showed, that some publishers are more successful in making disciples than others. The article told of two couples who have had outstanding success in this field, each couple aiding between 250 and 300 persons to become dedicated praisers of Jehovah. Is there something we can do to be more successful in this work?
4 These couples tried to involve the whole family. They worked together, and the sessions were never simply question-and-answer reviews, but were enthusiastic discussions of the truth, helping the students to see the value of what they were learning. They stressed the importance of keeping the study appointment. They tried to bring people to the meetings and to acquaint them with the organization. They saw the need to be genuine friends of the people. Have you tried these suggestions?
5 Being whole-souled in your efforts to help Bible students to progress will bring Jehovah’s blessing. Remember, they are Jehovah’s sheep, not ours, so acquainting them with others in the congregation will help them spiritually, as 1 Corinthians 3:6, 10 shows. However, it may be our privilege to help lay the foundation of truth in the hearts of some. For a start especially, it is good to discuss matters of special interest to the person. Let him pick the subject he wants to discuss. Once he learns the value of what he is studying he will want to continue and enlarge his understanding of other topics from God’s Word.
6 It is of great help to keep the discussion flexible. Find out what the person thinks about the topic before you start. Many find it good to paraphrase certain questions, as it encourages the person to put his reply in his own words also, rather than in the words of the publications. Occasional questions to see if the person agrees with what is being said may be helpful to you in determining if more Scriptural discussion of certain thoughts would be in order.
7 Help the householder to understand how the material is of concern to him and will benefit him and his family. Do not hesitate in a tactful way to point out the difference between the teachings of the Bible and religious traditions. Do you feel you are reaching the heart of the student? Is he responding to your efforts, accepting your invitation to come to the congregation meetings at the Kingdom Hall or the book study? Is he talking with his friends about what he is learning? If not, you may wish to try enlarging his view of the organization, telling him about the assemblies, the worldwide educational work and how instructive our meetings are for each one in the family.
8 When you feel it is appropriate to start opening and closing the discussion with prayer, it will help the student to see even more the importance of the study. In your personal prayers, ask Jehovah for his direction and spirit so that the studies you conduct will be productive and your efforts to make disciples will have his blessing.

