Are You Available to Help Where Needed?
1 Highlighting the need for more Christian ministers, Jesus said, “The harvest is great, but the workers are few.” While this was true in Jesus’ day, there is an even greater need now in this time of the end. Therefore, in obedience to Jesus’ command, we “beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.”​—Matt. 9:37, 38.
HELP NEEDED
2 While we are far along into the harvest, it is not yet completed. Jehovah God continues to bless our ministry with fine increases in the field, and it is a challenge to train the new ones. (Matt. 28:20) Most congregations in this country are covering their assigned territory regularly, but a few still need help. There are some territories not currently assigned to any congregations. There is still an urgent need for more workers.
3 There is also a great need to strengthen some congregations spiritually. Elders, ministerial servants, strong Christian families, and pioneers could be used in a number of congregations. When willing workers of this type are added to a congregation, the brothers are strengthened, and expansion is often the result.
HOW CAN THESE NEEDS BE FILLED?
4 First, in the congregations needing help, it would be good for the elders to analyze the circumstances. What are the local needs? What can those now in the congregations do to fill these needs? Could some increase their activity in the field service? Could more serve as auxiliary or regular pioneers? Are the baptized brothers reaching out and being used to their full potential? Is it possible for the elders and ministerial servants to set an even better example in zeal for the ministry? Would more warm, loving encouragement and commendation stir some in the congregations to greater activity?
5 Next, talk to the circuit overseer about the situation. He may have meaningful suggestions as to what can be done within the congregation to meet local needs. Or he may know of other congregations or pioneers in the circuit who could render help. If so, he can put them in contact with you. Where no assistance is available within the circuit, the circuit overseer or the local elders may write to the Society outlining the circumstances and needs.
6 If your congregation is covering its territory often or if there are sufficient elders, ministerial servants, or pioneers to care for the local needs, could some make themselves available to help elsewhere? Individuals and family groups would do well to review their own spiritual gifts, assets, and potential. Would it be possible to take a temporary assignment to work unassigned territory or perhaps move to help a congregation permanently where the workers are few?
7 To those who can take a temporary assignment or make a permanent move, it is recommended that they write a letter to the Society, making known their availability. Such a letter should be given to the Congregation Service Committee so they may add their recommendation and mail it to the Society.​—See Our Ministry, pages 112, 113 and Our Kingdom Ministry of May 1982, page 7, paragraph 7.
8 Before moving, it is very wise to count the cost. (Luke 14:28) Remember, in most areas where help is needed the towns are small, secular work is often scarce, and you may not always have others to work with in service. You may have frequent parts on meetings, and the quality of meetings may not be what you are used to. A sincere desire to help and an intense love for your brothers are essential. An appreciation of what it means to be self-sacrificing is a must. Do you qualify? The need is there! Are you available?​—Isa. 6:8.

