Following Up the Interest We Find
1 When giving final instructions to his faithful followers, Jesus said: “Go . . . make disciples . . . teaching them.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) With these words Jesus impressed upon his disciples that they were to do a teaching work. This would necessitate making return visits on people to cultivate their interest.
HOW IS THIS DONE?
2 Some brothers have found it difficult to engage in this feature of the preaching work. Sometimes it is because of uncertainty about the approach to use when calling back. However, it is not that difficult. Usually it is best to start planning what you will say on a return visit immediately after you conclude your first visit. Write down points that interested the householder. This will give you a common ground on which to build. Call back within a few days if possible. If weeks go by, the householder’s interest may cool and will be more difficult to rekindle. Keep your presentation simple, clear, and to the point. Use the Bible to back up what you say. Avoid controversial subjects. Highlight the appealing aspects of the Kingdom message.
3 Your presentation should not be one-sided. Success often depends on getting the householder involved. Use viewpoint questions to learn what he is thinking. This enables you to do meaningful teaching.
AVAILABLE HELP
4 Of course, some of us need help in developing our teaching ability on return visits. Such help is usually available. Almost all of us know someone who is capable in witnessing on return visits. The service overseer is anxious to share what he has found to be successful. Your study conductor may be able to assist. Ask him if he can accompany you on some of your calls. Or, perhaps it is just a matter of getting help in preparing what to say. These experienced publishers can show you what methods they have used to get good results. Remember Jesus took time to teach his disciples. They were instructed by him prior to their setting out to preach. (Matt. 10:5-15; Mark 6:7-13; Luke 9:1-6) Instructions similar to those provided by Jesus are available through Jehovah’s organization today.
5 Practical suggestions for our reference are provided also in the Our Ministry book. For example, note what fine guidelines are contained on pages 88 and 89. Just reading the four paragraphs under the heading “Making Return Visits” should encourage us.
6 Another fine aid is the book Make Sure of All Things. There are 123 principal subjects, with additional related subjects, to draw on. Two methods of using the material are given in paragraphs 1 and 2 on page 8. Suggestions are given for using the material if the discussion time is either limited or lengthy. Paragraph 3 also notes: “Not only will its subheadings offer you a ready-to-use outline, but the wide selection of scriptures quoted will make it possible for you to have variety and freshness in your presentation.”
7 So there is every reason to be positive in following up the interest we find in our preaching work, even if we have only limited experience. The important thing is that we care about others. Jehovah’s organization today has provided literature and experienced publishers for our training. When we find sincere persons who are “sighing and groaning” over the bad things they see, our love should move us to return and help them.​—Ezek. 9:4-6.

