Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 30
Song 3
10 min: Theocratic News, local announcements, and encouragement to support field service activity on the first Sunday of the new year.
10 min: “1985 District Convention Arrangements.” Convention coordinator, consider first half of insert through subheading entitled “What You Should Do.” Handle by means of questions and answers.
16 min: “The Honor of Bearing Jehovah’s Name.” Question-and-answer coverage of material. On paragraphs 7 and 8 have brief demonstrations presenting Watchtower subscription, using new Topic for Conversation.
 9 min: “The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever.” Talk on value of brochure, calling for experiences of any who have used it successfully in field ministry.
Song 76 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 6
Song 66
10 min: Selected Announcements and local announcements, including field service arrangements and accounts report.
20 min: “1985 District Convention Arrangements.” Convention coordinator, consider last half of material in insert, beginning with subheading “Dormitories.” Handle by means of questions and answers.
15 min: “Family Communication​—How Can It Be Improved?” Talk from the January 8, 1985, Awake! Speaker can highlight points that may be used in placing January 8 Awake!
Song 181 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 13
Song 198
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Review highlights of 1985 Yearbook. Pick out experiences that reflect growth of work and how Bible principles have changed the lives of some who have now taken their stand on Jehovah’s side.
25 min: “Following Up the Interest We Find.” Talk and discussion of article with audience. Demonstrate briefly what may be said on return visits. Emphasize prompt follow-up to achieve best results. Include experiences from audience of good results from prompt follow-up and preparation before calling back.
Song 92 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 20
Song 90
10 min: Local announcements and talk on “Be Stabilized in the Faith.” Build up enthusiasm for circuit assembly and the value of attending each session.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In Business Territory.” Question-and-answer discussion preferably by service overseer, encouraging greater participation in reaching business people in territory. Have experienced publishers give demonstrations of what may be said in approaching storekeepers.
10 min: Local needs.
10 min: Experiences from audience on obtaining subscriptions and in following up interest. Encourage field service on fourth Saturday.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 27
Song 68
10 min: Local announcements. Outline local arrangements for midweek and weekend field service. Encourage support for service arrangements on first Sunday in month.
20 min: “Are You Available to Help Where Needed?” Talk, with audience participation on paragraphs 4-8. An elder can offer appropriate suggestions in harmony with what is said in paragraphs 5 and 6. In paragraph 7 emphasize the need to discuss plans with elders before writing to the Society about serving where the need is greater.
15 min: “Abound in Love to One Another.” Talk based on 1 Thessalonians 3:12, showing that with rapid growth of organization there is great need to be concerned for one another. Extend hospitality so as to get to know one another better. (Rom. 12:13) Do some need help in field service? Could you offer to help them? Look for opportunities to assist older ones in loving ways; mothers with children who may need help in caring for their children so that they may share in the field service; some who are spiritually low and need to be strengthened, and so forth. Commend brothers for what they are doing and recommend that they keep on abounding in love toward one another. (Material in chapter 17 of United in Worship book may be helpful in preparing talk.)
Song 82 and concluding prayer.

