Presenting the Good News​—In Business Territory
1 The account at Acts 17:17 says that Paul “began to reason in the synagogue with the Jews and the other people who worshiped God and every day in the marketplace with those who happened to be on hand.” His preaching in the marketplace and in other locations clearly demonstrated his heartfelt desire to reach people with the Kingdom hope, wherever they could be found. This was true even when the circumstances seemed less than favorable. For example, his preaching in the marketplace, in the account referred to above, resulted in his being led to the Areopagus where he made a marvelous defense of his faith. On that occasion many, including Dionysius, a judge, were moved to embrace Christianity.​—Acts 17:15-34.
2 Can we expect similar results when preaching to those in business territory? Yes! In fact one sister who called on the owner of a restaurant with the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! sparked his interest in the truth, resulting in a regular Bible study at his restaurant.
3 Yet, in spite of the success that many have had in this feature of the ministry, some publishers are inclined to feel that witnessing to storekeepers would be extremely difficult. One publisher who took this view said, “I expected that the response would be negative. However, to my surprise, their reaction to the Kingdom message was just the opposite! They were genuinely polite and friendly and almost always accepted the magazines.” Yes, those who have shared in working business territory speak of it as a fruitful work that brings blessings.
4 Elders, especially the service overseer, should encourage experienced publishers to work business territory. Those who participate should endeavor to be brief and to the point when contacting business people since their time may be limited. Many have found it practical to call at times when the stores or offices are not so crowded, such as in the morning when the stores open or perhaps during the middle of the week instead of during busy shopping periods. One sister writes: “We entered the stores or businesses when no customers were present and quickly showed the current magazines or the brochure. The interest was such that we had placed all our magazines within two blocks.”
WHAT SHOULD WE SAY?
5 It is appropriate to ask for the manager or the person in charge. Using a simple approach, explain the reason for calling. For example, after introducing yourself, you could say, “Since it is often very difficult to find business people at home, we are making this effort to contact you here. In the latest issue of The Watchtower there is this article entitled [give title] that contains information that personally affects you. We know you will enjoy reading this article as well as the others. We offer it along with Awake! for a contribution of only 40 cents.”
6 One pioneer brother periodically places magazines with the local police department. Imagine his reaction when the police, after having accepted the April 22, 1984, issue of Awake!, contacted him and requested 500 copies! They planned to use the article “My Child Is Missing!” in connection with fingerprinting the children in their town. However, it did not end there. When the police department of a nearby community heard of the article, they contacted another pioneer brother and requested 400 copies of the same issue of Awake!
7 Witnessing in business territory affords us an opportunity to reach persons who are rarely contacted in the door-to-door work. So be alert to such opportunities. Fine results have come from working business territory!

