The Honor of Bearing Jehovah’s Name
1 What an honor to bear the name Jehovah’s Witnesses! We rejoice to know Jehovah and to be recognized by him as individuals who respect his name and obey his laws. Are we not proud to be among the relatively few persons on earth who have taken their stand on the side of the Greatest Personage of the universe?
2 To bear God’s name worthily, we must show we understand clearly what that name involves. For one thing, we acknowledge Jehovah as the Great Purposer. What he says comes to pass. (Isa. 55:11) The Bible shows his objectives have always been fully accomplished. Hence, we have absolute confidence that his purposes for the future will be fully realized. To demonstrate our confidence, we should use our lives in support of his arrangements. This confirms our faith and assures us of his blessing.​—Matt. 7:21.
3 Bearing Jehovah’s name also means recognizing and loving his qualities. When we hear his name we think of his mercy, graciousness, patience, loving-kindness, and truth. (Ex. 34:6) Primarily he is a God of love. Jesus said he made Jehovah’s name known to his followers. Why? So that they could experience God’s love. (John 17:26) So, bearing His name worthily includes imitating Jesus and manifesting his qualities in our lives.​—John 13:35.
EFFECTS OF BEARING HIS NAME WORTHILY
4 When we serve Jehovah whole-souled, positive effects are observable to others. They see us as happy, fearless people united in true worship in all countries. We are free from addictive drugs and immoral practices. Our families and marriages are, for the most part, happy as a result of applying Scriptural principles. Many employers prefer to have Jehovah’s Witnesses work for them because they are honest and do not steal, cheat, or lie. Many have made public statements commending us because they see we are different from others in the world. (See w83 6/1 p. 10; w83 10/1 p. 7; g81 10/8 p. 14.) Our Christian conduct draws sincere people to Jehovah.
5 But the greatest testimony to our respect for Jehovah’s name is our preaching the good news of his Kingdom. Encouraging reports from all over the world show that God’s people are zealously sharing in this preaching work. More and more are reaching out for auxiliary and regular pioneer service. Have you experienced the joy of such service? If not, could you do so sometime during this year? What a fine opportunity this provides to speak to a greater number of people about God’s name and purpose.
6 Do not feel disheartened if your circumstances prevent you from doing as much as others who are physically stronger and less encumbered. Jehovah’s name is honored when each person does the best he can with what he has. The spirit of wholeheartedness in preaching shows that we appreciate God’s love and that we desire to honor him.
OFFER SUBSCRIPTIONS
7 A tremendous aid to us in making Jehovah’s name known to others is the Watchtower magazine. For the past 105 years it has been used to announce Jehovah’s Kingdom. It is a powerful instrument that we can use during January and February. During these months we will offer the subscription for The Watchtower for $4. We could also offer a subscription for both The Watchtower and Awake! for $8. Emphasize the value of the Scriptural knowledge in these magazines as you present them. Your enthusiasm may move spiritually inclined ones to subscribe.
8 Those who do subscribe or take individual copies can learn more about Jehovah and hopefully they too will eventually have the honor of bearing Jehovah’s name.​—Rom. 10:13.

