From Our Readers
The New Morality
One half of the June 22nd Awake! deals with sex. Admittedly, you also give us the Bible counsel, but is it necessary to have the articles in such large doses?
M. M., Wales
I have been disturbed by the articles on morality. I realize that we need to be aware of the terrible things that are happening, but do we have to use the terms that these ones use and read the details of what goes on?
N. R., England
The information was open and shocking, but none of the language was vulgar or lewd, nor would any expressions used titillate or appeal to any prurient or immoral interest. The purpose was to alert our readers to the badness taking place and the subtle arguments used to defend such. It was also presented as a warning to parents to protect their children and equip them to resist such bad influence. The Bible is very open and direct in dealing with such matters. See Genesis 19:4-11; Leviticus 18:22, 23; 20:15-17; Romans 1:26, 27.​—ED.
I found this article to be very shocking, but I really do appreciate the publishers’ frankness and open-mindedness on this ever-growing dilemma.
L. B., England
I have just finished reading the articles on child pornography. I’m crying, shaking and I feel sick. Until I read this I was totally unaware of the disgusting things happening around us.
A. J., Wales
I would like to commend you on your straightforward handling of “The New Morality.” I was constantly victimized as a child and have never revealed this to anyone until now. It began at the age of eight and continued until my parents separated years later.
Anonymous, New York
I never imagined that things had got so outright disgusting. My grandfather assaulted me when I was seven years old, not just once but on a number of occasions. Now I feel the repercussions constantly. It’s been a living nightmare ever since. The memory can be pushed back for a while, only to resurface again. Thank you for showing it to be just what it truly is, selfish and reprehensible child abuse and a grotesque violation of a child’s trust and dependency.
M. K., New York
The articles on “The New Morality” are so very good. People must be made aware of these things.
K. P., Massachusetts
Thank you for your frank and clear presentation of this problem. Awake! has once again lived up to its name. It has awakened everyone to a real problem, perversion of sex. Incest is so common in this country that it is not a crime but a custom. Please give us more articles like these.
J. M., Upper Volta

