VOL. XVII. SEPTEMBER 15, 1896. No. 18. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 214 

View from the Tower 215 

Poem: Abide in Me 218 

Some Better Thing for Us 218 

Thy Light is Come 220 

Questions of General Interest 221 

Bible Study: Wholesome Counsel 223 

Encouraging Letters 224 

page 214 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE CHART OF THE AGES. 



IT IS five feet long, of heavy, tinted cloth, with spring roller, 
having painted thereon, by a good artist, the outlines, etc., of the 
divine plan of the ages, the same as represented by the diagram in the 
front of MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. 1. Ordinarily it would cost about 
five dollars to prepare such charts; but by giving large orders in the 
dull seasons we can supply them at one dollar and fifty cents each.— 
and we prepay the expressage. The painter has just completed a new lot, 
and we are prepared to fill all orders. To foreign countries at same price. 

A careful study of the "Three Discourses on the Chart" will enable 
many of the friends of the truth to explain the chart, and the divine plan 
there symbolized, to their friends and neighbors. These three discourses 
are published in pamphlet form, bound in leatherette, at 10 cents per 
copy, postpaid. Every one who has a chart should also have this 
pamphlet. Later on you will be able to present other features, finding 
help in MILLENNIAL DAWN, each chapter being a discourse. 



R2037 : page 214 

FLORIDA LAND FREE -NEAR THE TRACT SOCIETY'S 
PROPERTY 

Some of the brethren own considerable land in Florida (a portion 
of which was some time ago donated to the TRACT SOCIETY and sold 
by it and the proceeds used in spreading the truth). These brethren 
wish us to say for them that,— 

They have no desire to withhold this land from those who would 
wish to settle on it and cultivate it, but who cannot afford to purchase. 
They therefore make an offer of a ten-acre plot (sufficient for an 
early-vegetable farm there) free, to actual settlers. 

This land is in the healthiest part of Florida— between the Gulf 
of Mexico and Tampa Bay, close to the railroad and within four to 
eight miles of St. Petersburg, which has one of the finest harbors in Florida. 
The atmosphere there is so pure that fresh meat hung in the open 
air will not spoil in the hottest weather. 



R2033 : page 215 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



WE are frequently reminded of the words of the 
apostles relative to the insidious attacks of 
Satan that would come upon believers in the last days 
of this age, as we witness his attacks not only upon 
every servant of the truth, but also upon the truth itself 
—the Word of God. What a comfort we have in 
the assurance that all the true "sheep" will hear and 



know the Shepherd's voice, and that none shall pluck 
them out of his hand,— that the "very elect" shall not 
be deceived. How this should and does stimulate us 
to press for the mark of character development which 
will make our calling and election sure. 

Satan seems to know that these attacks will be all 
the more forceful if they are apparently scientific discoveries, 
etc., and so he operates along that line. Thank 
God,— "We are not ignorant of his devices." For 
instance, Spiritism and Christian Science, having captured 
their thousands and gotten well established are 
continued, while other signs and wonders are introduced 
under the name of Theosophy (already described 
in these columns); and now later Hypnotism is introduced, 
not as a religious but as an occult power which 
will inferentially corroborate and endorse Satan's pseudo 
religions and discredit the teachings of the Scriptures. 
Thus, for instance, the visions and revelations 
granted of the Lord to some of the apostles and prophets 
(Dan. 7; 2 Cor. 12:1; Eph. 3:3; Rev. 1:1,10) 
are, by the powers of Hypnotism, made to appear very 
ordinary, such as may be had by any one who will be 
put by himself or by a professional into a cataleptic 
sleep or trance. This, because professing to be non-religious, 
scientific, will catch some who instinctively 
fear the trance-mediums and clairvoyants of Spiritism; 
and yet it will surely pave the way to the latter, and away 
from God's Word which condemns it and everything 
akin to it— witchcraft, etc. 

One of the latest feats of Hypnotism was the simulation 
of our Lord's death and resurrection. This was 
performed both in Europe and in the United States. 
Hindu Theosophists by the power of Hypnotism put 
one of their number asleep in London in a coffin, with 
the understanding that he would be awakened after 
three days in Vienna, whither, with guards, etc., the 
coffin was conveyed. On the third day at Vienna the 
coffin was opened and the fakir found apparently dead. 
The rigid form was taken from the coffin and placed 
upon a table, where, to demonstrate that the subject 
was wholly unconscious, needles were thrust through 
his flesh, but brought no sign of consciousness. Finally, 
at the command of the chief Hindu fakir, the hypnotic 
spell was broken, the man's consciousness returned, and, 
with manifestations of pain from his long cramped position, 
he got up and ate and went about his business. 

Thus, without directly attacking the Bible account 
of the awakening from the sleep of death of Lazarus, 
and Jairus' daughter, and the son of the widow of Nain, 
their influence is offset by these modern "strong delusions" 
to "believe a lie." (2 Thes. 2:11.) Nay, more; 
it goes farther and would even discredit or cast into the 
shade the resurrection of our Lord Jesus. 

Similar was the demonstration which took place in 
the United States, only still more realistic; for the subject 
was not only put into a death-like sleep, but was 



actually buried under three feet of earth through which 

R2033 : page 216 

a wooden pipe permitted air to reach the subject, and 
down which the public looked upon the buried man's 
face. The New York Journal (Aug. 30, '96) publishes 
an illustration of the grave, its occupant, and the public 
gazing down upon him, together with the subject's 
own account of the matter, and of his feelings, etc.; 
and the Editor introduces it in the following words:— 

"John D. Wyatt has just been resurrected at Indianapolis, 
Ind., after being buried alive at his own request 
for three days. No fancied grave was his, for 
though in hypnotic sleep, he was actually buried under 
four feet of earth. It was a marvelous experience. 
No man ever endured one like it." 

It is claimed that ere long the public will become 
accustomed to hypnotic phenomena by their introduction 
through dentistry, where it will be used in a manner 
calculated to support the claims of "Christian Scientists," 
that there is no such thing as pain, but merely 
an imagination thereof. 

Truly, the great Adversary is being permitted to 
prepare "strong delusions" for those who, having 
been brought in contact with the truth, either resist it 
or, by failure to follow the true light loyally, show that 
they are unworthy of it, "that all might be condemned 
who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 
-2 Thes. 2:11,12. 



Another illustration of Satan's subtle workings is 
found in the claimed "latest discoveries of science." For 
two centuries science has been making discoveries which 
it has claimed completely overthrow the reliability of the 
Bible narrative; but as often have these scientists been 
compelled to admit that they have erred. The fact 
is that scientists are usually infidels, if not openly, then 
of the "higher criticism" type, who have little respect 
for the Bible, and who are on the lookout to secure 
world-wide fame by finding and promulgating something 
which would do what other scientists had tried to 
do but failed; viz., to cast discredit on the Bible. It 
is not remarkable that being thus prejudiced against 
the Bible, these worldly-wise scientists, going about to 
disestablish God's Word, and seeking honor one of another, 
and not submitting themselves to the guidance 
of faith in their researches, will, in the future as in the 
past, frequently "believe a lie" and publish it for the 
truth, until disproved and repudiated later by some 
other scientists. Our prejudices should be in favor of 
the Bible, and only positive, unimpeachable evidence 
against it should be even considered. 

The modern field for scientific research is Assyria, 



where the ancient buried ruins of Babylon, Nippur, etc., 
being dug into, furnish relics and records of an early 
day— antedating all history except that of the Bible. 

R2034 : page 216 

So, then, let it be understood that the scientific research, 
for which our day is noted, is frequently only an effort 
on the part of those engaged in it to immortalize themselves 
by impeaching the record of God's Word, if they 
can possibly do so. 

The latest news of this kind is from a party of Armenians, 
representing the University of Pennsylvania, 
who have for some time been excavating the ruins of 
the ancient city of Nippur in the Valley of Babylon. 
This news is that these scientists, having dug down below 
the level of the known Nippur, found about thirty 
feet below it a still older Nippur with valuable relics, 
tablets, etc. 

Immediately Prof. S. A. Binion (who, so far as 
we are aware, has never seen the excavations at Nippur) 
hastens to tell the public through the daily press 
what he don't know about Nippur, and to most dogmatically 
assert respecting tablets, broken vases, etc., 
bearing inscriptions, and their supposed decipherment, 
—"These tablets show that a high state of civilization 
existed 7,000 years before the birth of Christ, and 3,000 
years before the creation of the world as set down in 
the marginal chronology of the Bible." "Many cuneiform 
records upon tablets, of Babylonian history, have 
been unearthed, in an excellent state of preservation. 
Some of these are 9,000 years old, and are almost as 
clear today as when the writing was done." Professor 
Binion very accommodatingly furnished also a "sectional 
drawing" showing the temples, streets and 
houses of ancient Nippur, from which thirty-six feet of 
covering, debris, is supposed to have been removed; 
and also showing the still more ancient Nippur, from 
which thirty feet additional debris had been removed. 

This drawing covers nearly a page of the New 
York Journal of Aug. 30, '96, under a full page headline 
declaring as follows:— 

"A BURIED CITY UPSETS THE CHRONOLOGY OF 
THE BIBLE. 

Under the above mentioned picture of the two 
cities, in large types, appeared the following:— 

PREHISTORIC NIPPUR 7000 YEARS BEFORE CHRIST. 

THE REMAINS OF THE ASSYRIAN CITY, NIPPUR, BUILT 

3,000 YEARS BEFORE ADAM AND EVE 

WERE CREATED. 

(FROM A SECTIONAL DRAWING AND RESTORATION 

OF THE EXCAVATION BY PROFESSOR S. A. BINION, 



THE ARCHAEOLOGIST.) 

Every scientist, every editor, every business man, 
every mechanic and every day-laborer can, if he will 
but think, see through the fraud thus practiced upon 
a confiding public by a Professor and an editor. Why, 
if the University of Pennsylvania had a thousand times 
as much money as it now possesses, and if it spent 
every cent of that sum in excavating at Nippur and 

R2034 : page 217 

had laborers at work night and day, none of its professors 
would live long enough to see such a job of work accomplished 
as Prof. Binion and the New York Journal 
represent— thirty-six feet of debris removed from off 
a city of miles in extent, and thirty feet more from off 
a lower city of similar size. 

What are the facts? Simply these: A few years 
ago the management of the University of Pennsylvania, 
desirous of fame for their institution, concluded that 
foot-ball and boat-rowing are not the only outside 
enterprises in which a modern college may engage, 
and with commendable enterprise undertook scientific 
digging into the ruins of Nippur. At the outset Rev. 
Dr. Peters was placed in charge of the work. Under 
his direction a shaft or pit was sunk on the principal 
mound, and some underground passages excavated 
thirty-six feet from the surface. But to be a successful 
"scientist" in such a work, a man needs to have a 
lively imagination and to give it full play, else he will 
fail to "astound" the world with his "archaeologic" 
ability in deciphering real and imaginary hieroglyphics 
on pieces of pottery, etc.; and so Dr. Peters was superseded 
by a man pretty sure to find something that 
would cover himself and the University of Pennsylvania 
with glory and renown— Prof. Hilprecht. 

The latter gentleman has not uncovered the entire 
city of Nippur, but merely removed a few more cubic 
yards of debris from what is believed to have been a 
temple; and sinking a shaft or pit thirty feet still 
lower, through the debris, he found at that level "virgin 
soil" and some relics of an ancient civilization 
which it would in every way be to his interest to believe 
and seek to prove existed 7,000 or 8,000 years 
before A.D. 1. 

Whether or not there are two cities of Nippur, 
one built upon the other with thirty feet of debris between, 
nobody can yet say truthfully. It will require 
vastly more money and labor than has already been 
expended, to demonstrate the truth or fallacy of the 
suggestion. The Valley of Babylonia is supposed to 
have been the cradle of the race; and it is possible that 
Nippur was a city built before the deluge of Noah's 
day. If its temple were but sixty feet high, thirty 
feet of silt and debris would still leave a temple thirty 



feet high, whose upper levels may have been used after 
the flood. Or it may be that the level first recognized, 
thirty-six feet below the surface, was never a city level 
but merely one level of the temple. 

Prof. Binion describes the written tablets as "in an 
excellent state of preservation," "almost as clear today 
as when the writing was done;" but Prof. Hilprecht, 
now at Constantinople, told quite a different 
story to the representative of the London Daily News 
who interviewed him, and who says: "The labor of 
piecing together the thousands of fragments of vases 
and other objects, and of deciphering the inscriptions 
upon them, has during the past winter nearly cost him 
his eyesight." Prof. Binion is probably mistaken also 
in saying that these broken fragments are in Philadelphia. 
According to the "firman" or permit issued to 
the University by the Turkish government, all findings 
were to belong to the Turkish museum. 

These "scientific" gentlemen who endeavor to 
discredit the Bible by fraudulent pictorial misrepresentations 
and descriptions, ask us to take their word 
for it, that the Bible account, which has time and 
again come off victorious in contests with "scientists," 
so-called, and which alone of all histories carries an 
unbroken line from creation to our day, and is represented 
by a living race— the Jews— is now utterly overthrown 
and proved unreliable, by the finding of some 
broken pottery bearing peculiar letters and symbols 
which one scientist fondly hopes will raise him and the 
college employing him to world-wide renown. 

As for us, we will hold on to the Bible and wait a 
few years until another "scientist" equally anxious 
for renown will refute the present conclusions and show 
wherein the deductions are false. It has ever been 
thus. Not long ago Chinese histories were paraded 
similarly, to prove that China had a civilization and 
history one or two thousand years older than that of 
the Bible; but to-day archaeologists concede that the 
very ancient history of China is mythical, a fabrication. 

We have gone into this matter at some length because 
we have had many inquiries concerning it, and because 
it serves as a sample of the many ways the Adversary 
is attacking the Bible, and overthrowing the 
faith of those who have not put on the whole armor of 
God, that they may be able to stand in this evil day. 
(Eph. 6: 13.) What a defense against doubt and every 
attack of the devil is the knowledge of the divine plan of 
the ages! Praise God from whom our blessings flow! 

Professor Sayce, one of the best informed as well 
as one of the most candid of modern archaeologists, 
writing upon the reliability of the Babylonian records 
and their probably faulty interpretation says, under 
date of June 30, '96:- 

"I pointed out some years ago that the length of 
reign assigned to several of the kings in the first two 
dynasties is suspiciously, if not impossibly, long, and 



that the same high number recurs with too great a frequency. 
Since then the American excavators in 
Babylonia have discovered tablets which show that in 
the early period of Babylonian history records were 
kept of the events which marked the several years of 
each king's reign, and it was by these events that the 
legal documents of the time were dated. I believe 
that it will turn out that the compiler of the dynastic 
list supposed in some cases that where two or three 
events characterized the same year they were to be 
reckoned as representing separate years, while in other 
cases the co-regencies of a father and son have been 
neglected, as they have been in Egyptian and Jewish 
history." 

"ABIDE IN ME." 



That mystic word of thine, O sovereign Lord! 

Is all too pure, too high, too deep for me; 
Weary with striving, and with longing faint, 

I breathe it back again in prayer to thee. 

Abide in me— o'ershadow by thy love 

Each half-formed purpose and dark thought of sin; 
Quench, ere it rise, each selfish, low desire, 

And keep my soul as thine— calm and divine. 

As some rare perfume in a vase of clay 

Pervades it with a fragrance not its own- 
So, when thou dwellest in a mortal soul, 

All heaven's own sweetness seems around it thrown. 

The soul alone, like a neglected harp, 

Grows out of tune, and needs that Hand divine; 

Dwell thou within it, tune and touch the chords, 
Till every note and string shall answer thine. 

R2035 : page 218 

Abide in me: there have been moments pure, 
When I have seen thy face and felt thy power; 

Then evil lost its grasp, and, passion hushed, 
Owned the divine enchantment of the hour. 

These were but seasons beautiful and rare; 
Abide in me, and they shall ever be; 

I pray thee now fulfil my earnest prayer- 
Come and abide in me, and I in thee. 

Harriet Beecher Stowe. 



R2035 : page 218 



SOME BETTER THING FOR US. 



"These all, having obtained a good report through faith, received 

not the promise, God having provided some better thing for 

us, that they without us should not be made perfect.— Heb. 1 1 :39,40. 

IN the eleventh and twelfth chapters of Paul's letter 
to the Hebrews the two classes who are to constitute 
the two phases of the Kingdom of God (the human 
and the spiritual*) are brought to our attention. At 
the time of this writing the heirs to the earthly phase 
had all run their course, and were awaiting their reward 
in the resurrection, John the baptist having been 
the last and most highly honored of all that noble line 
of ancient worthies (Matt. 11:11); but the heirs to the 
heavenly phase had just entered upon their course; and, 
knowing that it would be a long and painful one, the 
worthy Apostle would have them draw a large measure 
of inspiration and zeal from considering the faithfulness 
and patient endurance of the worthy ones who 
shall constitute the earthly phase of the Kingdom. 

His words, while addressed directly to the early 
Church, apply with equal force to the whole Church, 
to the end of the age; and in some respects the application 
will be seen to have special force in the end, or 
harvest, of the age. In recounting the prominent 
characters among those to inherit the earthly phase of 
the Kingdom, beginning with Abel, he shows that it 
was their faith in the promises of God that nerved them 
to such endurance and faithfulness, even unto death; 
and so he would have us consider and, with the same 
faith, rely upon the exceeding great and precious promises 
given unto us, whereby, as Peter says, we may 
"escape the corruption that is in the world" and be 
made "partakers of the divine nature." (2 Pet. 1:4.) 
He shows how by faith they walked with God; how 
they ventured upon his promises, doing his will and 
leaving the results with him; how they overcame great 
obstacles in the strength of that faith; and how they 
endured persecution, pain and loss, and then died in 
faith that what God had promised he was able also to 
perform, and would perform in his own good time and 
way. They were such men and women, says the Apostle, 
as the world was not worthy of. They endured as seeing 
him who is invisible, so strong and courageous was 
their faith. 

Yet, though the reward of those ancient worthies 
will fully recompense their faithfulness, the Apostle 
would have us know that God hath still reserved "some 
better thing for us;" viz., the inheritance of the heavenly 
phase of the Kingdom. In so doing, however, God is 
not rewarding us according to our deserts; for neither 
our merit, nor that of the ancient worthies, could claim 
by right an inheritance in either phase of the Kingdom. 



Both callings are of his abounding grace. The times 

and seasons for the selection of these two companies, 

as well as the conditions of eligibility to them, were 

fixed by Jehovah before the foundation of the world; 

and within those appointed seasons those individuals 

who will have complied with the conditions become 

heirs of the promised inheritance to be realized in the 

time appointed. God has a right thus to do what he 

will with his own, and his wonderful favors will be received 

with thanksgiving by all his righteous heirs 

without respect to comparisons; and all will be satisfied 

when they awake in his likeness, whether it be on 

the human or on the spiritual plane of being. 

The "better thing" reserved "for us" who are 
called of God during this Gospel age is the join t-heirship 
with Christ, Jehovah's only-begotten Son and heir 
of all things, the partaking with him in all his subsequent 
work for the blessing of all God's intelligent creation. 
Therefore it is, as the Apostle states, that the 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. 1., Chap. xiv. 

R2035 : page 219 

reward of the ancient worthies tarries until first the 
overcoming Gospel Church is exalted to the throne 
with Christ in the dawn of the Millennial age, now so 
close at hand. As soon as the spiritual phase of the 
Kingdom is established in power the setting up of the 
human phase will be immediately accomplished. In 
humble recognition, therefore, of the divine purpose 
and order in the superior exaltation of the Gospel 
Church, we repeat the Apostle's statement that "they" 
—those noble, loyal, righteous, faithful ancient worthies 
—"without us shall not be made perfect." Their 
perfecting will be instantaneous with their awakening 
from death, their trial having been passed successfully, 
as attested by the Lord's word. 

But as to whether we shall be numbered among 
the "us" depends yet upon our successful running of 
the race set before us. Surely, no less faithfulness and 
nobility of character can be expected of us than of those 
who ran for the earthly prize. And since all the blessings 
of God's plan,— the exaltation of the ancient worthies, 
the liberation of the whole world from the bondage 
of sin and death and the final judgment of angels 
—await the manifestation of the spiritual sons of God, 
the Gospel Church, therefore the Apostle in chapter 12, 
in forceful metaphor, points us back to those ancient 
worthies as a stimulus for faith and zeal; saying:— 

"Therefore also we, being compassed about with 
so great a cloud of martyrs [Greek marturon— who so 
nobly witnessed for God and righteousness], let us 
[emulate them and] lay aside every weight and the sin 



which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience 
the [higher, heavenly] race that is set before us, 
looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, 
who, for the joy that was set before him, endured the 
cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right 
hand of the throne of God." Jesus, our Ransomer, is 
also our forerunner and pattern in this race. He ran 
successfully, and in consequence is even now at the 
right hand of the throne of God, whither we also may 
go to him. His way to the crown was the way of the 
shameful cross, and he said, If any man love me, let 
him take up his cross daily and follow me: the servant 
is not above his Lord. Persecution and shame and 
grief and loss are our portion in this present world, and 
the exaltation and the glory will follow in due time, if 
we faint not. Therefore we are urged to consider his 
example and teaching lest we be weary and faint in 
our minds under the trials of faith, patience and endurance 
of this evil day. 

Again referring to the ancient worthies and their 
faithfulness (12:18-24), we are reminded of our much 
more favored position on the stream of time; for we 
are not approaching, as were they, the established typical 
kingdom of God under the typical mediator Moses; 
but, in point of time, we are approaching the glorious 
antitype of that— the Kingdom of Christ. How inspiring 
is this thought of the proximity in time to the glory 
of the Kingdom! And if this was true of the early 
Church, how much more is it true of us who are living 
in the end, the "harvest," of the age? 

The Apostle would also lead us to a fuller appreciation 
of the glory to be revealed in the setting up of 
the real Kingdom— the antitype— by a reference to the 
glory that attended the setting up of even the typical 
kingdom, and the enunciation of its righteous code of 
divine law. (Verses 18-21; see also 2 Cor. 3:7-11; 
Exod. 19.) That was a scene whose majesty and glory 
caused all Israel to fear and tremble; and even Moses 
said, "I exceedingly fear and quake." But, he says, 
that manifestation of glory was nothing in comparison 
to the glory that excelleth, which shall attend the setting 
up of the real Kingdom. That will be the glorious 
New Jerusalem, the true Mount Zion, the city (government 
or Kingdom) of the living God, the city for which 
Abraham looked afar off. It will be the general assembly 
of the Church of the firstborn in the midst of a welcoming 
host, "an innumerable company of angels:" it 
will be the gathering together of the Church unto Christ, 
the mediator of the New Covenant which speaketh 
better things than the blood of Abel— not vengeance, 
but peace, pardon and life,— and unto God, the Judge 
of all, and to the spirits [lives] of just men made perfect; 
—first the earthly phase of the Kingdom, and finally 
the full number of the restitution host. 

What a glorious prospect! and how full of solemn 
import to us specially, who have approached to the very 



threshold of this blessed hope;— solemn, in that the 

overcoming to be done before we reach the goal will 

tax all our fortitude and faith and test every principle 

of righteousness to the utmost. To do this will require 

the greatest humility and dependence on Christ, not 

only for redemption but also for grace to help in every 

time of need. If we should allow pride and self-righteousness 

to come in and our ears to grow dull to the 

voice of him that speaketh from heaven, we shall no 

more escape the wrath of God than would an Israelite 

have escaped it had he disobeyed the voice which commanded 

that he should not touch the mountain where 

God appeared unto them and spoke to them through 

their mediator Moses; for our God is a consuming fire 

to all who attempt to approach him except through our 

mediator, Christ, just as, in the type, he was a consuming 

fire to any who disregarded the mediation of Moses. 



page 219 

"ONLY FOR JESUS! -Lord keep it forever 
Sealed on the heart and engraved on the life! 

Pulse of all gladness and nerve of endeavor, 
Secret of rest, and the strength of our strife." 



R2036 : page 220 

THY LIGHT IS COME. 



"Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen 
upon thee. For behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and 
gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon 
thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And 
the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings 
to the brightness of thy rising."— Isa. 60:1-3. 

THE words of this prophecy have a double application, 
—first to spiritual Israel, and second to 
Israel after the flesh. The great and long-looked-for 
light is the Lord Jesus Christ, the light of the world; 
and the time indicated is the end or harvest of the Gospel 
age, when he comes in glory and power to shine as 
the sun in his Kingdom. That the prophecy had a 
partial fulfilment to fleshly Israel at our Lord's first 
advent is true. He indeed was the light and glory of 
Israel; but as a nation they knew not the time of their 
visitation (Luke 19:44): the light shined in the darkness, 
and the darkness comprehended it not. (John 1:5.) 
Consequently the glory of the Lord was not then seen 
upon Israel: they did not know their King, nor enter 



with him into his Kingdom, though the privilege was 
then offered to them. They did not arise and shine, 
and therefore darkness came upon them; and, as a nation, 
blinded to their highest interests, they stumbled 
into the ditch (Matt. 15:14), a great time of trouble, 
which, beginning with the destruction of their holy city 
and the complete wreck of their national polity, drove 
them out of their own land and left them as fugitives 
in every land and the subjects of more or less persecution 
even unto the present day. 

All this reminds us very forcibly of the words of 
Jesus to them,— "Yet a little while is the light with you. 
Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon 
you; for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not 
whither he goeth. While ye have the light, believe in 
the light, that ye may be the children of light." (John 12:35,36.) 
But alas! Israel heeded not the light, nor 
the warning. It was as the Prophet had foretold (Isa. 1:3), 
"Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider." 
However, Behold (says Paul) the goodness as 
well as the severity of God: on them which fell from 
their high privileges, severity; but upon you Gentiles, 
goodness, if you heed and continue to walk in the light, 
but, if like them you become proud and self-righteous, 
you also will be cut off from the divine favor and left to 
stumble in darkness.— Rom. 11:22. 

Indeed, that such would be the case with the masses 
of nominal spiritual Israel in the end of the Gospel 
age, as well as with fleshly Israel in the end of the Jewish 
age, was also foretold by the Prophet, who said, "And 
he shall be for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of 
offence, to both the houses of Israel." (Isa. 8:14.) 
Again, in the end of this Gospel age, the Lord of the 
whole earth has come. He comes not for a sin-offering, 
as at the first advent, but he comes now in the 
plenitude of his kingly power to begin his glorious 
reign and to exalt his faithful Church as his bride and 
joint-heir to his throne and his glory. He comes while 
yet darkness covers the earth and gross darkness the 
people, and the glad message to all his faithful saints 
is, "Arise, shine! for thy light is come." "Who hath 
ears to hear, let him hear." 

Observe that the Prophet calls upon the saints to 
shine now, and also tells of a glory about to be revealed 
in them. The thought of the passage is plainly that 
they have something to do with the shining to which 
they are exhorted, while the glory to be put upon them 
is apart from their own doing, a reward from God to 
the faithful ones who now diligently let their light 
shine for him. 

Jesus said to his disciples in the beginning of the 
age, "Ye are the light of the world;" and so the true 
followers of Christ all through the age who have been 
with Jesus and learned of him have been the lights of 
the world. (Matt. 5:14-16.) But this prophecy, taking 
the standpoint of the end of the age, indicates that 



greater light is due here than at any previous time. 

And so we find it. Although the Lord has been enlightening 

and leading his people ever since the days of his 

first advent, yet now they are to arise and shine as never 

before. Within these days of the Lord's presence 

(since 1874) the light of divine truth has been shining 

more brightly than ever, so that his people have been 

able to discover and understand God's deep designs, 

and to see in his mighty work a grand and benevolent 

plan of ages, fully worthy of the wisdom, power, justice 

and love of our God. To use another figure, the table 

of the Lord has been richly spread with all the bounties 

of the harvest season, and the Lord himself, according 

to his promise, is serving.— "Blessed are those 

servants whom the Lord when he cometh shall find 

watching: verily, I say unto you, that he shall gird 

himself and make them to sit down to meat and will 

come forth and serve them."— Luke 12:37. 

Well may the Church arise now and put on her beautiful 
garments; for very shortly she is to receive beauty 
for ashes and the oil of joy for the spirit of heaviness. 
The time is come when she may lift up her head and 
rejoice, knowing that her deliverance draweth nigh. 
(Luke 21:28.) The exhortation to arise and shine is 
therefore to all who have been enlightened by the harvest 
message in these days of the Lord's presence. The 
prophet tells us that this truth which so fills our hearts 
with joy and gladness is nothing less than the glory of 

R2036 : page 221 

the Lord which is risen upon us. How blessed the 
thought, how precious the truth! The humblest saint 
who has been brought to a knowledge of it, and who 
has been thrilled with its blessed inspiration, may rejoice 
in the realization that the glory of the Lord has 
already risen upon him. 

Is it indeed true that the glory of the Lord is risen 
upon this humble one who has to fight hard the fight 
of faith day by day to keep his mortal body in subjection 
to the mind of the spirit, and who realizes every 
moment that he stands only in the imputed righteousness 
of Christ, his own being but as filthy rags? Yes, 
it is even so; and the fact that the glory of the Lord is 
risen upon thee, that it has thrilled thy soul with a joy 
unspeakable and full of glory even now, is a special evidence 
of his love and care for thee. And more, it is an earnest 
or foretaste of that fulness of glory and blessing promised 
a little further on, if we are faithful to the light we 
now enjoy; if, with a holy zeal for God, we arise and 
let it shine— in our words, in our works and in our 
characters. 

A few more days or years of cross-bearing and 
trial, a few more days of valiant and persistent warfare 
with the principalities and powers of darkness that conspire 
against us to bring us again into bondage to sin, 



a few more opportunities to tell the blessed tidings to 
those who sit in darkness, to bear our loving testimony 
to the power and grace of our God, and then, by and 
by, we shall shine in the glory of the Kingdom for the 
blessing of all the world;— "His glory shall be seen 
upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, 
and kings to the brightness of thy rising." Let us 
therefore be faithful to the light; let us walk in the 
light while we have the light; for if we prove unfaithful 
to it, it will be withdrawn from us. If, after receiving 
it and being blessed by it, we fail to appreciate it, and 
seek for the satisfying portion elsewhere, thus plainly 
indicating our lack of appreciation, it will not continue 
with us. 

While this harvest message comes to all the professed 
people of God with this stirring appeal, "Arise, 
shine!" it comes also with an inherent power to separate 
between the true and the false, the faithful and 
the unfaithful. Like a magnet, it attracts only its own 
kind. The spirit of God which is in the truth must 
also be in every one who receives it: all such, and only 
such, have an affinity for it and can be attracted by it; and 
the more they are filled with the spirit of God the more 
they will prize the treasure of divine wisdom and cling 
fast to it, notwithstanding the opposition that may be 
brought against them. Those who have less of the 
Lord's spirit may not hold to it so tightly, and unless 
they become filled, sooner or later, they will be overcome 
by opposition, either open or subtle, and will be 
swept away. There must be a very strong and close 
affinity for the magnet of truth to hold fast to it against 
all opposition. Those in whom the spirit of the world 
dwells, whether they be professed Christians or not, 
have no affinity for it, and are not drawn by it. It is 
no matter of surprise, therefore, that we find the large 
majority of professed Christians, who are really worldlings, 
either indifferent or in opposition to the truth; 
for the nominal spiritual Israel, like fleshly Israel, is to 
stumble at this stumbling stone, and only the remnant 
of both houses shall be counted worthy of the Kingdom 
and its glory. Now, as in the end of the Jewish age, 
the masses of the professed people of God are blinded 
and stumbled because their hearts are not in the proper 
attitude to receive the blessings God has to bestow. 

Another thought is prominent in this glowing prophecy 
and this cheering exhortation to arise and shine. 
The words remind us of our Lord's counsel to Mary, 
immediately after his resurrection. Overcome with joy 
she was inclined to linger in his presence; but gently 
he reminded her that the good news of his resurrection 
would be equally good to all the other disciples, and 
that it was her privilege to bear it to them. The time 
for his ascension to the Father was not yet, and he 
would meet with them all again.— John 20: 17. 

So now, while we are made to realize and to rejoice 
in the presence of our Lord, the prophet bids us 



be mindful of our brethren to whom this joy has not 
yet come, and to whom it is our privilege to bear these 

R2037 : page 221 

good tidings. All who are truly the Lord's faithful 
covenant people will recognize the glory of this harvest 
message; they will be attracted by it and rejoice in it. 
But since we cannot always discern the hearts to know 
who are the worthy ones, we must expect the repulses 
of many whose hearts are not yet in condition to receive 
it. But, nevertheless, let us arise and shine. Let us 
bear the blessed testimony wherever we have opportunity, 
especially to them who are of the household 
of faith. 

After spiritual Zion has been glorified with Christ 
to shine as the sun in the Kingdom (Matt. 13:43) and 
that true light shines upon the nations, it will be first 
upon the house of Jacob— the return to them of divine 
favor, "mercy through your mercy" (Rom. 11:26-31); 
then this call will come also to them, "Arise shine, 
thy light is come!" 



R2037 : page 221 

QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST. 



Question.— Some define gnosis, rendered "knowledge" 
in 2 Pet. 1:5, as "the spirit of judicial investigation 
and inquiry." If we are always willing to add 
to our faith the gnosis, the spirit of judicial investigation 
and inquiry, the epignosis, the exact, sufficient 
knowledge, will certainly be the reward. Do you consider 
this the Apostle's meaning? 

Answer.— Reference to other passages in which the 
word gnosis occurs shows that the above definition is 
not adequate. See 1 Cor. 8:1; 2 Cor. 4:6; Eph. 3:19; 
2 Pet. 3:18; etc. 

To our understanding the Apostle's meaning is 
not, "Add to your faith an investigating disposition," 
but as follows: 

Beginning with those who already have some 
knowledge, enough to be a basis for faith, he exhorts 

R2037 : page 222 

them to add to their faith fortitude (common version, 
"virtue"); that is to say, he implies that if they hold to 
their faith against the attacks of the enemy it will develop 
fortitude, an added grace of character. And when 
he says, "Add to your fortitude knowledge," we understand 
him to mean that if faith be held firmly, and 



fortitude of character result, this, under the Spirit's 

guidance, will bring the faithful one to deeper and wider 

expanses of knowledge; or, as the same Apostle suggests 

(2 Pet. 3:18), the faithful one will grow in both 

grace and knowledge, and the holy Spirit, through its 

begetting, will enable such to know (appreciate) the 

deep things of God, the things freely given unto such 

by God, the knowledge of God resulting from our experience 

in the school of Christ. It is concerning this 

knowledge, not merely concerning the intricacies of doctrinal 

matters, but the heart sympathy and communion 

with the Lord himself, that the Apostle Paul exclaimed, 

"I count all things but loss for the excellency of the 

knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord."— Phil. 3:8. 

This knowledge, received into a good and honest 
heart, will bring forth the fruitage or grace of character 
here termed "self-control" (common version, "temperance"). 
As is elsewhere stated, "He that hath 
this hope in him, purifieth himself," controls himself, 
purges out more and more of the old leaven. Following 
and connected with the attainment of such self-control 
would come patience: for the self-mastery would 
teach the necessity for sympathy with and patience toward 
others. This patience in turn would lead to and 
develop the next grace mentioned; namely, piety— a 
condition in which the love of God is shed abroad in 
the heart, influencing all the thoughts and words and 
deeds. This condition in turn develops brotherly kindness 
—a love for all who are brethren and yoke fellows 
in the cause of righteousness and truth, the cause of 
God. And brotherly kindness in turn leads to that 
still broader and deeper experience designated the chief 
of all graces; namely, love, love for God, love for the 
brethren, love deep and pure and true, which thinketh 
no evil and doth not puff itself up, and is not easily 
offended, rejoices always in the truth and never in iniquity, 
the climax of Christian attainment in the present 
life; the grace of all graces, which never fadeth, and 
which will but be perfected when we receive the new 
resurrection body. 

Question.— If our Lord had power to take his life 
again after having laid it down (John 10:18), would 
not this indicate (1) that his covenant to give his life 
a ransom was not binding and (2) that he possessed 
knowledge and power in hades? 

Answer.— This passage should read, "I have power 
to lay it down, and I have power [or privilege] to receive 
it again." We understand our Lord to have meant 
that he was commissioned or authorized by the Father 
so to do. 

Our Lord, born under the Law, was subject to its 
conditions, and additionally he took fresh responsibilities 
upon himself at the time of his baptism, specifically 
consecrating his all to the Father's service, in 
harmony with the Father's provision for him. But, 
while his life was consecrated, it was still in his own 



hand, it could not be taken from him. To be his sacrifice 

it must be his own offering in every sense of the 

word. Hence when he said, "Thinkest thou that I 

cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently 

give me more than twelve legion of angels?" he undoubtedly 

spoke the truth. (Matt. 26:53.) His request 

would have been honored. Having violated no 

law, his life was not forfeited, and we believe could not 

have been taken from him. But having consecrated 

his life, and realizing that it was the Father's will that 

he should attest his obedience by the death of the cross, 

he kept his covenant with the Father and would not 

ask for protection, but freely delivered himself up on 

our behalf. He does not indicate by his language that 

he could ask for angelic protection and yet retain 

the full measure of the Father's approval; but, choosing 

the latter, he refrained from making the request. 

We remember in this connection his previous prayer, 

"Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me— 

nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt." (Matt. 26:39.) 

What our Lord did, and what he refrained 

from doing, we know was the Father's will. To what 

extent he could have done contrary to the Father's will, 

or what would have been the consequences to himself, it 

is not necessary for us to know, and what would have been 

the results of such improbabilities have not been revealed. 

The substitution of the word "receive," a better 
translation, clears away the difficulty from the word 
"take." It is distinctly stated that he was raised up by 
"the glory of the Father."— Compare Rom. 6:4; 8:11; 
1 Cor. 6:14; 2 Cor. 13:4. 

Question.— Several of the brethren here, myself 
among them, are railroad employees. We have intimation 
that we will be expected to vote at the coming 
election, and that for the gold party. What is our 
duty? Does Colossians 3:22 bear upon this question? 

Answer.— The Scripture you quote does not apply 
to your voting privileges. The "servants" there addressed 
by the Apostle were bond-servants or slaves; 
but even in their case he cannot have meant that they 
should violate their consciences in obedience to the 
commands of their masters. 

The safe plan is to take no part in politics; and to 
tell inquirers with whom you are intimate that, although 
an ardent admirer of this as the highest type of human 
government, you are, as Cromwell expressed it, "a 
fifth monarchy man"— waiting for and talking for "the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son;" for which we pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it 
is done in heaven." 

The Quakers take note of the fact that God's people 
are not to engage in carnal warfare, but they overlook 
the fact that when they vote for a government 
they ought to support it by words and deeds. Thus 
our Lord said, "If my kingdom were of this world, 
then would my servants fight." 



Of course if "the powers that be" should ever compel 
us to vote or to fight, it would be our duty to act 

R2037 : page 223 

with the side most nearly approved by our consciences. 

Some will take knowledge of you— especially if 
your daily conduct support well your profession; 
others will ridicule you; but few will injure you, "if 
you be followers of that which is good," and faithful 
to your duties. And if you should sustain injury, God 
is able to make it work for your good. But, whatever 
your conscience may dictate, obey it. 

R2038 : page 223 

Question.— In the May 15 issue, page 116, you 
refer to the withdrawal of the Roman army under 
Vespasian from the siege of Jerusalem, A.D. 69. It is 
claimed by some that this retirement was by Cestius in 
65. Will you please explain? 

Answer.— Both statements are correct. Cestius 
Gallus with a Roman army first undertook the subjection 
of the rebellious Jews. He was defeated in 65 A.D., 
and Vespasian was sent to conquer them. The latter 
having reduced the principal fortresses was just ready 
to attack Jerusalem when the death of Nero stopped 
him until he should get orders from the succeeding 
emperor. Disorders at Rome and his own proclamation 
as Emperor hindered the war for about a year, 
when the army returned under Titus, and Jerusalem 
fell. It is quite probable that the majority of those who 
recognized the Lord's prediction and escaped availed 
themselves of the first of these two opportunities. 



R2038 : page 223 

WHOLESOME COUNSEL. 

-SEPT. 20.-Prov. 16:22-33.- 

Golden Text— "There is a way that seemeth right unto a man; 
but the end thereof are the ways of death."— Prov. 16:25. 

THE most important thought of this lesson is expressed 

in the Golden Text. It is a solemn 

warning against self-deception— against pursuing a 

course of conduct which is radically wrong, being opposed 

to the spirit and intent of the divine law, and yet 

which may be made to seem right by a line of false reasoning 

suggested by the will of the flesh and apparently 

founded upon the Word of God, yet denying its 

fundamental principles of righteousness. The delusions 

of Satan also greatly help along such deceptions, 



and thus the blinded one is urged along in a course 
which seems to him to be right, but the end of which 
is death. 

Christians should above all things guard themselves 
against the folly of this way. To do this, let us ever 
remember that, even though through Christ we have a 
reckoned standing of justification before God, the human 
heart which we still have is "deceitful above all 
things and desperately wicked (Jer. 17:9), and that it 
requires constant watching and purging to enable us to 
put in practice the Apostle Paul's rule,— In simplicity 
and godly sincerity have your conversation in the world. 
(2 Cor. 1:12.) To do this requires humility, sobriety, 
godliness. If the heart be puffed up with pride, or 
ambitious for vain glory, or if it be selfish, or in any 
measure intoxicated with the spirit of the world, then 
beware; for there is great danger of getting into that 
way that seemeth right, to a man because blinded by 
his own perverse will or fleshly mind. 

The best safeguard which a Christian can have 
against the snares of Satan is that understanding which 
is here (vs. 22) described as "a well-spring of life unto 
him that hath it." Such understanding is not merely 
that of the head, but of the heart specially; for, "With 
the heart man believeth unto righteousness," and "out 
of the heart are the issues of life." If the heart be 
wrong, the head will seek to justify it, and in so doing 
will pervert judgment and truth. Therefore, take 
heed, and "keep thy heart with all diligence." 

Not only will the "wise and understanding heart" 
keep the feet in the paths of righteousness, but also 
"the heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth 
learning to his lips" (verse 23), so that he shall speak 
forth "words of truth and soberness," words of wisdom, 
of kindness and of love. How important that the 
fountain should be sweet, that thus the stream that issues 
from it may be healthful and refreshing to all 
within the range of its current! Truly, "pleasant words 
[of wisdom, of counsel and of loving kindness] are as 
a honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones 
[in that they refresh and comfort and stimulate courage 
and thus fortify the soul and strengthen it to noble 
deeds]."— Verse 24. 

How different is the picture of the ungodly man! 
(Verses 27-29.) "An ungodly man diggeth up evil 
[apparently finding a morbid satisfaction in searching 
for it], and in his lips there is a burning fire. A froward 
man soweth strife, and a whisperer separateth chief 
friends. A violent man enticeth his neighbor, and 
leadeth him into the way that is not good. He shutteth 
his eyes to devise froward things: moving his lips, 
he bringeth evil to pass." Thus, as Isaiah says, "The 
wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, 
whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, 
saith my God, to the wicked."— Isa. 57:20,21. 

But blessed is the man that hath learned the right 



ways of the Lord and walketh therein with a perfect 
heart. Such a one, unlike the wicked who go about 
digging up evil, delights himself in doing good and 
in speaking forth the words of truth and soberness. 
He is slow to anger, and studies carefully how to rule 
his own spirit, which is surely a great work and worthy 
of the ambition and effort of every Christian. (Verse 32.) 
How blessed (vs. 31) are the closing years of a 
long life devoted to this most worthy end of ruling one's 
own spirit in harmony with the principles and precepts 
of the Word of God; when, as Mr. Whittier has beautifully 
expressed it,— 

"All the jarring notes of life 

Seem blending in a psalm, 
And all the angels of the strife 

Are rounding into calm;" 
and when the hallowed influences of ripened Christian 
graces are manifest to every beholder. Truly, "the 
hoary head is a crown of glory if it be found in the way 
of righteousness." But if not, it is but a monument 
of folly and its ripened evil fruitage is most undesirable. 

The statement of verse 33 is to the effect that God's 
overruling power takes cognizance of even those things 
which men may regard as mere chance, and that nothing 
can come to pass without his knowledge and permission, 

R2038 : page 224 

and that eventually all things will be overruled 
to the accomplishment of his purposes. 

SEPTEMBER 27, REVIEW LESSON. 



Golden Text— "The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the 
righteous runneth into it and is safe."— Prov. 18:10. 

The earnest Christian of many years has had this 
assurance amply verified by blessed experience. Let those 
younger take heed, apply their hearts unto instruction, 
learn to trust the Lord with implicit faith, and he will 
make you also to realize the blessedness of this refuge, 
and the sweetness of abiding in him. Let the language 
of our hearts continually be, "What time I am afraid, 
I will trust in thee." 



R2038 : page 224 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



Washington. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER:-The enclosed Postal Order is a 
thank-offering to the Lord for an especial favor. The occasion is, that 
I have recently completed the perfect memorization of the Book of 
Isaiah; and I desire with a humble heart to thank God for the preservation 
of my memory, for its power of rapid reception and the tenacity 
with which it retains that which has been stored in it. Please do not 
think me boastful, for I fully realize that it is God's gift, and I feel very 
humble in view of the fact that I have so misused it in the past. 

The book was more than half learned in detached portions before 
I dreamed of making it a complete subject; then it was completed 
much sooner than I had expected it to be. It has been mostly the work 
of my morning hours. I rise habitually at four and leave home for the 
shop at seven. Breakfast and other duties occupy part of the time, but 
I get from an hour to an hour and a quarter for reading and study, and 
that is the best time I have for it. This is the only entire book of the 
Bible which I have memorized, except the first epistle of John, which I 
had learned before meeting MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

I know that it is one thing to fill the mind with a collection of 
words, and another to understand their meaning; and I ask your prayers 
that God's holy Word may not be to me as the words of a book that is 
sealed, nor I as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal, but that I may have 
the seal of understanding and the stamp of obedience on my heart. 
Pardon me if I seem egotistic, but God's mercy to a weak old man fills 
me with the desire to tell some one of it, and I have no one here to 
whom I can talk about these things and who can sympathize with me 
in them. The memorial which I send is small, but it is nearer in its 
proportion (as coming from me) to the widow's mite, than it once would 
have been; and I trust you will accept it in the spirit in which it is offered, 
and that the Lord will use it, as he does many small things, to 
his glory. Yours in love and sympathy, . 

[When the memory is thus stored with the words of divine revelation, 
what food is furnished for prayerful meditation, what a ready 

R2039 : page 224 

weapon of defence is at hand against every attack of the adversary, what 
words of wisdom, counsel, instruction, comfort, consolation, warning, 
encouragement and cheer will spring up in the mind as necessity may require. 
We commend the brother's course to all to the extent of their 
ability and opportunity, remembering the counsel of the Lord, "My son, 
keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee. Keep my 
commandments and live; and my law as the apple of thine eye. Bind 
them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart."— 
Prov. 7:1-3. See also Deut. 6:6-9; Psa. 1:2. 

Such storing of the memory with heavenly "food," if it be but 
one verse a day or one verse a week should not be neglected: the results 
will be surprising in even one year. "Thy word was found and I did 
eatit."-EDITOR.l 



Maine. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The following item from a religious 
publication shadows forth the wide-spread feeling that to accomplish 
any purpose, even to subduing the earth and crowning the blessed 
Christ, only the unity of Christians is necessary. It reads:— 



"The time has quite come to beat the sword into a plow-share, and 
the spear into a pruning hook. This age has the courage and the faith, 
if applied in the right direction, to grasp the mighty contents of prophecy 
and hurry its fulfilment, thus quickly bringing on its blessings. 

"God is willing that something should be done for him on a scale 
as magnificent as for war or international display. The Christian nations 
are well equipped with ships for destruction and tremendous engines 
of war. Let the Church of Christ drop its differences, and bury 
them to the centre of the earth; then unite to do this thing. The angels 
will again throng the skies, with their song, 'Glory to God in the 
highest, and on earth peace, good-will to men.' From heaven itself 
mighty, unseen forces will move to help on the work of crowning Jesus 
King of kings. May there not be found somewhere a man, who will 
be as great for God, as Napoleon Bonaparte in war, as statesmen have 
sometimes been for their country, as many now are for the simple purpose 
of making money?" 

Strangest of all is the idea that it is in the hands of men to accelerate 
or retard the accomplishment of God's great and glorious designs. 
It seems to me that the assertion that this age has "courage and 
faith to grasp the mighty contents of prophecy," is little better than the 
incoherent mutterings of one in deep sleep. Who can grasp the mighty 
contents of the prophecies unless God reveal them? God declares 
that he reveals them only to his humble, watchful children; and we know 
that the boasted numbers of Christendom have no such characteristics. 
And to hurry God's movements: what comment is adequate to such 
towering pride? 

We can know what God wills to be done only by his revealing it; 
and nowhere has he revealed that he would have a grand display of 
earth's pageantry to usher in the kingdom. Truly, the "outer darkness" 
is very great; but my heart rejoices to walk the lowly vale with the 
self-sacrificing One. W. F. EATON. 

[REPLY. Very true; and yet it is well to remember that most of 
us who now rejoice in God's "marvelous light" were once in the same 
darkness. There is every reason why we should think charitably and 
even hopefully of such blind reasoners. They are on the Lord's side at 
least, and longing for the better day, however ignorantly. A zeal not 
according to knowledge is far more pleasing to God than a knowledge 
without zeal. The zeal shows the state of the heart, and the knowledge 
the condition of the head to some extent. It was because Saul of Tarsus 
had the proper zeal that God corrected his knowledge and made 
him the great Apostle Paul; while it is declared that "unprofitable servants" 
who have knowledge, and who do not have the loving zeal to use 
it, will be cast out of the light into the "outer darkness." 

A man, such as the writer of the above, who respects "the contents 
of prophecy," is a much more hopeful subject for effort than the many 
who know not and care not for the prophecy, and who disbelieve the 
promise of a coming Kingdom of God in which God's will shall be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven. 

The eyes of such may be profitably anointed with a few facts as follows: 

(1) This century has witnessed the greatest missionary efforts ever 
put forth. 

(2) Some sanguine people reckon the converts from heathenism 
during this century as high as one million souls. 

(3) Statistics show that during the same period the numbers of the 
heathen have increased about two hundred millions. 

(4) It does not require a great mathematician to see that there is no 



hope for the conversion of the world, unless God interposes supernaturally. 

(5) These facts should awaken all who are truly God's people to a 
study of God's Word, to see what is the "hope of the groaning creation;" 
and they would find it to be the Kingdom of God— the glorified Church, 
whose Lord and head is Christ Jesus; and that his Kingdom is to be introduced 
by divine power and judgments in a great time of trouble now 
nigh, even at the doors.— EDITOR.] 



page 225 