A Resolution
Attendance at “Divine Justice” Conventions will no doubt have exceeded that of the previous year, when 6,443,597 assembled at 1,098 locations worldwide, with 93,822 being baptized. The talk, “The Infamous ‘Harlot’” given at all “Divine Justice” Conventions, was followed by the release, in more than 20 languages, of the beautifully illustrated 320-page bound book Revelation​—Its Grand Climax at Hand! The speaker told his listeners: “Use this new book well in your personal and congregational studies. Use it, too, in announcing to the world that Babylon the Great is doomed, that the nations now face Armageddon, and that the grand climax will be reached in Jehovah’s magnificent Kingdom rule by Christ and his bride. You will be happy in hearing and observing these things, ‘for the appointed time is near’!”​—Revelation 1:3.
We, who since 1914 have been living in “the Lord’s day” and at this time of divine judgment, rejoice in the grandest of all privileges, that of serving the Sovereign Lord Jehovah under his King of kings, Jesus Christ. (Revelation 1:10) As JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES, we testify that:
(1) WE ABHOR the reproach that Babylon the Great, and Christendom in particular, has cast upon the name of the one true and living God, Jehovah. For our part, WE AFFIRM wholeheartedly, in the words of Revelation 4:11: “You are worthy, Jehovah, even our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power.”
(2) WE ABHOR Christendom’s adherence to Babylonish teachings, notably those of a triune god, the human soul’s immortality, eternal torment in hell, a fiery purgatory, and worship of images​—such as the Madonna and the cross. In line with Revelation 22:18, 19, WE FIRMLY ABIDE by God’s written Word and all that it contains.
(3) WE ABHOR anti-God philosophies and practices, so common in Christendom, such as evolution, blood transfusions, abortions, lying, greed, and dishonesty. In our worship and way of life, WE WILL HONOR our Creator, Jehovah God, the Almighty, whose ways are described at Revelation 15:3 as “righteous and true.”
(4) WE ABHOR Christendom’s failure to heed Jesus’ messages to the seven congregations at Revelation chapters 2 and 3 in such matters as sectarianism, idolatry, fornication, the Jezebel influence, lukewarmness, and lack of watchfulness. For our part, WE WILL HEAR AND OBEY what “the spirit says to the congregations.”
(5) WE ABHOR the immorality and permissiveness in Christendom and among its clergy, and we welcome Jehovah’s clear judgment stated at Revelation 21:8 that those who continue in their filth​—fornicators, liars, and suchlike—​will be utterly destroyed. WE WHOLEHEARTEDLY SUPPORT Bible standards on sex, marriage, and family life.
(6) WE ABHOR the centuries-long spiritual prostitution of the clergy of Babylon the Great in conniving with worldly rulers to gain power, wealth, and oppressive dominance over the common people. WE ARE RESOLVED to help honesthearted ones to obey the angel’s call at Revelation 18:4: “Get out of her, my people.”
(7) WE ABHOR the massive bloodguilt resulting from over 100 million lives sacrificed in war in this century alone, largely attributable to the great harlot’s fornication with the political powers. WE REJOICE that the appointed time is near for God to execute judicial punishment on Babylon the Great, as clearly stated at Revelation 18:21-24.
As Jehovah’s Witnesses, WE COUNT IT A JOY AND A PRIVILEGE to announce to the world that in 1914 “the kingdom of the world did become the kingdom of our Lord [Jehovah] and of his Christ.” (Revelation 11:15) WE ARE RESOLVED to move forward fearlessly in making known Jehovah’s declared judgments on Babylon the Great and in warning of the imminence of God’s war of Armageddon. WE ARE DETERMINED to echo, in a loud voice and “to every nation and tribe and tongue and people,” the glad tidings that “a new heaven and a new earth” are at hand for the blessing of obedient mankind. (Revelation 14:6; 21:1) WE REJOICE that as a result of this proclamation, a great crowd of more than three million from all nations is now united with us around the globe. Along with the angel flying in midheaven, all of us declare: “Fear God and give him glory, because the hour of the judgment by him has arrived, and so worship the One who made the heaven and the earth and sea and fountains of waters.”​—Revelation 14:7.
[Study Questions]
 1. In what do Jehovah’s Witnesses now rejoice?
 2. On each of the Resolution’s seven points, state (a) what Jehovah’s Witnesses abhor and (b) what positive affirmation the Witnesses make.
 3. (a) What joy and privilege do Jehovah’s Witnesses have? (b) What is the resolve of the Witnesses? (c) What also are we determined to do? (d) In what rejoicing and declaration do Jehovah’s Witnesses share?

