
Do You Remember?

Have you carefully read the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:



How can we quench the fire of uncontrolled speech?

We should examine our own heart. Rather than be critical of a brother, why not analyze what might be behind such an attitude? Might we criticize him as a means of making ourselves look better? Moreover, being critical can make a tense situation worse.—8/15, page 21.



How did the Law reflect God’s view of women?

Israelite women enjoyed considerable freedom, and they had access to education. They were to be honored and respected, with their rights being protected.—9/1, pages 5-7.



With Jehovah’s day approaching, what events are yet to come?

“Peace and security!” will be proclaimed. The nations will attack and destroy Babylon the Great. There will be an attack on God’s people. The war of Armageddon will occur, followed by the abyssing of Satan and his demons.—9/15, page 4.



How do we benefit from not knowing when the end will come?

Not knowing the exact day or hour allows us to reveal what is in our heart. It gives us the opportunity to make God’s heart glad. It encourages us to pursue a life of self-sacrifice and helps us to rely more fully on God and his Word. Moreover, it allows present adversities to refine us.—9/15, pages 24-25.



How can we use Genesis 3:19 to reason with a person who believes in hellfire?

The verse says that at death Adam would return to the dust of the ground, not that he would go to a fiery hell.—10/1, page 13.



Who are represented by the “seven stars” in Jesus’ right hand mentioned at Revelation 1:16, 20?

They represent spirit-anointed overseers in congregations, and thus, by extension, all overseers.—10/15, page 14.



How can a family deal with debt they may be facing?

A married couple should talk openly and calmly about their debt. It will help if they analyze their current budget. Can they increase their income or reduce family expenses? They should decide the order in which they will tackle their debts, perhaps negotiating payments with creditors. But they should be realistic and keep money in its proper place. (1 Tim. 6:8)—11/1, pages 19-21.



How did Jesus manifest the humble attitude referred to at Isaiah 50:4, 5?

Those verses say that one having “the tongue of the taught ones” would “not turn in the opposite direction.” Jesus displayed a humble attitude, paying close attention to what his Father taught him. Jesus was eager and willing to learn from Jehovah, closely observing God’s humility in exercising mercy toward sinful mankind.—11/15, page 11.



How did an Estonian commemorative postage stamp testify to the integrity of Jehovah’s Witnesses?

In 2007 the National Post Office issued a stamp focusing on the Stalinist genocide of Estonians. It bore the number 382, referring to the number of Witnesses and their children who were deported in 1951 to labor camps deep inside Russia.—12/1, pages 27-28.



