From Our Readers
Homelessness
I am surprised the articles on world homelessness (March 8, 1988) do not stress the root cause​—world overpopulation or man’s inability to control the rate of his own reproduction. As in all cases, man brings misery on himself through contravening God’s wishes for His children in some way.
J. A., Japan
It is true that overpopulation is a major cause of homelessness. However, the homeless are also found in parts of the world where overpopulation is not a big problem; hence our effort to present a balanced view of the causes. World overpopulation is a subject in its own right and was discussed at length in our issue of August 8, 1983.​—ED.
In one of my classes, we have been doing reports on problems in the world today. I chose to do my report on homelessness. From all the magazines I used as references, the March 8 Awake! gave me the most and the best information. It was the only one that had the real solution.
S. G., United States
Avoiding Rape
Last December, I was attacked. A man grabbed me from behind. I remembered that the magazine (July 8, 1980) advised women to scream in such situations. Since he had his hand over my mouth, I tried biting it to be able to scream, but it was impossible. He kept saying that he would kill me if I didn’t calm down. But I was in no doubt as to what to do.
I managed to open my mouth and found the palm of his hand between my teeth. I bit him with all the strength I had, and he loosened his hold on me. I bit him again, and pulling his hand away with my nails, I screamed as loud as I could. Swearing at me, he punched me hard in my mouth and then ran off. How grateful I was! I will never miss an article in these fine magazines.
D. P. Italy
I have to thank you for the “Watching the World” item “Best Weapon: Screaming” that gave advice on avoiding rape. (August 22, 1980) While I was walking from one village to another recently, a man pursued me and made a violent attempt to rape me. I screamed and shouted for help. Two men ran out from the bush to rescue me, and the rapist ran away. Thanks again.
E. A. A., Nigeria
Honor Parents
I am 17 years old and have just finished reading “Young People Ask . . ” on honoring parents in the April 8 and 22, 1988, issues of Awake! These articles were especially for me. Following the counsel not to ‘sift through the diamonds looking for dirt,’ I sat down and filled a sheet of paper with my parents’ good points. There are so many of them.
The articles helped me to understand how much I should appreciate the fact that I have two dear parents who, in spite of all their faults, have guided me toward the best way of life. I realize I am often impossible to get along with, but they don’t deserve this. From time to time I read that sheet of paper listing their fine qualities. Thank you for these excellent articles.
R. P. Italy

