Announcements
JEHOVAH’S WORSHIP EXALTED ABOVE THE MOUNTAINS
The worship of the Most High, whose name alone is Jehovah, must be exalted above everything else, including the high governmental “mountains” of this world. That worship, moreover, must be “in spirit and in truth,” for only such worship does Jehovah God accept. This high standard is now sought by people of good will of all nations. They inquire about the ways of Jehovah and express their desire to follow them. In this way they ‘go up to the mountain of the house [temple] of Jehovah.’ (Isa. 2:2, 3, AS) The Word of Jehovah must be the spiritual guide for those who desire to escape the devastation of the approaching battle of Armageddon. To aid all such persons more than a half-million witness ministers will call on people at their homes presenting the Bible study aid You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World and a booklet on another Bible subject on a contribution of 50c. You too may have a share in this work of saying, ‘Come, let us go up to the mountain of the house of Jehovah,’ by writing us for information.
WHAT CAN YOU BE SURE OF?
How can you be sure of anything when so many other persons have a different view? The answer is to be certain of your authority. But how can you have real confidence in any one man when even authorities disagree? There is only one absolute Authority available and that is God’s Word, the Bible. Of course, opinions vary considerably, even as to what the Bible has to say on any specific subject, but the reason for this is that men interpret various texts to satisfy their own views. The authority for the view, then, ceases to be God’s and becomes that of the private interpreter. Would you like to have assurance of what the Bible really teaches? Then you should have the book “Make Sure of All Things”. It treats seventy themes and 287 subjects simply by quoting related scripture texts without additional comment. The comparison of expressions from God’s Word on the point will give you the answer, one that you can rely on because the only authority used is absolutely reliable. The book is yours for only 75c. Send for it today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
December 16: Faithful Stewardship. Page 689.
December 23: Blessings Through Service. Page 696.

