Blessings Through Service
 1. What has caused the anointed remnant to increase Kingdom interests a hundredfold?
THE reader will have observed how the faithful remnant of God’s anointed have increased their privileges and gained more responsibilities. They have increased more than a hundredfold. Using the interests of the Kingdom industriously, energetically and prayerfully, they have been helped by Jehovah to prosper in the service. Jehovah has made it a success, he has made the work prosper. This faithful steward class is receiving the mark of God’s approval and is happy. Look carefully at the years of diligent, enthusiastic, unselfish service that have been devoted to the ministry, so that you may see the way to take to gain the same favor and approval. You now have the honor and benefit of seeing an actual demonstration before your eyes of a class receiving the approval of the Most High God. He is well pleased with them.
 2. (a) Why has one organization exclusively proclaimed God’s name? (b) How is this a fulfillment of prophecy pertaining to the end of the world?
2 Out of obscurity the name of the true God, Jehovah, has been lifted. His name has been blasphemed, ridiculed and reproached, but Jehovah’s people have lifted it on high. His Word commands: “In that day shall ye say, Give thanks unto Jehovah, call upon his name, declare his doings among the peoples, make mention that his name is exalted.” (Isa. 12:4, AS) Think of all the religious organizations claiming to be Christian, and who among them all is declaring the name Jehovah and announcing that his name Jehovah is exalted? None but one. Strange though it may sound, the only people performing this Jehovah-honoring ministry are Jehovah’s witnesses working under the direction of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, the legal administrative body of God’s anointed remnant. Today hundreds of thousands of Christians are calling upon the name of Jehovah for salvation and protection. The name has been set in its right place in the minds and hearts of all these people. Years ago they did not know that name, and probably when a minister called at the home, saying, “I am one of Jehovah’s witnesses,” they wondered what it meant. Who was Jehovah? Why have witnesses? Now readers of The Watchtower know. Yet the day will come when one will not need to go to his neighbor’s door, for God’s prophet declares: “And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know Jehovah; for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith Jehovah: for I will forgive their iniquity, and their sin will I remember no more.” (Jer. 31:34, AS) And what a grand work this has been! Actually bearing his reproach, but loving him all the time! Shortly that name will be exalted by all living on earth and in heaven, for others simply will not exist. Jehovah has prospered this work and has given it his richest blessing. Is that what you want? Then follow the same example and do likewise. Preach the name of Jehovah as the only true God; honor him and he will honor you; bless him and he will bless you. This also is a definite fulfillment of prophecy marking the end of this wicked age.
 3. Why must the day of vengeance be proclaimed, and what results to the proclaimers?
3 We are now at the end of this wicked system of things when Jehovah purposes to destroy all unrighteousness. This will be in the day of his wrath, the day of vengeance. He will not destroy, however, without warning. God does not do anything in the dark, nor slyly, like a dagger thrust in the back. So he commands: “Proclaim the year of Jehovah’s favor, and the day of vengeance of our God.” (Isa. 61:2, AS) Peter, speaking prophetically, said: “By the same word the heavens and the earth that are now are stored up for fire and are being reserved to the day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly men.” (2 Pet. 3:7, NW) Again it is written: “A strong angel lifted up a stone like a great millstone and hurled it into the sea, saying: ‘Thus with a swift pitch will Babylon the great city be hurled down.’” (Rev. 18:21, NW) For declaring the day of God’s vengeance Jehovah’s witnesses are hated of all nations, but they have valiantly and fearlessly continued to speak all the words commanded. They have declared God’s judgment to the world at large and to all its rulers on earth, and before the wicked spirits invisible to human sight and against Gog the prince of devils, who is Satan the great adversary.
 4. Has protection been given, and is it still promised?
4 This work has been performed faithfully and is still progressing and will do so until Armageddon. All has been done under the direction and guidance of the “faithful and discreet slave” class. Jehovah’s protection is over us as this perilous work is done. Salvation lies in obedience and confidence. His blessing is with the Jehovah-fearing man. Do you also desire his blessing? If so, come right onto Jehovah’s side, leave the old world, shun evil companions and join the happy slaves of Jehovah, who have faith in his works. Trust in him with all your heart. So shall his blessing be yours. The world is condemned to destruction. Take warning now and flee from it. Remember Lot’s wife. Be safe, relying on the promise that “he that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.”—Ps. 91:1, 2, AS.
 5. (a) How is the scripture at Matthew 6:10 being fulfilled? (b) How are we a pure theocracy?
5 Jehovah God is the great Theocrat. Christ Jesus is next in power and authority, then those spirit creatures who carry out the will of the Most High God. God’s will alone is performed in heaven. The Theocrat’s rule is law there, therefore it is a theocracy. Now on earth Jehovah’s people are dedicated to do only his will; the Word of God is their law. He directs his will through his beloved Son operating through the holy angels by means of his spirit, causing the “faithful and discreet slave” class to carry out his purpose. With the anointed remnant and their faithful companions it is now a matter of doing only the will of Jehovah God. No personal purposes now, but only God’s! “Let your will come to pass, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matt. 6:10, NW) This was the prayer the Lord Jesus taught his disciples, and today it is an accomplished fact with Jehovah’s chosen people. The rule of Scripture is the rule in his organization. Also the principles therein set forth are those upon which we work. Jehovah’s thoughts, ways and purposes are those we follow and not our own. It is a pure theocracy. Therefore there is peace in our ranks Here again is another fulfillment of prophecy. Jehovah has blessed the wholehearted effort of his people to bring everything into line with the Scriptures. Therefore as you witness this, and if you too desire peace, prosperity and Jehovah’s blessing, then bring your life into obedience to the will of Jehovah God and be in subjection to theocratic rule, recognizing those who have the authority over you in Jehovah’s pure and happy organization.
 6. (a) Have the faithful in times past looked for these days? (b) What should this fact produce in us?
6 For thousands of years Jehovah’s prophets and the saints of God have prayed for and looked forward to this very time in which we are now living. Jehovah promised it and declared it would come to pass. His faithful ones rejoiced in its hope; some desired to know more about it but could not. The Lord Jesus was happy knowing such a glorious time would come and the apostles comforted the brothers in the same sure promises of God. Now the Kingdom is here. The satanic wicked old world is about finished. Very shortly Jehovah God will annihilate the wicked foes, and then unrighteousness, sin and death will be no more. Yes, Jehovah and Christ Jesus have given to us the evidences of their works, that they have worked with, cleansed and blessed this people. Therefore with grateful exultation Jehovah’s people should hear God’s word: “Happy you are, O Israel! Who is there like you, a people enjoying salvation in Jehovah? A shield your helper is, and he who is a sword is your eminent one. So your enemies will cringe before you, and you—upon their high places you will tread.”—Deut. 33:29, NW.
 7. Can anyone be compared to Jehovah’s people today, and why do you answer as you do?
7 O happy people dwelling in the sunshine of Jehovah’s favor, working under the protection of his love, rejoicing in the bountiful provisions! O Jehovah’s witnesses, the antitypical Israelites, who is there like you in all the earth? None among all the nations can be compared to you. The blessings of Jehovah God are upon you because of his loving-kindness to his beloved anointed remnant. Jehovah God dwells with you because his anointed are his visible temple. Jehovah, he is your God; Jehovah, he is your salvation. He will go before us through his glorious King Christ Jesus. None shall successfully oppose us now, for Jehovah is with us. Even as did Joshua and Caleb of old, so now the “faithful and discreet slave” class bid you to choose and serve Jehovah and gain his blessings.—Josh. 24:15, AS.
BLESSINGS FOR SALVATION
 8. Why does Jehovah give these blessings, and what should result?
8 What will result from all these blessings? The simple answer is, greater glory to the name of Jehovah, higher exaltation and proclamation of the King, Christ Jesus, and his kingdom; a more bountiful gathering of the Lord’s “other sheep,” holding up the truth like a burning torch to show the way for those in the world’s darkness to escape and find safety, as it is written: “Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of Jehovah is risen upon thee. For, behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the peoples; but Jehovah will arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And nations shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.” (Isa. 60:1-3, AS) “Thus saith Jehovah, The labor of Egypt, and the merchandise of Ethiopia, and the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine: they shall go after thee; in chains they shall come over; and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee; and there is none else, there is no God. . . . Israel shall be saved by Jehovah with an everlasting salvation: ye shall not be put to shame nor confounded world without end.”—Isa. 45:14-17, AS.
 9. What speedy move is required today, where to, and with what objective?
9 Those out of the many nations see today that Jehovah is with us and will hasten to get to know more about Jehovah’s ways and escape the coming wrath of Almighty God at Armageddon. Jehovah’s people are in the limelight for this purpose, so that those who escape from the nations will know where to go. The prophetic word written for this time says: “It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come peoples, and the inhabitants of many cities; and the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to entreat the favor of Jehovah, and to seek Jehovah of hosts: I will go also. Yea, many peoples and strong nations shall come to seek Jehovah of hosts in Jerusalem, and to entreat the favor of Jehovah. Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: In those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold, out of all the languages of the nations, they shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you [people], for we have heard that God is with you.” This does not mean the natural Jew, but the favored people of Jehovah today, the spiritual Israelites and their companions.—Zech. 8:20-23, AS.
10. Who are the ten men mentioned at Zechariah 8:20-23, and how do they take hold of the skirt of the Jew?
10 Those escaped from the nations are hastening with all speed, carrying from city to city the good news that Jehovah is blessing his people, that God is with them. They are entreating God’s favor. To take hold of the skirt means to appeal for instruction and protection. The antitypical Israelites, Jehovah’s witnesses, hear the appeal and rush to aid. There is great urgency today in this gathering and instruction work. These inhabitants of great cities are, not stragglers, but intelligent, inquisitive men of business. All move forward with briskness, eager to obtain knowledge of Jehovah’s ways. All Jehovah’s witnesses and companions should take to heart the words “Let us go speedily”; yes, go continually to entreat the favor of Jehovah. “‘In an acceptable season I heard you, and in the day for salvation I came to your help.’ Look! Now is the especially acceptable season. Look! Now is the day for salvation.” This speedy work is for our salvation and the salvation of hundreds of thousands more. It is a matter of great moment, and delay is dangerous.—2 Cor. 6:2, NW.
11. How do the peoples of the nations recognize Jehovah’s people?
11 But keep in mind that it is because of the blessing of Jehovah upon his favored people that others in the nations came to realize that here with God’s people is where they can get tuition and safety. Those out of the nations desire eagerly to go with God’s people. Therefore all must know that to join yourselves to Jehovah God you must join yourselves to Jehovah’s people. You cannot have one without the other. So let us incite one another to love and good works. Honor those whom Jehovah has honored. Then you will learn the fear of Jehovah, the beginning of wisdom.
12. What are the requirements for retaining theocratic citizenship, and how do we learn of these?
12 All drawing near to Jehovah and his organization must come into line with theocratic instruction. It is written: “And it must occur that, because you continue listening to these judicial decisions and you do keep them and do carry them out, Jehovah your God must keep toward you the covenant and the loving-kindness about which he swore to your forefathers. And he will certainly love you and bless you.” (Deut. 7:12, 13, NW) “I will give thanks unto thee with uprightness of heart, when I learn thy righteous judgments.” (Ps. 119:7, AS) Jehovah has caused his righteous judicial decisions to be published through the theocratic organization and in it there is peace. I will “seek thee earnestly: for when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness. Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness; in the land of uprightness will he deal wrongfully, and will not behold the majesty of Jehovah.” (Isa. 26:9, 10, AS) Therefore seek Jehovah earnestly, walk in his fear and learn his judicial decisions; so shall you then be in the way of salvation.
13. To whom does Jehovah give his salvation, and why especially now?
13 The redemption of Jehovah belongs to those who fear him, for the Word of God says: “So shall they fear the name of Jehovah from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun; for he will come as a rushing stream, which the breath of Jehovah driveth. And a Redeemer will come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith Jehovah.” (Isa. 59:19, 20, AS) Those of the nations seeking his favor must turn from idolatry and all forms of false religion. Jehovah will put all our enemies to flight. Through the Angel of his presence he will come like a river pent up that the tempest of Jehovah drives along. His revealed judgments are terrible and strike fear into the hearts of all God’s enemies. Those who fear bow down before his majesty and awfulness. They tread before him gently and reverently, for Jehovah is dwelling with his beloved ones. Nothing can stop the onrush of truths, the manifestation of his judgments. The time has come at last for righteousness to be exalted and all the wicked to be dethroned. This glorious and happy day is here. Rejoice, you witnesses of Jehovah, for true and lasting salvation is here in the power of earth’s new King.
14. How is the Abrahamic promise fulfilled today through Jehovah’s people?
14 Following the lead and example set by Jehovah’s anointed now, all will be blessed. They are the remaining members of the seed of Abraham. To Abraham God promised: “I will bless those who bless you, and him that calls down evil upon you I shall curse, and all the families of the ground will certainly bless themselves by means of you.” (Gen. 12:3, NW) So those who bless God and the anointed remnant will themselves be blessed, and this means riches and prosperity. The faithful Jehovah-fearing class have prayed for guidance and their steps have been guided. “From Jehovah are the steps of a man, they have been prepared, and his way he desireth.” (Ps. 37:23, Young) The steps of this “good man” class have led Jehovah’s people to his holy hill and to the temple of God to dwell there forever in pure worship and true holiness.
15. (a) What important reason is there for pure and clean worship today? (b) How can one today stand in Jehovah’s holy place?
15 Now we dwell in his presence; his glory is over us and fills the organization. Every one of God’s people must now reverence and fear Jehovah to remain in his holy presence. There must be only pure worship offered, for any idolatry will be obnoxious to him and to his people. All must cleanse themselves from all impurity. “Who shall ascend into the hill of Jehovah? And who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto falsehood, and hath not sworn deceitfully. He shall receive a blessing from Jehovah, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the generation of them that seek after him.” (Ps. 24:3-6, AS) If you desire with all your heart to come to his temple to worship, which means recognizing the remnant of God’s anointed in their privileged and honored position of service, then do these things. You will neither worship here nor will you remain with Jehovah’s beloved ones unless you do have clean hands and pure hearts. Therefore learn God’s way now for pure worship, attend all the arranged meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses so you can study God’s holy Word with the aid of the Bible textbooks, appreciate the truth and escape this evil world. Then as you read, run, run speedily to your neighbor and tell him. Go to those in your district and tell them. Yes, if possible, go from city to city and show others how to escape and get to Jehovah’s house of prayer—his temple.
16. How important was Jehovah’s presence to his typical people?
16 When Moses was leading the Israelites from the Red Sea to the Promised Land there was always safety as long as they had with them the pillar of fire by night and the cloud by day. Yes, Jehovah’s presence was with them and they were secure from their enemies. Fear held them fast whenever there was the slightest possibility that Jehovah would not continue going before them. On one occasion Jehovah stated he would not go: “For I shall not go up in the midst of you, because you are a stiff-necked people.” When the people got to hear this evil word they began to mourn, and while Moses was seeking Jehovah he said: “See, you are saying to me, ‘Lead this people up,’ but you yourself have not let me know whom you will send with me. . . .’ So he [Jehovah] said: ‘My own person will go along and I shall certainly give you rest.’ At this he said to him: ‘If your own person is not going along, do not lead us up from here.’”—Ex. 33:3, 12-15, NW.
17. As showing its importance, what are the effects of his presence with his people today?
17 To have the presence of Jehovah with them meant everything to Moses and Israel. He would lead, feed, protect, deliver and bring them into the Promised Land. So it is today. Jehovah God is with us and he is our guide even unto death. “For this God is our God for ever and ever: He will be our guide even unto death.” (Ps. 48:14, AS) If Jehovah is with us we need have no fear, for “God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. . . . though the earth do change, and though the mountains be shaken into the heart of the seas; . . . The nations raged, the kingdoms were moved: . . . Jehovah of hosts is with us; . . . God is in the midst of her [the holy place of the tabernacle of the Most High]; she shall not be moved.”—Ps. 46:1-11, AS.
18. How does Isaiah 4:4-6 find fulfillment today?
18 Now Jehovah’s witnesses know Jehovah is in his holy temple. (See The Watchtower of November 15, 1955.) They are filled with awe, fear and dread, because the Most High God dwells with his people. Yet all are comforted and at peace, knowing that he is here with his faithful ones and that his cloud of glory is over them. This means continual guidance and protection. It also means salvation for the anointed and for all the “other sheep,” those who have escaped from the nations. After the cleansing work has proceeded with his people then come his blessings, as is shown by the following promise: “When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the spirit [blast] of justice, . . . Jehovah will create over the whole habitation of mount Zion, and over her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night; for over all the glory shall be spread a covering. And there shall be a pavilion for a shade in the day-time from the heat, and for a refuge and for a covert from storm and from rain.”—Isa. 4:4-6, AS.
19. Why does world tribulation leave Jehovah’s people unshaken?
19 Oh the joy and blessedness of those who are dwelling in the presence of Jehovah God! They are in a holy place. The storms of opposition and the heat of persecution will come, also the troubles on earth will increase with perplexity. But none of these troubles will harm those in the pavilion of Jehovah. You want to remain there forever, do you not? Or, if you have not yet entered into association with Jehovah’s people, blessings await you. One of God’s promises states: “For in the day of trouble he will keep me secretly in his pavilion: . . . he will lift me up upon a rock.” “In the covert of thy presence wilt thou hide them from the plottings of man: thou wilt keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.” “He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of Jehovah, He is my refuge and my fortress; my God, in whom I trust. . . . I will set him on high, because he hath known my name.”—Pss. 27:5; 31:20; 91:1, 2, 14, AS.
20. Jehovah’s people are a guarantee of what, and why?
20 Let all hurry to go up to the organization of Jehovah and abide there. Seek his blessing while it is obtainable. Do not hesitate. Look to the faithful course of God’s anointed in these last days and know for a certainty that what Jehovah God has done for them he will do for you. The mercies of God will not be given to you if you remain in this evil world, neither will you be in the way to receive his goodness by standing still. You must move forward in faith born of the abundant testimony now before you. The promise is: “I, Jehovah, have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles.” (Isa. 42:6, AS) Yes, Jehovah’s people are a guarantee for your light and security.
21. What blessed promise should it be our aim to obtain?
21 All must be faithful, holding responsibility in the fear of Jehovah, guarding well this beautiful trust and giving a good account of our stewardship. Thereby may we gain his approval by increasing our privileges, and finally hear: “Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.”—Matt. 25:21, NW.

