The Chief Was Impressed
The district servant was busy overhauling the Society’s panel truck after arriving at the assembly site. It was out in “bush” country of Northern Rhodesia and the trip had been made over rough dirt roads. To keep any vehicle in good condition under these circumstances requires constant attention. So here he was, busy on the job, and not in exactly the kind of attire to receive a formal visit, when there appeared on the scene a small procession, a superior chief and his attendants, personal clerk, interpreter, etc.
After a few minutes of formal exchanges, the chief nodded to one of his attendants, who immediately presented the district servant with a dozen eggs—without doubt a friendly visit.
Along with many others, this chief has been undergoing a change of heart toward Jehovah’s witnesses. Just a few years ago he had no time for the witnesses, for he thought they were political troublemakers. Now he is an ardent backer and defender of Jehovah’s witnesses, finding them to be the greatest peacemakers ever to bless his district. Taking up the story the district servant writes:
“When the news trickled through to the chief that Jehovah’s witnesses were having their circuit assembly in his area, that was his cue to get busy. First he calmed the uneasiness of a European superior, who, not knowing the nature of the assembly, feared there might be trouble. Next, at every court hearing which he attended he commanded that the accused should be present at this assembly. Then he called in all the village headmen under him and in no mean terms told them that if they themselves failed to attend or if they did not notify the village people and encourage them to be present then he personally would see that they were charged with negligence of duty. As though this were not sufficient, he made a public decree that all the officials and officers and people of his own village must honor the assembly by their presence!
“Although not one of Jehovah’s witnesses, the chief talks highly of these cheerful peacemakers. And as he says, ‘Peacemakers are here to stay.’”
No doubt about it, the chief was impressed.

