Announcements
● Literature offer for December: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for a contribution of $2.50. Kingdom News No. 33 will also be distributed. It may be used to introduce the book offer, left where no one is at home, or given free of charge to any who wish to read it. January and February: Watchtower subscription for a contribution of $4.00. Where subscription is not obtained, two magazines and a copy of the brochure The Government That Will Bring Paradise will be offered for a contribution of 70¢. March: Any of the older pocket-size books for a contribution of $1.00.
● Presiding overseer should arrange to have MEDICAL ALERT cards distributed at beginning of the Service Meeting the week of January 5. Brother handling announcements can give brief reminders concerning use of card as expressed in letter dated July 20, 1980. Post letter on information board for a week or two. Brothers are encouraged to fill out card promptly, having it properly signed, witnessed, and dated.
● The presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit congregation’s accounts on December 1, or as soon as possible thereafter.
● It is suggested that all congregations display the new yeartext by January 1, 1986.
● The special public talk for the 1986 Memorial season will be given worldwide on Sunday, March 9. The subject of this talk will be “The World’s Insecurity​—Is There a Solution?” An outline will be provided as soon as possible. Those congregations having the visit of the circuit overseer or a circuit assembly scheduled that week will have the special talk the following week. No congregation should have the special talk before March 9.
● Bound Volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! for 1985: Publishers and pioneers, please order your volumes through your congregation. Congregations should begin collecting requests for these volumes now. Then, on January 1, 1986, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society, using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). Order only the number of bound volumes for which you have requests. The bound volumes will be available in Dutch, English, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, and Spanish at $5.00 each. There is no pioneer rate. Payment should not accompany the congregation order sent to the Society. (See the Cost List, paragraph 23.) Until the bound volumes are available and shipped, they will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Please announce to the congregation when the bound volumes are received so that all who ordered can obtain their copies.
● New Publications Available:
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?​—Dutch, Italian, Japanese
Reasoning From the Scriptures​—Danish, German, Norwegian
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Chinese
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Kalanga
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—English

