Kingdom Hall Expansion Program
1 Imagine the great joy of the Israelites when the building work on Jerusalem’s wall was completed! The inspired account tells us: “They proceeded to sacrifice on that day great sacrifices and to rejoice, for the true God himself caused them to rejoice with great joy.” (Neh. 12:43) The returning Israelites had trusted in Jehovah. Despite adversity they had gone forward with the work assigned. What an evidence of Jehovah’s blessing upon their loyal efforts when the building work was completed in just 52 days!
2 Likewise today, there is cause for rejoicing when we reflect upon the good that Jehovah’s servants have accomplished in the Kingdom Hall expansion program in the United States. During just the past two years, over 300 new Kingdom Halls have been built in 47 states and over 100 existing Kingdom Halls have been remodeled so as to provide additional seating. The Society Kingdom Hall Fund has assisted in financing some of this new construction, and other Society funds have been used for remodeling projects. In many cases, the local brothers have provided needed financing or they have obtained it from other sources. So, at this writing, construction on 414 new or remodeled Kingdom Halls has been completed. Another 62 new Kingdom Halls are scheduled to be built in the near future. Yes, we, too, have reason to “rejoice with great joy”!
3 This important work is being accomplished through the united efforts of integrity-keeping Witnesses throughout the land. Outsiders have taken note of the organizational unity demonstrated by Jehovah’s people as they work together on their Kingdom Halls. One city building inspector in Ohio stated: “I was impressed with the preplanning. Everybody’s got their job, they know what to do and they’re doing it. . . . There’s nothing to compare it to.” And to whom does the credit go? It is to our God and Father, Jehovah. He has been blessing us in this work as we lovingly give of ourselves and our resources.
4 The news media has commented extensively upon what has been observed. A Colorado newspaper editorial said: “Teamwork was never more evident than it was last weekend when the local congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses and their friends built their new Kingdom Hall. . . . Such a project might have been considered impossible by some, but seeing is believing, as a whole community can now attest. . . . It should also provide an inspiring example to others as to what teamwork can accomplish. One person alone has limitations as to what he or she can accomplish, but a unified team can produce results which stagger the imagination.”
5 In New Hampshire, a newspaper writer commented at length on what he had observed at a Kingdom Hall construction site. Among other things, he wrote: “I am not easily impressed by cooperative ventures. . . . They all seem to crumble because too many members want a free ride while only a few are pushing the wagon. . . . This is the prejudice I brought with me to watch the Jehovah[’s] Witnesses build a new Kingdom Hall this past weekend. . . . I arrived with a lot of doubts​—and went away happily surprised. . . . It was a very cordial and polite construction crew. They all wore hard hats but did not engage in the usual profanities associated with men on rafters. All the work performed this weekend was free. Nobody was getting a pay check. . . . It was amazing to watch so many people working on one building.”
KINGDOM HALL REPORT
6 Generosity has always been an identifying characteristic of spiritually-minded individuals. (2 Cor. 9:1-5) You will be encouraged to know that the Society Kingdom Hall Fund has been used to assist in building new Kingdom Halls in 40 states, providing accommodations for over 150 congregations. These congregations may not otherwise have been able to obtain financing. The goal of the Society Kingdom Hall Fund is not just to provide financing at a reasonable cost but to do so for congregations that would find it difficult or impossible to obtain the necessary funding elsewhere.
7 It would be good for congregations to exercise care regarding “interim financing” or other forms of shorter-term loans on new construction projects. The desire to proceed with a building project is certainly understandable. Yet, such temporary financing should not be obtained through commercial banks or loan associations unless the congregation has first contacted the Society for assistance and been advised to do so. Congregations faced with urgent remodeling or repair needs can contact the Society, since some funding is available for such projects from time to time on a limited basis.
CONTINUED ASSISTANCE NEEDED
8 We rejoice that 168 new congregations were formed in the United States during the 1985 service year. (Isa. 54:2) This means that more Kingdom Halls are needed for these new congregations. Additionally, there are still 1,081 congregations that meet in Kingdom Halls that are shared by three or more congregations. Even though the brothers are displaying a loving, cooperative attitude as halls are used efficiently in these circumstances, it will be a fine thing when additional facilities are provided.
9 Although much has been accomplished already, there is still an urgent need in the United States for more Kingdom Halls. Each of us has the opportunity to demonstrate the same zealous spirit that Haggai and his brothers manifested when working on the temple after the Jews returned to their homeland. (Ezra 6:14; Hag. 1:3, 4, 8) We can assist in keeping our Kingdom Hall clean and presentable. It may be that we can help with the maintenance and periodic improvement of the Kingdom Hall. By our regular contributions to the Society Kingdom Hall Fund, we can give another evidence of our brotherly love and assist in building new Kingdom Halls nationwide. (Matt. 22:39; John 13:34, 35) If new labels for identifying the Society Kingdom Hall Fund contribution box are needed, they can be requested from the Society by writing to the Kingdom Hall Desk.
10 All contributions made to the Society Kingdom Hall Fund should be forwarded to the Society each month. As these contributions accumulate, arrangements are made to provide loans to congregations needing assistance. The contributions received are used solely to assist in the construction of needed Kingdom Halls. When congregations that have received these loans make repayment to the Society, the funds can again be lent to help still other congregations. So funds contributed to the Society Kingdom Hall Fund will be used time after time in building one Kingdom Hall after another.
WILLING WORKERS ACCOMPLISH THE TASKS
11 While the success of the Kingdom Hall building program is due in part to the money provided by the Society Kingdom Hall Fund, much more than that is involved. All these new centers of true worship scattered throughout the country have required many thousands of hours of volunteer labor. In this, also, the brothers have proved to be exceedingly generous, especially over the past two years.
12 In various areas of the country, trained groups of brothers have been organized to assist congregations in building Kingdom Halls quickly, perhaps completing a project in just one weekend. Regional building committees have helped greatly with such work. Many brothers have volunteered their time and energies to help. All who are doing this are to be commended for their demonstration of loving concern. Such brothers, however, are encouraged to exercise sound judgment and to be balanced in what they do. Many have family responsibilities as well as assignments to care for in their respective congregations. They must continue to have a full share in the field ministry. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) Therefore, congregations needing assistance should also approach their Kingdom Hall project in a balanced manner. While there may be a desire to build as soon as possible, unreasonable demands should not be made on the skilled workers, insisting that they help right away. Rather, all should participate according to a scheduled arrangement. Some may even find it necessary to delay their construction project temporarily so that matters can proceed in an orderly manner without becoming burdensome to others.
13 Israel was commended for completing the tabernacle construction assignment “just so.” (Ex. 39:32, 43) Likewise today, it should be our desire to provide quality-built Kingdom Halls. Rather than engaging in a spirit of competition to ‘see how fast it can be done,’ Jehovah’s people endeavor to ‘see how well Kingdom Halls can be built,’ although they are also built in a relatively short period of time. It is recommended that Kingdom Halls be modest, suitable houses of worship, not extravagant in size or style, not wasteful of dedicated resources.
14 We rejoice with a congregation that is engaged in a building or remodeling project. Nevertheless, it shows both kindness and consideration to the brothers who are working on the project if we do not travel to the construction site simply to be spectators. If we cannot participate in the work at hand in a meaningful way, it would be best to share in field service activities with our local congregation.
MAINTAINING OUR KINGDOM HALLS
15 Just as faithful Israelites worked to keep the temple of Jehovah in good repair, so today congregations of Jehovah’s people exercise care so that the condition of the Kingdom Hall does not deteriorate. (2 Chron. 24:13) While failure to maintain the Kingdom Hall in good condition could result in substantial financial loss, of even more importance is how the Kingdom Hall reflects on Jehovah, his people, and the Kingdom message. Individuals who attend for the first time often make judgments based on what they observe. What will be their reaction to your Kingdom Hall? Does it need to be repainted? What is the condition of the seats, the carpet, the drapes?
16 All congregations have been provided with direction on the maintenance and repair of the Kingdom Hall. Additionally, the Society communicates from time to time with the body of elders, reviewing important maintenance requirements. Of course, there are matters to which the elders should always be alert. Is the roof in good repair? What about the plumbing, air conditioning, heating, and electrical systems? Are these all in good working order? At least once a year the elders should carefully check on these matters.
17 When a congregation finds that it has outgrown its present Kingdom Hall, what should be done? The body of elders should give careful consideration to all the options that are available. For example, though the Kingdom Hall may be crowded, the present location may be good. The site may be readily identified by the community and easily accessible to most. Therefore, the congregation may wish to give serious consideration to major remodeling rather than sale and new construction. This may allow the congregation to satisfy its present needs as well as provide for growth in the future. Generally, remodeling can be accomplished at less cost in time and money. Buying another property and building a new Kingdom Hall also involves the associated problem of trying to sell the old facility. Of course, as these matters are analyzed, there are many factors to be taken into consideration and all possibilities should be carefully weighed.
18 Yes, still more Kingdom Halls are needed. As a united organization working through the Kingdom Hall expansion program, we can meet this challenge. The Society Kingdom Hall Fund has been a great aid in getting this program on the move. As we continue to give freely of our time and resources, we will look to Jehovah to bless our united efforts, to his praise.​—2 Cor. 9:6, 7.
[Picture on page 3]
Indiana​—Kingdom Hall quickly built with assistance of Society Kingdom Hall Fund
[Pictures on page 4, 5]
Variety in architecture of Kingdom Halls built in last two years
Missouri
Colorado
Missouri
Montana
Tennessee
[Pictures on page 6]
Texas and Kentucky​—Both Kingdom Halls quickly built in September 1984 with assistance of Society Kingdom Hall Fund

