Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 1
Song 50
10 min: Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Share an experience or two from the congregation’s work so far in offering the Creation book.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In December.” Apply to local circumstances. Questions and answers. Include one or two brief demonstrations showing how the tract can be used to introduce the offer.
15 min: “Kingdom Hall Expansion Program.” Question-and-answer discussion of first ten paragraphs of insert. Draw attention to pictures of Kingdom Halls that have been built in different states. Also, encourage congregation’s continued participation in Society Kingdom Hall Fund.
Song 36 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 8
Song 106
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Encourage magazine work on second Saturday, December 14. All should bring Reasoning book to meeting next week.
15 min: “Find Refreshment for Your Souls.” Talk with audience participation. Include commendation of brothers for their diligence in some specific ways in which they extend themselves to attend all the meetings and share in field service regularly.
20 min: “Kingdom Hall Expansion Program.” Question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 11-18 of insert. When discussing paragraphs 15 and 16, comment on maintenance of local Kingdom Hall.
Song 48 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 15
Song 37
 5 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News.
15 min: Holiday Witnessing. Three well-prepared demonstrations showing practical value and use of Reasoning book. Comment briefly on need to be prepared to meet objections and to answer sincere questions related to specific holidays. (pp. 176-82) Demonstrate use of material under (1) “Date of the celebration” on pages 176-7; (2) “Is there any objection to sharing in celebrations that may have unchristian roots as long as it is not done for religious reasons?” on pages 178-9; and (3) “Are New Year’s celebrations objectionable for Christians?” on page 180. Use a different setting or circumstance for each demonstration.
15 min: “Be Versatile in Your Ministry.” Talk with some audience participation. Demonstrate presentations in paragraphs 6 and 8.
10 min: “The Theocratic Ministry School for 1986.” Talk by school overseer, covering information in article and reviewing other key points that may need attention locally. Encourage all to become familiar with the instructions set out for the Theocratic Ministry School for 1986. Encourage enrollment by those who qualify.
Song 20 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 22
Song 89
10 min: Local announcements. Include encouragement for field service on fourth Saturday with magazines. Present two well-prepared 30- to 60-second demonstrations of magazine presentations suitable for your local territory. One of them should be simple enough for a child to use.
20 min: “Giving Attention to the Elderly and the Infirm.” Questions and answers. Consider practical ways the local congregation can apply material.
15 min: Local needs, or present talk on “Independence From God​—Why Not?” based on first two articles in November 1, 1985, Watchtower. Apply information to local congregation.
Song 99 and concluding prayer.

