Presenting the Good News​—In December
1 Witnessing during December often presents special challenges in some parts of the country because of inclement winter weather, along with the world’s holiday season. Are you prepared to meet these challenges?
2 If the weather in your part of the country becomes severe during December, what will you do to cope with the circumstances and thus “fully accomplish your ministry”? How will you present the good news to people who may be observing the holidays?
THE KEY
3 Good judgment and a positive attitude will be key factors. If the weather is severe, prepare well for service by dressing appropriately. Some congregations have apartment territory that can be worked thoroughly during periods of inclement weather. Car groups working other territories can make necessary arrangements so that publishers are protected from harmful weather elements without losing much time in field service. In some territories it may be advantageous to ask the householder if you can step inside for a moment to explain the reason for your call.
HOLIDAY WITNESSING
4 Of course, December brings with it the worldly holiday season. Some people may be more inclined to converse about religious matters. We do well to take advantage of this, perhaps incorporating comments such as: “We note at this time of year that many people are particularly concerned about subjects dealing with religion.” You could ask, “Do you find in your community today that people think less about God? [Allow for response.] Why do you think that is so?” After the householder responds, you could continue with your discussion and offer the Creation book.
5 Holidays provide time off from secular work and school, opening up additional opportunities to spread the good news. Elders will want to make special arrangements for field service on these days. It is good to remember, however, that when we call early in the morning on a holiday, we may disturb people who want to sleep late. It may be wise to start your house-to-house activity a little later than usual. Remember, too, that if people wish you a happy holiday, it would not be wise to offend them unnecessarily with regard to their attitudes about holidays. If they specifically ask how you feel about the subject, you can answer truthfully and respectfully. Information on pages 176-8 of the publication Reasoning From the Scriptures will no doubt be helpful.
6 On magazine days in December we will also have the opportunity to offer the excellent articles in the December issues of The Watchtower and Awake! By reading these magazines and becoming familiar with the articles well in advance, we will be in a position to offer them in an appealing way.
7 Although the weather and local holiday customs may present special problems, these will not deter Jehovah’s people from zealously presenting the good news. During December we hope to accomplish much in Jehovah’s service and to be refreshed with his favor.​—Matt. 25:21-23.

