The Theocratic Ministry School for 1986
1 The progressive training offered in the Theocratic Ministry School over the past 42 years has contributed greatly to the effectiveness of the worldwide witness concerning Jehovah’s Kingdom. If you qualify but have not yet enrolled, we urge you to do so now. The Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1986 was distributed with the October Our Kingdom Ministry. Everyone in the congregation should read over the instructions carefully and be resolved to take full advantage of this excellent organizational provision.
2 New ones and others needing help in preparing their assignments should feel free to approach the Theocratic Ministry School overseer and make him aware of the need. He will be happy to give assistance personally, or he will arrange for another qualified brother to do so. But it is important that each student demonstrate initiative, determination, and a willingness to work hard in preparing his assignments. If you attend regularly, view your assignments seriously, and fulfill each one, you will make advancement in your ministry. Such participation will also be of benefit to others in the congregation.
3 The Theocratic Ministry School overseer, other elders, and qualified ministerial servants are given Assignment No. 1 and highlights from the Bible reading. Assignment No. 1 consists of a ten-minute instruction talk followed by a five-minute question-and-answer review of material in the book “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial.” Highlights from the Bible reading will help the audience to appreciate why and how the assigned material is valuable to us. Although there may be an occasional involvement of the audience, primarily the speaker himself will present information that he has carefully researched and prepared. The brothers handling these parts will need to be not only fine speakers but also effective teachers.​—1 Tim. 3:2; Titus 1:9.
4 We pray for Jehovah’s continued blessing upon this fine arrangement to equip and train us for faithful Kingdom service.

