“Find Refreshment for Your Souls”
1 A man toiling and loaded down is inclined to seek refreshment by making a change. That is what Jesus Christ invites people to do. All who take on Jesus’ “yoke” and become his disciples truly ‘find refreshment for their souls.’​—Matt. 11:28-30.
2 Doubtless many of us are very busy taking care of necessary concerns each day. Family heads have to make honest provision for their household. Housewives are busy with many duties. Even the children are occupied with school, homework, and chores. Truly, we are very busy people. However, what is it that refreshes us and brings us happiness? Is it not having a regular and meaningful share in congregation meetings and in the field ministry?
CHRIST’S YOKE REFRESHES
3 Jesus’ invitation at Matthew 11:29 can be rendered: “Get under my yoke with me and become my disciples.” (Rbi8 footnote) So Christ’s yoke that we are invited to take on means a life of complete dedication to God as disciples of Jesus Christ. (Matt. 16:24-26) But how does this refresh the soul?
4 The refreshment we receive is primarily an inward experience of joy with reassurance that as disciples of Christ we are in a close relationship with Jehovah God. It is the peace of mind that we enjoy from knowing the truth and being doers of the work. (Jas. 1:25) It is a deep calming of the heart and a contentment in life that excels all thought.​—John 14:27; Phil. 4:6, 7.
5 In the Christian congregation, the theocratic principle of headship is observed. This reflects the fact that “God is a God, not of disorder, but of peace.” (1 Cor. 14:33) Refreshing peace and order are evident in our congregation meetings. Although brothers and sisters may be exhausted after a long day of work, they know from experience that they will be refreshed at the congregation meetings. They also know that by arriving on time and sharing in the meetings, they contribute to the peace and refreshment of others.​—Prov. 10:22; Isa. 48:17.
6 Theocratic households also provide refreshment and are blessed by Jehovah. Parents who are alert to the activities, conduct, and needs of their children can build them up spiritually by means of a regular family Bible study and regular meeting attendance. (Eph. 6:4) Parents and others can train the children in field service and help them to experience the joy that comes from sharing the truth with others. The first Sunday of the month is an excellent time for the whole family to be together in field service. Husbands and fathers are a source of refreshment when they take the lead in spiritual matters. (1 Cor. 11:3) This includes overseeing arrangements for study and service as well as recreation. Wives and mothers can accomplish much good by closely cooperating with and supporting these arrangements. The result will be theocratic order and refreshment for all.​—Eph. 5:22; 6:2, 3.
7 By imitating Jehovah God and Jesus Christ, all true disciples refresh others with the truth and show personal concern for all “who are toiling and loaded down.” In addition to fellow Christians, show consideration for the people in your territory and wherever you may go. (Matt. 5:43-45; Rev. 22:17) Be zealous in the Christian ministry. Accept Christ’s invitation and “find refreshment for your souls.”

