Announcements
KEEP ABREAST OF THE NEW WORLD SOCIETY—1 Cor. 11:1.
The New World society is entirely devoted to the doing of the will of God, whose name is Jehovah. It gives close attention to the commission of preaching the “good news of the kingdom . . . in all the inhabited earth,” knowing that the foretold “accomplished end” is in sight. (Matt. 24:14) All members of the New World society delight to imitate Jesus by talking to whomever they can, wherever they can, about the new world of God’s making. During this month of October many more millions of people will be called on at their home and given opportunity to learn of New World blessings in store for men of good will toward God. Jehovah’s witnesses in calling will give a timely three- to eight-minute sermon and offer the Scripturally helpful magazine Awake! on a contribution of $1 for a year’s subscription. Three enlightening Bible booklets will be given each new subscriber.
PROTECTION FROM MORAL BREAKDOWN
Never before in history have so many words been spoken or written that are not worth hearing or reading. The world is bogged down in a swamp of lifeless and vulgar thoughts. Newspapers have a great potential for raising cultural standards, yet the tabloid that features sex crimes, murders and tragedies becomes the nation’s best seller. Not so with Awake! magazine. One reason for its spiraling circulation is that Awake! does not follow the world’s cultural breakdown. It considers timely world issues as well as scientific, social and economic problems, yet the words it contains are well worth reading. They are upbuilding, strengthening and comforting. That is because Awake! upholds Scriptural principles of honesty, truthfulness, justice, moral cleanness and love for all mankind without racial or national distinction. Awake! follows the admonition given at Philippians 4:8; thus every issue considers things that are true and of serious concern. Its words provide real protection from the world’s cultural breakdown. Read it regularly. Send $1 for a year’s subscription and receive free three timely Bible sermons in booklet form.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
October 27: Endurance like Job’s in the Time of the End, ¶1-16. Page 592.
November 3: Endurance like Job’s in the Time of the End, ¶17-29. Page 596.
November 10: Endurance like Job’s in the Time of the End, ¶30-46. Page 601.

