Another Missionary Group Graduated
IT WAS about ten o’clock, July 28, 1957, a beautiful summer morning, as Milton G. Henschel began to speak on the subject “Be like Jesus.” Situated among large pine trees and surrounded by vases of beautiful gladiolas, the yellow-canopied speaker’s platform provided indeed a colorful sight. Immediately before the speaker were seated the 103 graduating students of the twenty-ninth class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. Also attentively listening were some 5,300 guests.
“It is not by accident that we are here today, not by any means,” began Henschel. “This school was born out of necessity. The need for preaching the good news has never been greater.” Jesus had appreciated that need and so devoted his life to it. More than that, he also sent out the twelve apostles to preach, as recorded at Matthew, chapter ten. Taking up this chapter, the speaker applied verse after verse to the missionaries seated before him.
Jesus manifested singleness of purpose and they would need it also not to get sidetracked. Because of their special training more would be expected of them; they would have to take the initiative and get things done. Jesus never doubted, he never feared, neither should you. Let none discourage you.
Following this discourse the students came forward to get their diplomas and other graduation items. They had come from six different lands and were being sent to lands in Asia, Africa, South, Central and North America, to twenty lands in all. A spokesman on behalf of the class then read a letter of appreciation for the training received.
This was the first time that the president of the Watchtower Society, Nathan H. Knorr, was not on hand to preside at a Gilead graduation, a district convention at Los Angeles requiring his presence there. Before Henschel spoke, ably representing the president as his secretary and as one of the board of directors, there were brief remarks by others associated with the school. The program had begun at nine o’clock with song and prayer, after which John Markus, of the Kingdom Farm, pointed out to the students their likeness to nursery trees being transplanted for permanent fruit-bearing.
Next the four instructors spoke: H. K. Jackson reminded them of the value of hard work. K. A. Adams stressed endurance and the importance of prayer. M. G. Friend stressed the qualities of the heart and urged the students to go out and spread happiness, helpfulness, harmony, friendship and affection. A. D. Schroeder contrasted New World education with that of the old world.
The evening before, some three thousand had assembled for a study of the weekly Watchtower lesson, which was followed by a musical program by the students. The final feature of the graduation weekend took place Sunday afternoon, when, for about two hours, twenty students told of the blessings of a Gilead training and urged others to make the missionary field their goal. At four o’clock a song and prayer ended the program.

