Keep Abreast of the New World Society
THE New World society is the group of dedicated Christians organized to witness to Jehovah’s name and kingdom. It is composed of some 700,000 ministers, who are found in 162 different lands and islands.
The Architect and Builder of this New World society is Jehovah God. To him alone goes the credit. Such a marvelous society could not have been produced by mere human efforts, especially not in view of the world-wide opposition directed against it. It is solely his spirit, wisdom, power and love that accounts for this remarkable society and its expansion worldwide.
This New World society is moving on apace.a It is increasing in numbers. It is growing in knowledge and understanding of God’s purposes and his will for his servants. It is improving the quality of its ministry, and its standards are becoming ever more fully in line with Jehovah’s righteous requirements. No question about it, this grand society is marching forward and will continue to do so right through Armageddon and on into the new world.
To become a member of this society a person must gain knowledge and understanding of Jehovah’s Word and purposes and exercise faith in them and in his Son’s sacrifice. Further, he must dedicate himself to do God’s will and to follow in Christ’s footsteps, leaving all things to follow Christ as did the apostles, and give public testimony thereto by water baptism.—Matt. 19:27.
Of course, to enter into the new world with this society we must keep abreast of it. We must heed Paul’s command: “Become imitators of me, even as I am of Christ.” (1 Cor. 11:1) And what does it take to keep abreast of the New World society?
It takes, first of all, zeal for Jehovah’s work of preaching the good news of his established kingdom, even as it is Jehovah’s zeal that will cause the increase of that kingdom and of peace to be without end. Yes, as it was true of Jesus, “zeal for your house will consume me”; and as Paul and other early Christians showed a burning zeal, so must we manifest a fiery zeal for all features of Kingdom preaching to the extent of our abilities and opportunities, if we would keep abreast of the New World society.—John 2:17.
To keep abreast of this society we must also learn to exercise self-control. We must discipline ourselves to form good habits, learning to restrain our appetites and tongues. Otherwise we may become disapproved ourselves after having preached to others.
Among other important essentials to keeping abreast of the New World society is recognizing the ones appointed to take the lead by Jehovah’s visible organization, the Society. We dare not grumble as did Aaron and Miriam against Moses, the one Jehovah was using so wonderfully.—Num. 12:1-16.
Instead, we must take to heart Paul’s counsel: “Let the older men who preside in a right way be reckoned worthy of double honor, especially those who work hard in speaking and teaching.”—1 Tim. 5:17.
So, by manifesting zeal for the Kingdom ministry, by exercising self-control and by respecting and co-operating with those in positions of responsibility, we shall keep abreast of the New World society and accompany it into Jehovah’s new world of righteousness. Are you thus keeping abreast of the New World society?
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, June 1, 1956.

