VOL. XXIV. DECEMBER 1, 1903. No. 23 
SEMI-MONTHLY. 



CONTENTS. 

"Hallelujah! What a Savior!" 435 

Christ Our Wisdom 435 

Christ Our Justification 435 

Christ Our Sanctification 437 

Christ Our Redemption or 
Deliverance 440 

Whom God Did Predestinate 440 

The Dedication of the Temple 441 

A Greater Than Solomon 444 

Interesting Letters 446 

Public Ministries of the Truth 448 

page 434 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



PASTOR RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES EVERY MONDAY. 



By a special arrangement with The Pittsburgh Gazette a stenographic 
report of Pastor C. T. Russell's discourses will be printed 
on Mondays. We will send you "The Pittsburgh Gazette" 
(daily) and ZION'S WATCH TOWER twice a month for a period 



of 12 months for $3.25, which is about the price of The Gazette 
alone. The subscriptions must be paid in advance and sent to us. 

NOTICE.— Where Gazette agencies are established the issues 
desired can be readily obtained through them. The Gazette refuses 
to mail papers to towns where they would interfere with 
the agents already located. 

THE LORD'S POOR SHOULD WRITE NOW. 



Those receiving the Watch Tower free and desiring 
its continuance on same terms for 1904, should send 
postal-card request now. By so doing they will save us much 
trouble. When a name has been dropped from the lists, 
it causes extra labor to reinsert it. This advice applies 
also to any who need to ask credit. Each year stands for 
itself. You are very welcome. What more can we say 
than "Ask that ye may receive"? 

R3282 : page 434 

SUBSCRIBERS FOR DAWN VOL. VI. 



We hope to fill all orders up to date, about December 
15th. Any who have changed their address since sending 
their orders should notify us at once by postal card, lest 
the book go to old address and be lost. 

INCREASED PRICE OF DAWNS IV., V., VI. 



In consequence of raise of prices for printing and binding 
just after we had reduced our price on cloth-bound DAWNS, 
we have been selling all volumes of the series at a loss for the 
past six months. The loss has been specially heavy on the 
thicker volumes, and we now feel compelled to increase the 
price on these to 40 cents, plus 10 cents postage. Subscribers' 
wholesale rate 20 cents plus 10 cents postage. These prices 
take effect Nov. 1, 1903. 

Volume VI. will have over 700 pages and is hoped for in 
December. Those who have already paid for it at old prices 
need not send additionally. 



page 434 

Mottoes on the walls of the earthly homes of the 
Lord's people are very helpful. We have a larger stock 
this year than ever before. Our prices are less than one-half 
the usual. We are putting them up in assorted packages. 
Ma, Mb and Mc, are three $1 assortments; My and 



Mz are $2 packages,— all different. Some may want all 
of these for $7, while others may be content with a 25c 
or 50c package of the less expensive sorts. We are pleased 
to co-operate and to supply your wants as best we can. 



Colporteurs who have no formal, written assignments 
of territory should write for such, expressing their preferences, 
—which will be granted so far as possible. Otherwise 
they, we, and others who have regularly assigned 
territory will be greatly inconvenienced at times. We 
cannot, hereafter, recognize any as colporteurs who do 
not comply with this rule, which is essential for the good 
of all. Changes of address should be sent us in advance.— 
on separate slip of paper or on postal card. 



R3279 : page 435 

"HALLELUJAH! WHAT A SAVIOR!" 



CHRIST, THE INSTRUCTOR, JUSTIFIER, SANCTIFIER AND DELIVERER OF HIS PEOPLE. 



"Who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, [justification], 
and sanctification, and redemption [deliverance]." 
-1 Cor. 1:30.- 

CHRIST OUR WISDOM. 



SINCE God's dealings with his creatures recognize 

their wills, the first step in his dealings 

with them, therefore, is to give them knowledge, 

or "wisdom," as it is translated in the above Scripture. 

It is for this reason that preaching was the first 

command of the Gospel age. To the worldly minded the 

preaching of forgiveness on account of faith in the crucified 

Jesus did not seem the wise course. To them it 

would have seemed better for God to have commanded 

something to be done by them. But, as Paul says— 

"It pleased God to save those who believe by [knowledge 

imparted through what the worldly consider] 

the foolishness of this preaching."— 1 Cor. 1:21. 

The first gift of God to our redeemed race, therefore, 
was knowledge. 

(1) Knowledge of the greatness and absolute justice 
of the God with whom we have to do. This knowledge 
was prepared for by the Mosaic Law, which was 
a "schoolmaster," or pedagogue, to lead men to Christ. 



And Christ, by his obedience to that law, magnified 
the Law and showed its honorableness, its worthiness; 
and thus honored God, the author of that Law, and 
showed his character. 

(2) Knowledge of his own weakness, of his fallen, 
sinful and helpless condition, was also needful to man, 
that he might appreciate his need of a Savior such as 
God's plan had provided for him. 

(3) Knowledge of how the entire race of Adam 
fell from divine favor and from mental, moral and 
physical perfection, through him, was also necessary. 
Without this knowledge we could not have seen how 
God could be just in accepting the one life, of Christ, 
as the ransom price for the life of the whole world. 

(4) Without knowledge as to what is the penalty 
for sin— that "the wages of sin is death"— we never 
should have been able to understand how the death of 
our Redeemer paid the penalty against Adam and all 
in him. 

(5) Knowledge, in these various respects, was, 
therefore, absolutely necessary to us, as without it we 
could have had no proper faith, and could not have 
availed ourselves of God's provision of justification, 
sanctification and deliverance through Christ. 

Most heartily, therefore, we thank God for knowledge 
or wisdom concerning his plan. And we see that 
this wisdom came to us through Christ; because, had 
it not been for the plan of salvation of which he and 
his cross are the center, it would have been useless to 
give the knowledge, useless to preach, because there 
would have been no salvation to offer. 

CHRIST OUR JUSTIFICATION. 



That Christ is made unto us righteousness or justification 
implies,— 

(1) That we are unjust, or unrighteous in the 
sight of God, and unworthy of his favor. 

(2) That, in view of our unworthiness, God had 

in some manner arranged that Christ's righteousness 
should stand good for "us," and thus give "us" a 
standing before God which we could not otherwise 
have because of our imperfections— our 
unrighteousness. 

(3) This scripture does not imply that Christ's 
righteousness covers every sinner, so that God now 
views every sinner as though he were righteous, and 
treats all as his children. No, it refers merely to a special 
class of sinners— sinners who, having come to a knowledge 
of sin and righteousness, and having learned 

the undesirableness of sin, have repented of sin, and 

R3279 : page 436 



sought to flee from it and to come into harmony with 
God. This is the particular class referred to in this 
scripture— "who of God is made unto us justification," 
or righteousness. 

(4) How God has arranged or caused Christ to be 

our "righteousness," or justification, is not here explained; 

but what we know of divine law and character 

assures us that the principle of Justice, the very 

foundation of divine government, must somehow have 

been fully satisfied in all of its claims. And other 

scriptures fully substantiate this conclusion. They 

assert that God so arranged as to have the price of 

man's sin paid for him; and that the price paid was an 

exact equivalent, a ransom or corresponding price, offsetting 

in every particular the original sin and just 

penalty, death, as it came upon the original sinner and 

through him by heredity upon all men. (Rom. 5:12,18-20.) 

He tells us that this plan of salvation was 

adopted because by it "God might be [or continue] 

just, and [yet be] the justifier of him [any sinner] 

that believeth in Jesus"— that comes unto God under 

the terms of the New Covenant, of which Christ Jesus 

is the mediator, having sealed it, or made it a covenant, 

by his own precious blood.-Heb. 13:20,21; 10:29. 

(5) While the benefits of this gracious arrangement 
are only for "us," for "believers," for those 

who come unto God by Christ— under the provisions 

of the New Covenant— these benefits are, nevertheless, 

made applicable to all; for God's special provision for 

the whole world of sinners is that all shall "come 

to a knowledge of the truth," that they may, if then 

they will accept the conditions of God's covenant, be 

everlastingly saved. A knowledge and a rejection of 

error— of false doctrines which misrepresent the divine 

character even though they be mixed with a little misconstrued 

truth— will not constitute grounds for condemnation; 

but a knowledge of the truth and a rejection 

of it will bring condemnation to the Second Death. 

The Greek text states this much more emphatically 

than our common English translation. It says, "come 

to an accurate knowledge of the truth."— 

1 Tim. 2:4. 

(6) The provision made was sufficient for all men. 

Our Lord gave himself [in death] a ransom— a corresponding 

price— for all; he was a "propitiation [or sufficient 

satisfaction] for the sins of the whole world." 

(1 John 2:2.) As a consequence, he is both able and 

willing "to save unto the uttermost [i.e., to save 

from sin, and from divine disfavor, and from death, 

and all these everlastingly] all that come unto God by 

him." (Heb. 7:25.) And inasmuch as God's provision 

is so broad, that all shall come to an exact knowledge 

of the truth respecting these provisions of divine 

mercy under the terms of the New Covenant;— inasmuch 

as the provision is that all the sin and prejudice-blinded 

eyes shall be opened, and that the devil, who 



for long centuries has deceived men with his misrepresentations 

of the truth, is to be bound for a thousand 

years, so that he can deceive the nations no more; 

and that then a highway of holiness shall be cast up 

in which the most stupid cannot err or be deceived; 

and in view of all this provision God declares that all 

men will be saved from the guilt and penalty incurred 

through Adam's sentence. Because, when all of these 

blessed arrangements have been carried into effect, there 

will be no reason for a solitary member of the human 

family remaining a stranger and alien from God's family 

except by his own choice or preference for unrighteousness, 

and that with an accurate knowledge that 

all unrighteousness is sin. Such as, of their own preference, 

knowingly choose sin, when the way and 

means of becoming servants of God are clearly understood 

by them, are wilful sinners on their own account, 

and will receive the Second-Death sentence as the wages 

of their own opposition to God's righteous 

arrangements. 

R3280 : page 436 

The world's salvation will be complete the moment 
all have come to an accurate knowledge of the truth 
concerning God's great plan of salvation; because then 
they will know that by accepting Christ and the New 
Covenant which God offers to all through Christ, they 
may have life everlasting— salvation to the uttermost. 
Whether they will hear (heed) or whether they will 
forbear (refuse to heed) will not alter the fact that all 
will thus have been saved from Adamic sin and death 
—will have had a full salvation tendered to them. 
Thus, the living God will be the Savior of all men— 
especially or everlastingly, however, the Savior of only 
those who accept his grace and become "his people" 
under the New Covenant.— 1 Tim. 4:10. 

(7) It is only to "us" that Christ is made justification 
or righteousness. Though all men are to be 
saved in the sense of being brought to the knowledge 
and opportunity of salvation, none have Christ as their 
justification, the covering of their imperfections, imputing 
his righteousness to them, except "us"— the 
household of faith. "Unto you, therefore, which believe 
he is precious." (1 Pet. 2:7.) He of God is made unto 
us justification, righteousness, covering and cleansing 
from the unintentional weaknesses and shortcomings 
of the present, as well as from the original sin and its 
sentence. Who is he who condemns us? Will that 
Anointed One who died; and still more who has been 
raised, who also is at the right hand of God, and who 
intercedes on our behalf? Nay, he has been made our 
justification; it is the merit of his great sacrifice that 
speaks our justification.— Rom. 8:34. 

Justification signifies to make right, or whole, or 



R3280 : page 437 

just. And from the word "whole" comes the word 
"(w)holiness," signifying soundness, or perfection, 
or righteousness. None of the fallen race are either 
actually or reckonedly whole, sound, perfect or just by 
nature. "There is none righteous [just, sound, holy], 
no, not one; all have sinned." But all who come unto 
God by Christ, whom he has accepted as the justification 
or righteousness of all who accept the New Covenant, 
are from that moment accepted and treated as 
sound, perfect, holy. Although we are actually unholy 
or imperfect, we are made "partakers of God's 
holiness;" first, reckonedly, in Christ, and, second, more 
and more actually by the eradication of our sinful tendencies 
and the development of the fruits and graces of 
the Spirit, through chastisements, experience, etc. 
(Heb. 12:10.) God not only begins on the basis of 
holiness, imputing to us Christ's merit to cover our 
demerits, but he continues on the same line, and ever 
urges us to "be holy [to strive after actual soundness 
and perfection], even as he is holy." (1 Pet. 1:15,16.) 
And he promises the faithful strivers that they shall 
ultimately attain absolute holiness, soundness, perfection 
—in the resurrection, when they shall be made actually 
like Christ, as now their wills are copies of his. 
For "without holiness [thus attained] no man shall 
see the Lord." (Heb. 12:14.) Hence, "Every man 
that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as 
he [Christ] is pure"— seeking to be as much like him 
as possible now, and by and by to be fully in his image. 
-1 John 3:3,2. 

Justified persons and no others are Christians, in 
the proper use of that term. 

CHRIST OUR SANCTIFICATION. 



The term "Sanctification," used in this text, 
means, set apart, consecrated, devoted to, or marked out for 
a holy use or purpose. 

Christ by God is made unto us sanctification. 
That is to say, God through Christ sets apart or marks 
out for a special share in his great plan "us"— the 
Church. 

Many make the serious error of supposing that 
God is sanctifying the world,— sanctifying sinners. 
As a consequence of this error, many are seeking to 
copy Christ's example, and thus be sanctified before 
God, while they repudiate the doctrine of the ransom, 
or justification by faith. They confound sanctification 
and justification in their minds, and suppose that if 
they consecrate or sanctify or set apart their lives to 
God's service and to deeds of kindness they are thereby 
justified. 



This is a serious error. Justification is entirely 
separate and distinct from sanctification; and no one 
can be sanctified in God's sight, and in the Scriptural 
sense, unless he has first been justified or cleansed from 
all sin. 

Consecrating a person or thing to God's service 
does not cleanse that person or thing. On the contrary, 
God always refuses to accept anything imperfect or 
unclean. This is distinctly and repeatedly shown in 
the typical arrangements of the Law given to typical 
Israel. The priests were obliged to wash themselves 
and put on new, clean linen garments before 
consecration to their office and work as God's typically 
set apart, or sanctified, priesthood. Their cleansing 
and new clothing represented justification, the appropriation 
of Christ's righteousness instead of the filthy 
rags of their own unrighteousness, as members of the 
fallen race. 

The seal or mark of their consecration was a totally 
different one, and followed the cleansing ceremony, as 
consecration should in every case follow justification. 
The sign or mark of consecration or sanctification was 
the anointing with the holy oil, which symbolized the 
holy Spirit. 

The anointing oil or symbol of consecration was 
poured upon the head of the High Priest only, but the 
under-priests were represented in the members of his 
body, even as Christ is the Head over the Church 
which is his body, and all together constitute the Royal 
Priesthood. So the holy Spirit given without measure 
to our Lord and Head applied to us (his body) through 
him. The Father gave the Spirit to the Son only: 
all of the anointing oil was poured upon the Head. 
At Pentecost it ran down from the head to the body, 
and has continued with the body ever since, and whoever 
comes into the "body" comes thereby under the 
consecrating influence— the spirit of holiness, the spirit 
of God, the spirit of Christ, the spirit of the Truth.— 
Acts 2:4. 

But in consecrating the typical priests the blood 
was not ignored. It was put upon all, upon the tip of 
the right ear, upon the thumb of the right hand and 
upon the great toe of the right foot, thus showing that 
the hearing of faith, the work of faith and the walk of 
faith must all be touched and made holy by an appreciation 
of the precious blood of atonement— the blood 
of Christ— the blood of the New Covenant. And then 
the garments of all the priests— their clean linen garments 
—were sprinkled with a mixture of the blood 
and the oil, implying that both justification through 
the blood and sanctification through the possession of 
the spirit of holiness are necessary in our 
consecration. 

To what end or service are God's people, the 
Royal Priesthood, consecrated or set apart? 

Some would be inclined to answer: To live without 



sin, to practice the graces of the spirit, to wear 

R3280 : page 438 

plain clothing and in general to live a rather gloomy 
life now, hoping for greater liberty and pleasure 
hereafter. 

We reply, This is the common but mistaken view. 
True, God's people do seek to avoid sin; but that is 
not the object of their consecration. Before consecration, 
they learned the exceeding sinfulness and undesirableness 
of sin, and saw Christ Jesus as their sin-bearer 
and cleanser. Consequently, they had fled from 
sin before consecration. When consecrated they will 
still loathe and abhor sin, and that more and more as 
they grow in grace and in knowledge; but we repeat 
that to seek to live free from sin is not a proper definition 
of consecration or sanctification. 

It is true also that all of the consecrated will seek 
to put on the graces of Christ's spirit and example; 
but neither is this the object of our call to consecration 
under the Gospel high-calling. 

It is true, also, that our consecration may lead to 
plainness of dress, and bring upon us sufferings for 
righteousness' sake, in this present evil world (age); 
but, we repeat, these are not the objects of our consecration. 
They are merely incidental results. 

The object of God in calling out the Gospel 
Church, and providing for the consecration or sanctification 
of its members, is a grand and worthy one; 
and when once clearly seen by the eye of faith it makes 
all the incidentals which it will cost, such as self-denials 
in dress, loss of friends and companionships, and 
even persecution for the Truth's sake, etc., to be esteemed 
but light afflictions, not worthy to be compared 
to the glorious object of our consecration, which is that 
we may become "partakers of the divine nature" and 
"joint-heirs with Christ," and together with him bless 
the world during its day of judgment— the Millennium 
—as we will show. 

God in his wisdom and foreknowledge knew that 
sin would enter this world and bring its blight,— sorrow, 
pain and death. He foresaw that after their experience 
with sin, some of his creatures would be, not 
only willing, but anxious, to forsake sin and return to 
his fellowship and love and the blessing of life everlasting. 
It was in view of this foreknowledge that 
God formed his plan for human salvation. 

In that plan Christ Jesus our Lord had first 
place, first honor. As he was the beginning of the creation 
of God, so he was the chief of all God's creatures 
thus far brought into being. But God purposed 
a new creation— the creation of a new order of beings 
different and higher than men, angels and archangels 
—higher than all others, and of his own divine essence 
or nature. The worthiness of any one accepted to that 



great honor should be recognized not only by God himself, 

but by all of his intelligent creatures. Hence God, 

who knew well the character of his first-begotten Son 

(our Lord Jesus), decided to prove or test his well-beloved 

Son in a manner that would prove to all of his 

intelligent creatures, what they all now recognize in 

the new song, "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive 

R3281 : page 438 

power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and 
honor, and glory and blessing."— Rev. 5:12. 

But the exaltation of our Lord, who already was 
the chief of all creation, was even less remarkable 
than another feature of the divine plan, foreordained 
before the foundation of the world (1 Pet. 1:2; Eph. 1:4); 
namely, that he would make to some of his 
human creatures (of the race sentenced as unworthy 
of any future life, but redeemed from that sentence by 
Christ's sacrifice) an offer of joint-heirship and companionship 
with his beloved Son, in the order of the 
new creation (of the divine nature), of which he has 
made the worthy Lamb the head and chief, next to 
himself.-l Cor. 15:27. 

This offer is not made to all of the redeemed race, 
but to many— "Many are called." The called are only 
those who in this age are justified by faith in Christ's 
atoning sacrifice. Unbelievers and scoffers are called 
to repentance and faith; but none are called to this 
high calling of participation in the divine nature 
(2 Pet. 1 :4) until they have forsaken sin and laid hold 
upon Christ as their Redeemer. 

If the worthiness of the Lamb was necessary to be 
shown, the worthiness of those whom he redeemed to 
be his joint-heirs (called also the bride, the Lamb's 
wife) would also need to be shown, proved, manifested 
before angels as well as before men, that God's ways 
may be seen to be just and equitable. 

It is for this reason that God calls upon those 
whom he does call, to consecrate themselves to him— not 
in dress or word merely, but in everything. It is not 
a consecration to preach merely, although all the consecrated 
will delight to use every opportunity in telling 
to others the good tidings of God's love. It is not 
a consecration to temperance reform, social reform, 
political reform, or any other work of reform, although 
we may and should feel a deep interest in anything 
that would benefit the fallen race. But our devotion 
should be as that of a maid to her mistress, or of soldiers 
to their officers, or, better yet, as that of a dutiful 
child toward a beloved parent— swift to hear, quick 
to obey, not planning or seeking our own wills, but 
the will of our Father in heaven. Just such an attitude 
is implied in the words sanctified, or consecrated 
to God. It takes hold of the will, and therefore rules 
the entire being, except where uncontrollable weaknesses 



or insurmountable obstacles hinder. And since 

our call and acceptance are based upon the New Covenant, 

which accepts a perfect will on the part of those 

R3281 : page 439 

trusting in the precious blood, and does not demand 
perfection of deeds, it follows that all of us, no matter 
how degraded by the fall, may be acceptable to God 
in the Beloved, and make their calling and election 
sure. 

Nor is this arrangement of the New Covenant (by 
which those in Christ whose wills and efforts are right 
toward God are not held responsible for the full letter 
of God's law, but for the observance of its spirit or 
meaning, to the extent that they have knowledge, 
opportunity and ability) a violation of Justice, as some 
have assumed. God's law was designed for perfect 
creatures, and not for fallen ones; but under the New 
Covenant in Christ, God has adapted his law to the 
condition of the fallen ones without interfering with 
that law itself or even with its spirit. The perfect law, 
dealing with the perfect man, demanded a full consecration 
of his will to the wisdom and will of his Creator, 
and an obedience to that Creator's Word to the 
extent of his ability. But since man was created "upright" 
(and not fallen), in the moral image and likeness 
of God (and not born in sin and shapen in iniquity), 
it follows that his perfect will, operating through 
a perfect body and under favorable conditions, could 
have rendered perfect obedience; and hence nothing 
less could be acceptable to God. 

How just, how reasonable and how favorable is 
God's arrangement for us! Yet he assures us that, 
while he has made all the arrangements favorable for 
us, he must insist on our wills being just right,— we 
must be pure in heart, and in this respect exact copies 
of his Beloved Son, our Lord. (Rom. 8:29— Diaglott.) 
Of those who learn of and accept God's grace in 
Christ, in the forgiveness of sins under the New Covenant, 
all of whom are called to this high calling of 
joint-heirship with Christ in the divine nature and its 
honors, only a few will make their calling and election 
sure (or complete), because the testings of their wills 
and faith are so exacting— so crucial. 

Nor should either of these God-declared facts surprise 
us: it is not strange, but reasonable, that God 
should test severely, yea, with "fiery trials" (1 Pet. 4:12), 
the faith and love of those invited to so high a 
station. If they be not loyal and trustful to the last 
degree, they surely are "not fit for the Kingdom," its 
responsibilities and its divine honors. Nor should it 
surprise us to be informed by God's Word that only a 
"few," a "little flock," will gain the prize to which 
many are called and for which many consecrate. Few 
are willing to "endure" a great fight of afflictions; 



partly while being made a gazing stock, both by reproaches 
and afflictions, and partly as companions of 
those who are so abused for Christ's sake and his 
Truth's sake.-Heb. 10:32,33. 

In a word, the trial of the justified and consecrated 
consists in the presenting to them of opportunities 
to serve God and his cause in this present time, when, 
because of sin abounding, whosoever will live godly 
and hold up the light will suffer persecution. Those 
whose consecration is complete and of the proper kind 
will rejoice in their privilege of serving God and his 
cause, and will count it all joy to be accounted worthy 
to suffer in such a cause, and thus to attest to God the 
sincerity of their love and of their consecration to him. 
Such consecrated ones, pure in heart (in will or intention), 
realizing the object of present trials, glory in 
tribulations brought upon them by faithfulness to 
Christ and his Word, realizing that their experiences 
are similar to those of the Master, and that thus they 
have evidence that they are walking in the footsteps 
of him who said, "Marvel not, my brethren, if the 
world hate you. Ye know that it hated me before it 
hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would 
love its own, but because ye are not of the world, but 
I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world 
hateth you." "Be thou faithful unto death, and I 
will give thee a crown of life."— 1 John 3:13; John 15:18,19; 
Rev. 2:10. 

Furthermore, they glory in tribulations because 
they realize that the Lord will be near them while 
they endure faithfully, and that he will not permit 
them to be tempted above what they are able to bear, 
but will with every temptation provide some way of 
escape; because they realize the necessity of forming 
character, and that tribulation worketh patience, and 
patience experience, and experience hope— a hope that 
maketh not ashamed; and because they realize that 
all these favorable results of tribulation follow, on account 
of a genuine consecration in which the love of 
God has been shed abroad in the heart, displacing the 
spirit of the world, the spirit of selfishness.— 1 Cor. 10:13; 
Rom. 5:3,5. 

"He that committeth sin [wilfully] is of the 
devil." "Whosoever is begotten of God. ..cannot sin 
[wilfully]." (1 John 3:3-10; 5:18.) And we have 
seen that all of those acceptable to God in Christ were 
obliged to come unto him under the New Covenant, 
whose first condition is faith in Christ; and whose 
second condition is an entire consecration of their wills 
to God's will and service. Hence, any wilful sin would 
mean that they had repudiated the New Covenant and 
were no longer recognized as begotten of the Truth, 
but under the influence of sin, and hence begotten of 
the devil— his children. 

If any justified and consecrated child of God commit 
sin it will be, at most, only partially wilful— 



largely of weakness or deception. He may feel his 
shame and weep bitterly, as did Peter; but all such 

R3281 : page 440 

penitence would but prove that his sin was not of the 
wilful kind that would make him as "of the devil." 
No: so long as the seed of the Truth, and of his consecration, 
remains in him, he cannot sin (wilfully). 
But if any trespass under deception or weakness, and 
not wilfully, he has an advocate with the Father,— 
"Jesus Christ the [absolutely] righteous" one, whose 
merit is applicable for all unwilful errors of such as 
abide under the shadow of the New Covenant. If he 
confess his sin, God is just to forgive him— because 
Christ died. (1 John 1:7,9; 2:1.) But if we should 
say that we have no sin, no imperfection, we deceive 
ourselves, make God a liar, and disown the Advocate 
whom God provided; for we are weak through the 
fall, and liable to deception and error at the hands of 
the world, the flesh, and the devil.— 1 John 1:8,10. 
Having seen what Sanctification is, its object or 
result and its present cost, we note that Christ by God 
is made unto us Sanctification— in that we could have 
no such call and could experience no such work of 
grace, under the divine plan, except for Christ and the 
work he did for us;— justifying us before the Law of 
God, sealing for us the New Covenant and making us 
fit for this call to "glory, honor and immortality." 

CHRIST OUR REDEMPTION, OR DELIVERANCE. 



Many readers confound the words redemption and 
redeem, found in the New Testament, whereas they 
refer to different features of the work of Christ. The 
word redeem in its every use in the New Testament 
signifies to acquire by the payment of a price, while 
the word redemption in its every New Testament use 
signifies the deliverance or setting free of that which 
was acquired by the payment of a price. "We were 
redeemed [purchased] with the precious blood [the 
sacrificed life, the death] of Christ." We wait for 
"the redemption [the deliverance] of our body" (the 
Church) from present imperfections and death. We 
wait for "the redemption [deliverance] of the purchased 
possession. -1 Pet. 1:18,19; Rom. 8:23; 
Eph. 1:14. 

In Christ is our redemption, or deliverance; for 
so God has ordained. He who redeemed, or bought us 
with the sacrifice of his own life, gives us, as our 
Prophet or Teacher, wisdom by his Gospel, to see our 
fallen state and himself as our helper; as our Priest, 
he first justifies us and then sanctifies or consecrates us, 



R3282 : page 440 

as his under priesthood; and, finally, as King, he will 
fully deliver the faithful from the dominion of sin and 
death, to the glory, honor and immortality of the 
divine nature;— for "God will raise up [from the 
dead] us also, by Jesus." If faithful to our call and 
covenant, even unto death, we shall at the second coming 
of our Redeemer, receive "an inheritance, incorruptible, 
undefiled, that fadeth not away, reserved in 
heaven for us who are kept by the power of God [His 
Word and Providence] through faith unto salvation, 
ready to be revealed in the last time."— Jas. 1:12; 
1 Pet. 1:4,5; Rom. 1:16; 2 Cor. 4:14. 
" Halleluj ah ! What a S avior ! " 
Truly he is able and willing to save to the uttermost 
all that come unto God by him.— Heb. 7:25. 

WHOM GOD DID PREDESTINATE. 



In the light of the foregoing, now read a hitherto 
obscure passage of Scripture: "We know that all 
things work together for good to them that love God, 
to them who are the called according to his purpose. 
For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate 
must be conformed to the image of his Son, that he 
might be the first born among many brethren. Moreover 
[the class] whom he did predestinate [must be 
copies of his Son], them he also called [or invited to 
that honor through the gospel]; and whom he called, 
them he also [previously] justified [because he could 
not consistently call to honor and glory those who 
were under his own sentence of death as sinners]; and 
whom he justified them he also [previously] honored 
[by sending to them the gospel message]."— 
Rom. 8:28-30. 

Thus the Apostle continues his argument concerning 
the favor of God toward the Church, asserting that 
God had a purpose to fulfil, and that the call of the 
Church is in accordance with that purpose. (Peter 
declares the same thing.— 1 Pet. 1:2.) And he asserts 
that all of God's dealings and arrangements correspond 
with that purpose, and cooperate for its accomplishment. 
God's predestination was, (1) that he would 
have a class of beings of the divine nature; (2) that 
each one of that class must have a fixed character, like 
that of his ever-faithful, Beloved Son. To get such a 
class, the Apostle reasons and declares, God must call 
or invite some (just as we see he is doing), because 
"no man taketh this honor to himself." (Heb. 5:4.) 
But whom would God call or invite? None were worthy; 
all had gone out of the way; none were righteous, 
no not one. Hence it was necessary that God 
provide for the justification of those he would call. But 



he could justify only such as believed in Jesus; and how 
could they believe on him of whom they had not heard, 
and without a preacher sent of God? (Rom. 10:14.) 
Hence it was necessary that these be honored with the 
Gospel message in this age, in advance of its general 
revealing to every creature during the Millennial 
age.-Rom. 1:16; 2 Cor. 4:6; 1 Cor. 15:1. 

True, many more were called than will be acceptable 
—many more than will acquire the likeness of the 
Beloved Son; and many were justified who did not, 

R3282: page 441 

after believing, consecrate themselves, and whose justification 
consequently lapsed; and many were honored 
with a hearing of the Gospel who, after hearing a 
little of it, rejected the message of mercy and favor. 
But all the preaching, justifying and calling of this 
Gospel age has been to the intent that the foreknown 
class of the predestinated character might be selected and 
made joint-heirs with Christ.— See also 2 Tim. 1:8-10. 

"What shall we [who have been so highly favored 
by God, and for whose successful running of the race 
every necessary arrangement and provision has been 
made] say to these things? If God be for us, who 
can be against us?" And in view of this let each 
say,— "What shall I render unto the Lord for all his 
benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, 
and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my 
vows [fulfil my covenant of consecration] unto the 
Lord, now, in the presence of all his people." (This 
will mean, as in our Lord's case, faithfulness dying 
daily, 1 Cor. 15:31— even unto death, but)— "Precious 
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his holy ones." 
-Psa. 116:12-15. 



R3282: page 441 

THE DEDICATION OF THE TEMPLE. 

-1 KINGS 8: 1-1 1,62,63. -DECEMBER 13.- 

Golden Text: "I was glad when they said unto me, 
let us go into the house of the Lord."— Psa. 122:1. 

VERY INTERESTING is the story of the 
great Temple of God purposed and largely 
prepared for by King David and built 
by King Solomon the wise. It was commenced in 
the fifth year of Solomon's reign and finished in the 
twelfth. The story of its cost seems fabulous, the 
gold and silver employed in its construction being 
estimated at from $1,000,000,000 to $2,500,000,000. 
We are inclined to think the smaller estimate nearer 



to the truth, or that the ancient standard of values, 
a talent, possibly, experienced a change of values, 
as for instance was the case in the English pound 
sterling, which originally meant a pound of silver 
in value but subsequently a quarter of a pound of 
silver, and to-day, by reason of the change of standard 
from silver to gold, it has a still different meaning 
not at all connected with silver. Similarly the 
Jewish talent may have experienced changes of 
value in the long centuries of its use. However, 
regardless of the aggregated value of the gold, silver, 
brass, precious stones, constituting the Temple, 
we have every reason to conclude that it was 
a wonderful structure for its day— one of which 
King Solomon in all his glory and wisdom, and the 
people of Israel with him, had good reason to rejoice 
and not feel ashamed. 

The context shows that King Hiram of Phoenicia 
not only contributed largely to the Temple as 
a friendly gift, but also supplied skilled workmen 
under Solomon's pay, who in various ways assisted 
in the preparation of the brazen columns for the 
porch, utensils for the court, etc. etc. Thirty thousand 
Israelites were drafted to serve in the Temple 
construction one month out of each quarter. Besides 
these there would appear to have been 150,000 
laborers, apparently foreigners, hired from outside 
(1 Kings 5:13-16; 9:21,22), or they may have been 
aliens residing in the land of Palestine— Canaanites. 
The overseers would appear to have been 550 chiefs 
and 3,300 subordinates, of whom 250 were Israelites, 
and 3,600 Canaanites. (2 Chron. 2:17; 8:10.) 
This preponderance of the Canaanites amongst the 
overseers seems to imply that the laborers were 
Canaanites, and also reminds us that "the Canaanite 
was still in the land." The fact that the Canaanites, 
strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, were 
the chief laborers in the construction of the great 
Temple, seems to have been typical of the fact that 
aliens, strangers, foreigners, and enemies of the 
Truth have the larger share in the work of preparing 
the antitypical Temple. Their hammering, 
their chiseling, their melting and casting, under divine 
providence, serve to make ready the living 
stones and the glorious pillars for the spiritual 
house. Verily they know not what they do. Their 
work is greater, better, than they comprehend, as 
the glories of eternity will demonstrate. 

The lesson opens with the Temple's construction 
finished, and the chiefs of Israel gathered with 
King Solomon at Jerusalem for its dedication, at 
the time we call October, corresponding to the Jewish 
New Year feast, held in connection with the 
great day of atonement. The Atonement Day was 
probably past, the sacrifices of atonement having 
been made in the Tabernacle and the blessing of 



the Lord, as usual, dispensed upon the people for 
the new year. While they were thus legally cleansed, 
reconciled to God typically, was the most appropriate 
time for the dedication of the Temple, 
which represented the spiritual hopes and aims of 
the nation. 

The Ark, representing typically the divine 
covenant with Abraham, the fulfilment of which 
centered in the Christ, must be transferred from the 
Tabernacle to the Temple, that thus the latter might 
supersede the former as the meeting place between 
God and his covenant people. The thousands of 
sacrifices offered during the procession of the King 
and priests and the celebrities of the nation, besides 
evidencing their devotion to God and their willingness 
to sacrifice, had a typical significance as representing 
the consecration even unto death of the 
whole company thus engaged in transferring the 
emblem of their faith and hope. In some respects, 
therefore, the King and the chiefs of the nation represented 
typically our Lord Jesus and the overcomers, 
and the chief priests and under priests represented 
the same from another standpoint. The 

R3283 : page 442 

procession was the meeting place between the sacrificing 

emblems of the present age and the typical 

representation of the kingdom glories and honors 

of the next age. The Lord's people to-day seem 

to be following this type. The Great King, antitypical 

of Solomon, has about finished the Temple 

construction and has sent forth the invitation of 

the heads, the chiefs of spiritual Israel, to attend 

and share in the great dedication. These chiefs are 

not the great of this world, but the Lord's very 

elect. From the four quarters of the spiritual heavens 

they are gathering, the procession has already 

commenced; but as the Temple was not complete 

until the Ark, its most important part, was placed 

in position, so the glorious Temple will not really 

be finished until every member of the body of Christ 

has been changed from the Tabernacle condition to 

the Temple or permanent condition in the first 

resurrection. 

The declaration that there was nothing in the 
Ark save the tables of stone on which was inscribed 
the Law, seems at first to be in conflict with the 
Apostle's statement in Heb. 9:4, where he mentions 
also the golden pot of manna and Aaron's rod that 
budded. We are to remember, however, that this 
description related to the Tabernacle and not to the 
Temple. The golden bowl of manna which did not 
corrupt was a type of illustration of the immortality 
or incorruptibility which the Lord has provided for 
the Royal Priesthood, and the budded rod was a 



reminder that the blessing and fruitfulness and privilege 

of service belong to the antitypical Levite, but 

as types both of these will end in the present dispensation. 

They met with the Tabernacle conditions; 

they will not be needed in the future conditions 

of glory, honor, and immortality represented 

by the Temple, because there the glorious things 

typified by these will have been fully entered into 

by the overcomers of the Church. But the law 

will still be an integral part of the divine covenant. 

As the Apostle explains the fulfilling of the law is 

love, and love never faileth. It will always be the 

divine requirement and essential to participation in 

any of the blessings connected with the divine favor 

represented in the Ark of the covenant. 

While the priests proceeded with their work 
of placing the Ark, the Levites, "arrayed in white 
linen, having psalteries and harps, stood at the 
east end of the [brazen] altar, and with them an 
hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets. 
It came to pass that the trumpeters and singers 
were as one, to make one sound to be heard in 
praising and thanking the Lord; and when they 
lifted up their voices with the trumpets and cymbals 
and instruments of music, and praised the Lord 
saying, 'For he is good; for his mercy endureth forever,' 
that then the house [Temple] was filled with 
the cloud"— the peculiar pillar of cloud which symbolized 
the Lord's presence through the wilderness 
journey, and subsequently in connection with the 
Tabernacle, and now in the Temple, for the first 
time rested upon it. This, which outwardly had 
the appearance of a cloud in the sanctuary on the 
mercy seat, represented an extreme brightness— so 
great that the priests could no longer remain in the 
Holy. 

But meantime the King explained to the people 
the significance of the Temple, that it was the house 
of God and built under divine direction, given to 
himself and to his father David. Then standing 
near the altar of the court, spreading forth his 
hands toward heaven, he prayed a most beautiful 
prayer, and one which we recognize as prophetically 
directed, and as teaching us the purpose and object 
of the great antitypical Temple constructed by the 
antitypical Solomon. The literal Temple was to be 
the place toward which all the Israelites should look 
as God's dwelling place, the center of his power, 
authority, forgiveness and blessing and help in every 
time of need. So in due time, when the spiritual 
Temple shall have been constructed and dedicated 
and filled with divine power, it will be the center 
toward which all who would approach God shall 
look for help and assistance and blessing and forgiveness, 
toward which they shall make their prayers, 
and in which they shall realize the manifestation 



of divine power and blessing on their behalf. 

After Solomon's dedicatory prayer was finished, 
the Lord openly manifested his favor toward the 
King and all the people by accepting their sacrifices 
with fire from heaven, as we read: "When Solomon 
had made an end of praying the fire came down 
from heaven and consumed the burnt offering and 
the sacrifices; and the glory of Jehovah filled the 
house [the Temple]. ...And when all the 
children of Israel saw how the fire came down and 
the glory of the Lord was upon the house, they 
bowed themselves with their faces to the ground 
upon the pavement and worshipped and praised the 
Lord, saying, 'for he is good, for his mercy endureth 
forever'"— probably joining with the Levites 
in singing Psalm 136. 

It is noteworthy that the Levites and the people 
did not sing of divine wrath never ending, but of 
divine mercy forever. This, however, according to 
the strict significance of the Hebrew word, does not 
mean "without an end," but "to an end",— that is to 
say, that divine mercy shall be exercised to its completeness, 
to its fulfillment, until every creature 
shall have been brought to a knowledge of the Lord 
and his goodness and to an opportunity of knowing 
him and of benefiting by the great promise made to 
Abraham and symbolized in the Ark of the covenant, 
through which all the families of the earth 
shall be blessed. Similarly in the last book of the 
Bible we read of the song of Moses and the Lamb, 
sung by the antitypical priests, saying, "Great and 
marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just 
and true are thy ways thou King of saints. Who 
shall not reverence thee, O Lord, and glorify thy 
name? For thou only art holy: for all peoples 
shall come and worship before thee, because thy 
judgments [righteous dealings] are made manifest." 
(Rev. 15:3,4.) This is the song which none but 

R3283 : page 443 

the overcomers can truly appreciate and sing at the 
present time, but by and by— when the glory of the 
Lord shall have filled the Temple— the peoples, the 
multitudes, shall learn that song, shall learn of the 
divine mercy, and as a prophecy it shall be fulfilled 
and all peoples shall bow to the Lord to confess his 
goodness and his love and to enjoy at the hands of 
the antitypical Solomon (the Christ), as prophet, 
priest and king of the new dispensation, the opportunity 
of full reconciliation to God and full return 
to the perfect conditions of mind and of body, and 
to life everlasting, lost by Adam's disobedience, and 
brought back by the great Redeemer for as many as 
will receive it upon God's terms. 
Naturally and properly our chief interest centers 



in the antitypical Temple, the antitypical Solomon, 
the antitypical priests and antitypical people. 
There is a sense in which every member of the 
New Creation may be said to be individually a temple 
of the holy Spirit now, a sense in which every 
individual should build up his own faith and character 
from the divine promises and by compliance with 
the divine requirements, but this is not the larger 
antitypical view of the Temple. In its antitypical 
sense Solomon's Temple certainly represented the 
glorified Christ, head and body, built up of living 
stones, as the Apostle Peter explains. Under the 
supervision of the anointed the work of gathering 
the various stones for the Temple has been in progress 
throughout the Gospel age. As not any and 
every stone was taken for Solomon's Temple, but 
only those of specific dimensions and peculiar pattern, 
in accordance with the plan, so it is with the 
antitypical, the living, stones. Only a certain class 
are approached at all, and only those which being 
cut out are first roughly quarried out and found 
suitable in character and dimensions are tooled at 
all, and only those which under the tool yield proper 
results and become conformed to the intended pattern 
will ultimately find their place in the glorious 
Temple which our Lord as the great master-builder 
is constructing. As before intimated, this accounts 
for the fact that various agents, even Satan himself, 
may be used of the Lord as servants for the 
chiseling and polishing and fitting and preparing of 
these living stones for their future glorious position. 
Viewed in this light what a satisfaction may come 
from the trials and difficulties which all the Lord's 
people are sure to experience, and without some of 
which they would be justified in fearing that they 
are not sons but bastards. (Heb. 12:8.) Only 
those who have some such insight into the divine 
program can ever reach that position to which the 
Apostle Paul attained, who claimed that he could 
also rejoice in tribulation, knowing that tribulation 
worketh patience and patience experience and experience 
hope, which will not be put to shame, but 
which will be rewarded eventually in the glorious 
joint-heirship in the kingdom promised by our Lord 
to his faithful. 

To our understanding of the teaching of Scripture, 
the fact that the materials for Solomon's Temple 
were prepared before its construction began, 
and were so perfectly fitted that no iron tool needed 
to be used in the construction, indicates that the 
antitype, this Gospel age, has seen the preparation 
of the various living stones, which when ready were 
marked of the Lord to their positions in the Temple, 
and fell asleep in Jesus until the time for the first 
resurrection, the time for the construction of the 
Temple. To our understanding we are now living 



in that time and have been in it since 1878. The 
living stones of the past have been brought together 
and the Temple is merely waiting for the few living 
stones which are still under process of trial and disciplining 
chiseling and polishing. The resurrection 

R3284 : page 443 

"change" coming to each of these in turn places him 
with the fellow-members of the grand Temple of 
the Lord. The picture of the bringing of the Ark 
would seem to be another illustration of the same 
lesson— the bringing of the members of the body 
of Christ from the Tabernacle or earthly condition 
to the heavenly or Temple condition. Soon the Ark 
will be in place, and priests and Levites and people 
are generally learning to sing of the Lord's mighty 
love and that his mercy endureth to completeness— 
to the full limit to which mercy could be of service, 
benefit or advantage, to the completion, when every 
ear shall have heard, every eye shall have seen and 
every heart shall have shown appreciation, shall have 
come to a knowledge of the grace of God in Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Let us, as day after day rolls by, 
remember our threefold relationship then to this 
Temple: (1) We are still in process of preparation 
as living stones. (2) As members of the Royal 
Priesthood carrying the Ark we are marching 
from the Tabernacle into the Temple condition; 
some of our number have already entered in and 
some are still on the way. (3) As the Lord's people 
the time has come for us to know, to sing with 
the spirit and understanding, the new song of divine 
mercy, justice, love and truth. Let us be faithful 
in each of these respects, fulfilling our parts, and 
ere long our course will be ended and the glory of 
the Lord will fill the Temple. It will be after this 
that the people will take up the refrain,— for his 
mercy endureth forever— to completeness. 

Our Golden Text is in line with the foregoing. 
Those who hear the invitation to become members 
of the house of God, the house of sons, the antitypical 
Temple, and who receive the invitation into 
good and honest hearts, are indeed made glad, 
"Blessed are the people who know the joyful sound." 
We couple with this a similar expression by the 
same poet prophet, who declares, "I will dwell in 
the house of the Lord forever." Not in earthly 
houses, not in earthly temples, do we hope to dwell 
forever; but those who become members, living 
stones in the spiritual house, the heavenly Temple 
now under construction, will indeed dwell in the 
house of the Lord forever. For them to go out 
would mean the destruction of the house, for of it 
they will be members in particular; as the Lord declares 
they will be pillars in the house of the Lord, 



R3284 : page 444 

and the ministers of his grace and truth to all the 
people. This text will be true also of the world 
during the Millennial age. All mankind will then 
be invited to approach the Lord in worship, to approach 
the spiritual Temple, the Christ, and through 
the Christ to approach the Father; and all who shall 
hear that message and who shall obey it will be glad 
indeed, even as the message brought by the angels 
at the birth of Jesus intimated that eventually the 
tidings of great joy shall be unto all people. 



R3284 : page 444 

A GREATER THAN SOLOMON. 

--1 KINGS 10:1-10.-DECEMBER20.- 

Golden Text: "When the righteous are in 
authority the people rejoice."— Prov. 29:2. 

BY THE TIME Solomon had reached his fortieth 

year, under the blessing of wisdom 

which he craved of the Lord, he had made 

the kingdom of Israel famous throughout the then 

civilized world. His kingdom connected with 

Egypt on the south, with the desert on the east and 

the Mediterranean Sea on the north and west, except 

that small portion known as Phoenicia, whose 

king, Hiram, had made a league with Solomon and 

assisted him greatly in the materials and workmen 

for the temple. Solomon's ships and those of Hiram 

were known to all the nations of that time as far 

east as Judea and as far northwest as Britain. The 

account of the wealth which flowed to him is astounding. 

His table dishes were made of gold, a 

thousand shields for his mighty men were of gold, 

and other things in proportion were magnificent in 

the largest degree. The brilliancy of his mind 

found expression not only in financial channels, but 

his army was equipped on a scale of equal magnificence. 

Fourteen hundred chariots were imported, 

and thousands of horses for these and for a cavalry 

detachment for his army. Literary matters were not 

neglected; he wrote many sonnets and spoke 3,000 

proverbs, and his fame in respect to these matters 

had extended to all parts of the world. 

Our lesson deals specially with the visit of the 
Queen of Sheba to Solomon's court. She herself 
declares that she had heard of his fame and had 
come to see him with her own eyes, and that notwithstanding 
her great expectations she found that 



not one-half of his greatness had been told her. The 
distance she came is estimated at 1,500 miles, and 
as the means for traveling was by camels, and their 
average speed twenty miles per day, it is estimated 
that the journey to Jerusalem and back to her home 
consumed five months; besides whatever time she 
spent at Solomon's court. Unquestionably it would 
be much less inconvenient to-day to journey around 
the earth than it was for the Queen of Sheba to 
visit Solomon. 

Tradition tells us that the Queen sent her ambassadors 
with a letter to King Solomon before she 
went herself. With them she sent 500 youths 
dressed as maidens, with instructions that they 
were to behave accordingly in the presence of Solomon. 
She sent also a thousand costly rugs inwrought 
with gold and silver, and a crown composed 
of finest pearls and gold hyacinths; also camel-loads 
of musk, amber, aloes and other precious products 
of South Arabia. She added a closed casket 
containing an unperforated pearl, a diamond intricately 
pierced and a crystal goblet. A letter accompanied 
these gifts as follows: "As a true prophet 
thou wilt no doubt be able to distinguish the youths 
from the maidens and divine the contents of the 
enclosed casket, to pierce the pearl and thread the 
diamond and to fill the goblet with water that has 
not dropped from the clouds nor gushed forth from 
the earth." 

The legend declares that when this embassage 
reached Jerusalem King Solomon told the bearers 
the contents of the letter before they presented it, 
and made light of their mighty problems. He 
caused the thousand slaves to wash their hands and 
faces and from the manner in which they applied the 
water detected their sex. He directed a fiery young 
horse to be ridden through the camp at the top of 
speed, and on its return caused its copious perspiration 
to be collected in a goblet. The pearl he pierced 
by some process known to him. The threading of 
the diamond with its crooked perforation puzzled 
him for a moment, but at length he inserted a small 
worm, which wound its way through, leaving a silken 
thread behind it. He dismissed the ambassadors 
without receiving their presents. When the emissaries 
reached the Queen of Sheba, their reports of 
these matters determined her to visit King Solomon 
in person. The account of her visit and her astonishment 
are recorded in this lesson. 

We are not informed as to the character of her 
questions, many of which quite probably were in 
the nature of conundrums, after the custom of that 
time. Everything connected with this story, however, 
assures us that Solomon was truly a wonderful 
man, that his mental powers were great and active. 
Nothing illustrates this better than the useful 



and expensive water works and arrangements which 
he provided for the capital city. So far as is known 
these were the first of the kind in the world and 
very much resembled the superior arrangements of 
our day. The fact that, although constructed 2,500 
years ago, they have recently been partially put into 
operation again, indicates clearly the solidity of 
their construction. Truly we see that the Lord's 
promise to the King was abundantly fulfilled, that 
he was wiser and richer than all others of his day 
and subsequently. The Queen was attracted specially 
by the sumptuous and methodical arrangements 
of the King's palace, his provision for the ministers 
of the realm, their uniform, etc., and the grand stairway 
which led up to the Temple. The expression 
"There was no more spirit in her," corresponds very 

R3284 : page 445 

closely to an expression of our day— it took her 
breath away. 

Our Lord indicated what otherwise would not 
have been quite apparent— namely, that Solomon's 
wisdom and glory, prosperity and peace, were typical; 
that the antitype of the Solomon is the Christ. 
Our Lord spoke as never man spoke, the people marveled 
at the gracious words that proceeded out of 
his mouth, and his fame during the three and one-half 
years of his ministry spread abroad;— yet so far 
from being recognized by his own people he was 
crucified as an enemy of their nation and an enemy 
of God. Referring to the matter he says, "The 
Queen of Sheba shall rise up in judgment with this 
generation and shall condemn it; for she came from 
the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom 
of Solomon, and behold a greater than Solomon is 
here. "-Matt. 12:42. 

By these words the Lord indicated his approval 
of the desire for wisdom evinced by the 
Queen. Indeed this is the spirit of the Scriptures- 
growth in knowledge, grace and love, knowledge being 
essential to the development of character. Here 
we have set before us a lesson which our Lord 
taught in the words, "Blessed are they that hunger 
and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be 
filled"— blessed are they who hunger and thirst for 
wisdom, for knowledge, for understanding of the 
good and true, knowing that they shall be blessed 
of the Lord and shall find that which they seek. 
The Lord's words were a reproof for his own nation 
and indicated that they were careless, indifferent 
respecting the Truth. It is still more important 
for us of to-day to notice that the same spirit of 

R3285 : page 445 



indifference prevails in nominal spiritual Israel. As 
the slightest suggestion of the heavenly wisdom 
manifested in our Lord's words and deeds should 
have kindled enthusiasm and zeal in nominal 
Israel, which would have hungered and thirsted for 
the Truth and by seeking would have found the 
Truth, so likewise to-day what confidence we have 
respecting the Lord and his character and plan 
should awaken every spiritual Israelite and lead 
him to seek the great fountain of wisdom. 

And as at the first advent the "Israelites indeed" 
were attracted to the Lord and learned of him, so in 
spiritual Israel those who are Israelites indeed are 
attracted to the Lord and are taught of him to-day; 
but as the Israelites at the Lord's first advent were 
few in number as compared with the professing nation, 
so the Spiritual Israelites of to-day are few in 
number compared to the millions of nominal Christendom. 
But as it was not until after Solomon had 
built the great Temple of God at Jerusalem that his 
fame was spread abroad and his greatness manifested, 
so with the antitype Christ; not until he, the antitypical 
Solomon, has erected the great Temple of 
God, which is the Church— not until it shall have been 
filled with the divine glory as the New Creation— 
not until the new Jerusalem shall shine resplendently 
with the riches of divine grace and the brilliancy 
of the Lord's polished jewels, will the fame 
of Emmanuel reach to the uttermost parts of the 
earth. Then, as the Scriptures declare, "Many peoples 
shall go and say, Come, let us go up to the 
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of 
Israel; he will teach us of his ways and we will walk 
in his paths; for the law shall go forth out of Zion 
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem."— 
Isa. 2:2,3. 

All the ends of the earth shall see the salvation 
of our God. The whole world shall have its eyes 
opened to behold the riches of divine grace and wisdom 
embodied in Christ, head and body, reigning in 
the New Jerusalem for the blessing and uplifting 
of the entire race of Adam— whosoever wills. The 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth as 
the waters cover the face of the great deep, and 
there shall be no need to say every man to his neighbor 
and every man to his brother, Know thou the 
Lord, because all shall know him from the least 
even unto the greatest. (Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34.) The 
wisdom of the great King, the antitype of Solomon, 
will be exercised on behalf of not merely the one 
nation of Israel but on behalf of all those who shall 
come into covenant relationship with the heavenly 
Father, typified by this people which entered into 
a covenant with the Lord, and which because of that 
covenant was the object of his mercy and care. In 
Revelation a little glimpse of the New Jerusalem 



is given and of the greater than Solomon who will 
be the light of it, and we are told that the nations 
shall walk in the light of it and the kings of the 
earth shall bring their glory into it.— Rev. 21:22,24. 

The Queen's astonishment at what she found, 
and her declaration that the half had not been told 
her, reminds us of the Scriptural declaration respecting 
the greater than Solomon and the wonderful 
kingdom glories in reservation for his faithful. We 
read: "Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither 
hath entered into the heart of man, the things which 
God hath in reservation for them that love him." 
Now we know in part and see as through an obscure 
glass, but then we shall see as we are seen and 
know as we are known, and be like our Lord and 
share his glories.— 1 Cor. 2:9; 13:12. 

The Queen's exulting remarks at the conclusion 
of her visit were, "Happy are thy men, and 
happy are these thy servants, which stand continually 
before thee and hear thy wisdom. Blessed be 
the Lord thy God which delighteth in thee to set 
thee on the throne of Israel; because the Lord loved 
Israel forever, therefore made he thee King to do 
judgment and justice." 

The greater than Solomon, in harmony with 
the divine arrangement, has prepared to have his 
faithful servants of the present time with him to 
share his glory and his Kingdom, and the blessings 
of that time will be specially theirs. Happy those 
men who will be in his presence, who will see him 
as he is and be like him, and be the recipients of his 
favors. O blessed thought! O words with heavenly 
wisdom fraught! 

And although the blessings of the Millennial 

R3285 : page 446 

kingdom will come first and chiefly to the Church 
of this Gospel age, which will be associated with 
the Lord in the kingdom glory and sit at meat with 
him and participate in his honors and be blessed by 
his presence and wisdom, yet indeed a great blessing 
will remain for the world. As the Queen expressed 
it of the typical King, that God's blessing 
upon Israel was manifested in choosing him for 
King, so God's blessing to the world of mankind 
will be manifested in the establishment of Messiah's 
kingdom, which is to bless all the families of the 
earth and to grant them an opportunity of coming 
back to covenant relationship with God, and thus 
eventually, if they will be obedient to his judgments 
and justice, back to all that was lost in Adam, 
with superadded favors and mercies. 

By faith some of us have heard of the Lord's 
fame in advance of the establishment of his Kingdom; 
by faith some of us have come from afar and 



offered him our treasures, laying our all at his feet; 
by faith these have been accepted of him, and instead 
he has given us exceeding great and precious 
promises and hopes far outweighing and outvaluing 
the little all that we gave to him. 

Although Solomon's wisdom and greatness and 
riches and honor as the king typified the greatness 
of the Christ in the Millennial kingdom, his subsequent 
manifestation of weakness, causing the decay 
of his greatness, is not to be esteemed as typical, 
for of the antitype it is declared that of the greatness 
of his kingdom there shall be no end. Nor is 
this type alone in this particular. Similarly David 
was a type in some particulars; so was Moses a type 
in some particulars and not in others; so was Adam 
a figure of him who was to come, yet not a figure in 
his transgression and condemnation. Our Golden 
Text can only have a partial application to any kingdom 
of man during "this present evil world," of 
which Satan has attempted control as the prince 
thereof. Owing to the inherent weakness of our 
race even its best specimens are far from absolute 
righteousness, and consequently no government of 
the present time, no government under imperfect 
men, can fulfill the predictions of our Golden Text. 
This is implied throughout the entire Scripture, in 
which the Lord promises that he will establish his 
kingdom amongst men, and that under Emmanuel's 
government all the families of the earth shall be 
blessed. It is for this reason that the Lord's people 
still pray, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on 
earth as in heaven;" it is for this reason that the 
Apostle declares that the "whole creation groaneth 
and travaileth together in pain until now"— waiting 
for the manifestation of the sons of God. 

The sons of God, the little flock with their Head 
the Lord Jesus, will by and by constitute the 
righteous who will be in authority, in power, in governmental 
control of the world by divine arrangement, 
based upon the great atonement sacrifice. Of 
that time and of that great ruler, head and body, it 
is written, "In his day shall the righteous flourish." 
In his day Satan shall be bound a thousand years to 
deceive people no more, and all the influences of 
righteousness and truth shall be let loose, that the 
world may be flooded with the light and knowledge 
of the glory of God. Under those blessed conditions 
whosoever will may take of the water of life freely 
and live forever. 



page 446 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR MR. RUSSELL:- 

I received Millennial Dawn from a dear sister 
who is a Colporteur, and I have received so much 
light and am just rejoicing in the Lord so much that 
I feel constrained to write and thank you. Thanks 
cannot express my gratitude to you. Oh, the joy I 
have got in the Lord! I realize how highly favored 
of the Lord I am that I am counted worthy to share 
in his sufferings and to follow in his footsteps. It 
is going eight years since I became the Lord's, 
but I never got any farther than justification until 
I got the Dawn and "Shadows," and the Lord has 
brought me rapidly into the light. I felt I must 
write you, for I know it is right you should enjoy 
the fruit of your labor. If you knew how much 
darkness I have been in during the past years as a 
Christian you would know much better how I feel 
toward you. You are a spiritual father to me. From 
you, under God, I have got my greatest blessing. 

I am, your sister in Christ, 

MAGGIE OLIVER,--Scotland. 



R3285 : page 446 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It was my privilege to have an interesting conversation 
with an Adventist preacher a few months 
ago. The brother referred to, being at our home 
on business, I handed him several "Old Theology 
Tracts." The next day he called again, and the conversation 
which took place was in substance as 
follows: 

He said to me: "My dear brother, I have come 
to your house this afternoon to try, if possible, to 
rid you of the terrible errors which the tracts you 
gave me yesterday support." 

I replied that I certainly appreciated the 
brotherly intention, but assured the visitor that his 
attempt would be fruitless. 

"Well," said he, "you will at least talk with 
me upon the subject." 

"Certainly," I replied; "but since I have been in 
the Truth but a few months, and since I am your 
junior by many years, and not wishing to seem disrespectful, 
I ask one 'handicap.'" 

On being asked what it was, I told him that I 
preferred him, instead of attacking my views, to 
question me concerning them and allow me to give 
a reason for the hope within me. He readily acquiesced, 
stipulating that all views must have a 
"Thus saith the Lord." 

He then asked me concerning our erroneous (?) 

R3285 : page 447 



idea of future probation. I read Acts 3:20; Jno. 1:19; 
1 Tim. 2:5,6; 4:10; Heb. 2:9; etc., and he 
tried to refute these testimonies by argument and a 
feeble attempt at quoting Scripture. Then taking 
his own standpoint I quoted Isa. 65:17-20, and asked 
him how sinners (according to his belief) could be 
in the new heavens and earth. 

"My dear brother," he replied, "when you reach 
the 20th verse you should know that God goes away 
back in his dates hundreds of years." 

I replied, "There is one thing sadly lacking in 
your argument— namely, your stipulated 'Thus saith 
the Lord.'" 

After a painful pause, he said, "I simply cannot 
quote Scripture today, and my ideas do not seem 
as clear as usual. I hoped to convince you of your 

R3286 : page 447 

error, but I see you are too well established in it to 
be moved." 

(Oh, how I thanked our heavenly Father for the 
encouragement thus brought to my heart!) 

I asked him if he had ever read the Divine Plan 
of the Ages. He replied that he had done so, and 
that its author crossed the Bible, human reason and 
common sense, besides crossing his own arguments. 

"If that is so," I replied, "I want to know it. 
Here is the book. Please show me his first error." 

He nervously turned the pages of the book and 
said, "I don't seem to see any place now." I urged 
him to hunt, or, if he was very busy, to take the book 
home, and when he found such a place to show it me. 
After a few more spasmodic attempts he turned to 
me with a distressed look and said he was not 
familiar enough with the work to really find such 
places. After begging his pardon if anything in my 
manner was not becoming to my youth, I urged him 
to either become sufficiently acquainted with the 
book to warrant such assertions, or else be very cautious 
about bringing such accusations. He left me 
very soon, and despite the fact that he insisted 
to our neighbors that I was possessed of the 
devil, I rejoiced in the privilege of thus serving our 
Master. I truly realized that the brother's defeat 
was not occasioned by his inferiority as a student, for 
I am sure that he was recognized, and doubtless 
justly too, as a Bible scholar; and I realized then my 
own insufficiency, but perceived that God allowed the 
Truth to triumph, to encourage me at that time. This 
fills my heart with joy, and I can indeed say with the 
Apostle, "I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ." 
Yours in him, 

W. H. B. -Rhode Island. 



page 447 

MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

The great wave of spiritual power and joy 
which it was our privilege to experience during your 
visit here last spring will long remain in our memories. 
The blessing of the Lord attending all the 
proceedings was manifest, and much beyond the little 
faith mingled with fears as to the result. Truly 
the Lord is good, and we have felt his goodness, 
and the hearts of all the dear saints here are verily 
overflowing with gladness since hearing the joyful 
tidings proclaimed, and the Truth so lovingly and 
charitably presented to their minds. 

We are very hopeful of good results. Certainly 
many are less prejudiced after hearing for themselves 
the unadulterated Word of Life. 

Oh, for the word of God, so pure, 

Sweet and refreshing to the mind; 
A constant draught from heavenly springs 

Within the Scriptures we can find. 

Free from adulterating creeds 

The soul true progress then can make; 

When strengthened by the Word of Truth, 
Man's faith in God no foe can shake. 

The lessons I was permitted to learn during your 
stay,— "beholding your order and steadfastness in 
Christ"— I trust will greatly instruct me to be more 
qualified for the responsible position as leader of 
such an honorable cause in the service of him 
"Whose I am and whom I (desire to ever) serve." 

The present commences a new epoch in our 
Christian history, which, by the Lord's help, will 
chronicle a larger sphere of influence, a more faithful 
declaration of the Present Truth, deeper spirituality 
of life, and fitness for the high honor of being joint 
heirs in the great future assigned for the faithful. 
It is the earnest desire of all our hearts, particularly 
that of my dear wife and self, that you may ever realize 
the needed supply of the holy Spirit to use you 
in "confirming the churches," and to be spared in 
furnishing the Lord's Table (through the Watch 
Tower and the remaining volumes of Dawn) that 
his people may continue being nourished "with the 
finest of the Wheat." With kind remembrances, 
Yours in the Redeemer's service, 
JAMES HAY,-England. 



MY DEAR SIR AND BROTHER: 



I do not wish to burden you with much writing, 
but I know how you must be interested in the 
human family or you would not devote so much 
time and labor for their good. I only wish that I 
could devote my time in the same way. 

I meet with a great many traveling salesmen in 
my business, and it has been my pleasure to get 
some of them interested in God's Word and its real 
value to us. One of them was an infidel, or, if not 
altogether one, he was at least an unbeliever of the 
Word of God— and by insisting on a promise from 
him to read the 'Plan of the Ages' if I would loan 
it to him, I succeeded in getting him to read; and 
now he is much interested in it, and, using his own 
words to illustrate his feeling, "It makes me glad 
to the ground." 

Another traveling man has become very much 
interested and has already distributed quite a number 
of tracts which I gave him. 

Yours very truly, 

J. D. HENDERSON, -Iowa. 



page 449 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 