VOL. XXI. NOVEMBER 15, 1900. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 339 

Is Nature Cruel? 339 

Roman Catholicism in Politics 340 

Make Sure of Winning in God's 

Election 341 

Different Standpoint, Different View 342 

Ignorance Respecting God's Election 342 

Sorrowful, For He Had Great 

Possessions 346 

The Grace of All Graces 347 

"Trust Not in Uncertain Riches" 348 

Entreaty Answered.— Blind Eyes 

Opened 349 

Ill-gotten Wealth Restored 351 

Christian Home Embellishments 352 

About Pilgrim Arrangements 338 

page 338 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2731 : page 338 
"PILGRIM" ARRANGEMENTS STILL MISUNDERSTOOD. 



We find that quite a number of our readers did not respond 
to our queries respecting "Pilgrim" visits because they thought 
themselves too far from Allegheny to ask or expect a visit. 
Others who did respond have wondered that a "Pilgrim" was 
not started to them at once. For these reasons we explain 
again, as follows:— 

The Society sends forth a number of these Pilgrims— according 
as the Society's funds will permit and the interests of 
the flock seem to demand. These are sent out on long tours- 
three to twelve months, according to circumstances;— and sometimes 
reach very out-of-the-way places where we know that 
the interest and arrangements will justify the expense and time. 
We rarely give more than two days to any place unless more is 
specially requested and good reasons given. 

We will be making up new routes for 1901 and therefore 
requested replies to our questions from all who desire to be remembered 
and visited. See TOWER Aug. 1, 1900. 

page 338 

MARKED NEW TESTAMENTS. 



We have now a goodly supply of the Marked New Testaments. 
The markings are in red ink, making prominent verses 
which are specially forceful as respects various features of the 
divine plan for our salvation. The ransom, justification, sanctification, 
the second coming of our Lord and the resurrection are 
made quite prominent in these markings. Price postpaid two 
for 25 cents or $1.10 per dozen by express at your charges. 

The publication, markings, etc. are not our work. 



MONEY OR STAMPS SHOULD BE SENT "REGISTERED" 



R2726 : page 339 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



IS NATURE CRUEL? 



THIS QUESTION has already been answered by 
some eminent authorities in the affirmative, and 
the belief that such an answer is the correct one is 
widespread. Sir Samuel Baker declares that nature 
"is a system of terrorism from the beginning to the 
end," and John Stuart Mill asserts that if there are 
marks of design in creation, "one of the things most 
evidently designed is that a large proportion of all 
animals should pass their existence in tormenting and 
devouring other animals." If we assume nature to 
be the work of a Being of infinite power, he concludes 
that "the most atrocious enormities of the worst men 
will be more than justified by the apparent intention 
of Providence that throughout all animated nature 
the strong should prey on the weak." These radical 
assertions are controverted by J. C. Hirst, of Liverpool, 
England, in a book whose title is the same as 
the head of this article (London, 1900). After examining 
the experiences of hunters of big game, he 
concludes in the first place that Sir Samuel Baker's 
dictum is untrue. We quote from a review in Our 
Animal Friends (October) the following abstract of 
his argument:— 

"Where there is terrorism there must be terror, 
and terror is one of the most horrible of sufferings. 
Is it true, then, that the animals most exposed to the 
attacks of the carnivora suffer greatly from terror? 
We believe that it is almost entirely untrue. Terror in 
human beings is largely due to the imagination.... 
Have we any reason to believe that the lower animals 
have a similar terror of imagination? We have 
good reason to believe the contrary. Mr. J. D. Inverarity 
tells the following incident: A poor donkey 
was 'tied-out'; that is, as a bait for a lion. The lion 
approached, but the hunter, looking through his peephole, 
saw the donkey standing unharmed, while the 
lion went on growling. It was afterward discovered 
that the lion had actually tried to throw the donkey 
over with his paw and had failed, altho it had scratched 
the donkey on the inner side of the leg. But 'within 
a few minutes of the donkey being attacked, it was 



calmly eating which showed its nerves were not 
affected.' 

"Mr. Wallace maintains that 'the constant effort 
to escape enemies, the ever-recurring struggle against 
the forces of nature,' are 'the very means by which 
much of the beauty and harmony and enjoyment of 
nature are produced.' To what else is it that the 
fleetness of the horse and of the many species of deer 
and antelopes is due? To what else, indeed, but the 
perpetual stimulus to exert their utmost speed, which 
is caused by the fear of enemies? But is not this fear 
the very terror which Sir Samuel Baker affirms? By 
no means. Mr. Francis Galton not only agrees with 
Mr. Wallace, but maintains that the peril in which 
they live is a source of pleasure.... 

"Prince Kropotkin points out the enormous exaggeration 
of the 'tooth and claw' view of nature. 

The Prince refers to the families of elephants, rhinoceroses, 
and the numberless societies of monkeys to be 
found in the lower latitudes of Asia and Africa; the 
numberless herds of reindeer in the far North, the 
herds of musk-oxen and the innumerable bands of 
polar foxes still farther north; the flocks of seals and 
morses and sociable cetaceans which inhabit the ocean; 
the herds of wild horses, donkeys, camels and sheep 
which range the steppes of Central Asia. He says: 

'"How trifling, in comparison with them, are 
the numbers of carnivora! And how false, therefore, is 
the view of those who speak of the animal world as 
if nothing were to be seen in it but lions and hyenas 
plunging their bleeding teeth into the flesh of the victims ! 
One might as well imagine that the whole of 
human life is nothing but a succession of Tel-el-Kebir 
and Geoktepe massacres.' 

"Unless, then, death is an inexcusable incident 
in animal life, it would seem that the terror of death 
to be inflicted by the carnivora is really a figment of 
the imagination; and one might reasonably adopt the 
language of Mr. Wallace, that 'the supposed torments 

R2726 : page 340 

and miseries of animals have little real existence, but 

are the reflection of the imagined sensations of cultivated 

men and women in similar circumstances, and 

that the amount of actual suffering caused by the struggle 

for existence among animals is altogether 

insignificant.'" 

Mr. Hirst does not, of course, deny that there is 
a good deal of eating and being eaten in the animal 
kingdom. This, however, he says, is not cruelty, 
and he devotes much space to showing that in their 
attacks wild creatures cause their victims little pain, 
altho he does not go so far as to say that the mangled 
ones enjoy it, as Wallace maintained of the fleeing 
antelope. The familiar case of Dr. Livingstone, on 



whom a lion's jaw crunching through his shoulder 
acted as an anesthetic, is of course cited, and supported 
by much evidence along the same line. The reviewer 
regards the case as having been made out, and concludes 
as follows: 

"So then, as the result of this most interesting 
investigation, we may reasonably come to the conclusion 
that nature is by no means the system of terrorism 
that Sir Samuel Baker makes it out to be; that 
it does not justify the pessimistic and almost atheistic 
conclusions of Mr. J. S. Mill, and that it is not the 
horrible commingling of devourers and devoured that 
a superexcited imagination is predisposed to paint it. 
On the contrary, we may believe that the various carnivorous 
enemies of the gentler races of animals are 
much more serviceable in training them to the finest 
exercise of skill and fleetness than they are destructive 
of their numbers or oppressively noxious to their happiness 
of animal life, and that in a world in which 
death is necessary, death by the assault of carnivorous 
enemies is no more dreadful, but is, in fact, much 
less painful, than many other methods by which life 
may be extinguished."— Literary Digest. 

The above is in full accord with our presentations 
on the subject in our issue of June 1, page 165; which 
please note again. 

R2727 : page 340 

ROMAN CATHOLICISM IN POLITICS. 



"At the annual meeting of the Catholic Young 
Men's National Union in Brooklyn, September 26, a 
resolution was adopted to form a great federation of 
all the societies of the Roman Catholic Church in the 
United States for political purposes. Last spring 
Bishop McFaul of Trenton, N.J., told the Ancient 
Order of Hibernians that the Roman Catholics of 
America were fools not to organize into one solid 
mass and make their power felt in the politics of this 
country; there were 2,000,000 Roman Catholic voters, 
and if they were united for political action they could 
make this country a Roman Catholic nation. 

"This federation has now been formed by the following 
societies: The Knights of Columbus, the 
Knights of St. John, the Catholic Benevolent Legion, 
the Ancient Order of Hibernians, the Irish Catholic 
Benevolent Union, the Irish-American Societies, the 
German-American Societies, the Catholic Knights of 
America, the Catholic Total Abstinence Union of 
America; and, as the Brooklyn Eagle of Sept. 26, 1900 
(from which we quote), says: 'Besides these organizations 
there are scores of others of less prominence.' 

"The federation is formed, says the Eagle, 'for the 



avowed purpose of influencing legislation and securing 
what the Catholics claim are their rights.' 

"The convention, which met in the Park Theatre, 
Brooklyn, was the largest gathering in the history of 
the Young Men's National Union, and it was addressed 
by leading priests and laymen from all parts of the 
country. Father Lavelle, rector of St. Patrick's Cathedral 
in this city, Monsignor Doane of Newark, N.J., 
Sheriff Buttling of Brooklyn, Congressman Fitzgerald, 
of Boston, and Father Wall of Holy Rosary 
Church, this city, made stirring addresses. The latter 
was elected president of the union. 

'"The convention,' continues the Eagle, which 
is one of the foremost metropolitan daily journals, 
'unanimously approved the plan of federation and appointed 
committees to carry it into effect. By this 
means tens of thousands of men of the Catholic faith 
will be brought under one national head, and this 
stalwart body of men will have a strong influence 
on national legislation.' The New York Herald and 
other papers had similar reports. This is the most 
important step ever taken by the Roman Catholics in 
the United States. They now have New York City 
in their possession, and many of the other large cities 
of our republic are under their control; all, like Tammany 
Hall, 'worked for all their worth,' in the interests 
of the Roman Catholic Church, and incidentally 
for the benefit of the workers. In politics I work 
for my own pocket all the time,' said Richard Croker, 
the 'Boss' of Tammany. He might have added that 
a large share of the municipal plunder goes to Roman 
Catholic institutions. 

"Having possession of the cities, the Romanists 
now reach out to gain control in national affairs. 
'We must make America Catholic,' said Archbishop 
Ireland at the hundredth anniversary of the establishment 
of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in the United 
States, which was held in Baltimore, Nov. 10, 1889. 
'We must make America Catholic. As we love our 
church, it suffices to mention the work and our cry 
shall be, God wills it, and our hearts shall leap towards 
it with Crusader enthusiasm.' He was wildly applauded 
by the eighty bishops, one thousand priests 
and five thousand laymen present. 

'"Why should we fear or hesitate?' he continued, 
with glowing fervor and proud boasting. 'We number 
ten millions— a powerful army if the forces be well 
marshaled and their latent strength be brought into 
action. Catholics in America are loyal to their church 
and devoted to her leaders. Their labors and their 
victories in the first century of their history show 
what they are capable of in the coming century, when 
they are conscious of their power and are under complete 
hierarchical organization.' 

"And so, even before the century has begun, they 
are preparing by a complete organization to conquer 



this country and turn it over to the pope! What have 
the Protestants of America to say to this? says The 
Converted Catholic of New York." 

R2727 : page 341 

SOCIALISM GROWING IN GERMANY. 



The election of a member of the Reichstag for 
Brandenburg has caused considerable political excitement 
throughout Germany, as it has resulted in a 
signal victory for the Socialist candidate, Herr Peus, 
by a majority of 648 votes. This constituency has 
had a varied history, having returned within the past 
twenty years Conservatives, Radicals and National 
Liberals; but throughout all its fluctuations one fact 
was prominent; namely, the growth of Socialism there. 

The number of Socialist members now in the 
Reichstag is fifty-eight; in 1885 there were only twenty -three; 
in 1890 the number rose to thirty-five. At 
the general election of 1893 there were forty-four Socialists 
returned. At the last general election in 1898 
the number was fifty-six. Subsequent byeelections 
have added two members. 

If we turn to the number of recorded votes we 
find that in 1885 over half a million Socialist votes 
were given; in 1887 three-quarters of a million; in 
1890 nearly one million and a half; in 1893 one million 
and three-quarters; and at the last general election 
two and a quarter millions. The calculation which 
places the strength of the Socialist party at the next 
election at three million votes, and 100 seats in the 
Reichstag out of a total of 397 seats, would not appear 
excessive.— London Daily Chronicle, Oct. 29. 



R2727 : page 341 
MAKE SURE OF WINNING IN GOD'S ELECTION. 



"Brethren, give diligence to make your 
calling and election sure."— 2 Pet. 1:10. 

INTEREST in the recent election of a President of 

the United States has been general throughout 

the whole world, and especially amongst English-speaking 

peoples: in fact, the exercise of the franchise 

by the public, whenever and wherever, is generally a 

matter of absorbing interest to "the children of this 

world"— whether the office be a high one, as that of 

President of the United States, or Member of Congress, 



or Member of Parliament, or whether it be 
a lower one, for some petty office of ward magistrate 
or constable. The candidates for these offices 
and their friends, in proportion to the dignity of the 
office, do not hesitate to spend money for printing, 
brass bands, banners, flags, banquets, traveling speakers, 
etc. And this is looked upon as thoroughly reasonable, 
and engaged in by the reputedly more intelligent 
and sane of all nations. But there is another 
election in progress— an election of a hundred and 
forty-four thousand, to a higher position than that of 
any earthly magistrate or potentate; and for not a few 
years merely, for the elect are promised this highest 
of all honors for all eternity. 

Does the world know about this election? We 
answer, No. True, many have heard something about 
an election— that God is "taking out of the nations a 
people for his name," a "little flock," who, as joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ their Lord, will be given the 
Kingdom which God hath promised to them that love 
him,— the Kingdom for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come; thy will be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven." But tho they have heard of this Kingdom 
and the election now in progress, to make up the foreordained 
number of its kings and priests they do 
not really believe it, but regard it as a fantasy, "as a 
tale that is told," a fairy story which none but the 
simple-minded and children would take seriously. Ah 
yes! and so the Redeemer-King informed us it would 
be; and so he prayed to the Father, saying, "I thank 
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent 
and revealed them unto babes; even so, Father, for 
so it seemed good in thy sight."— Matt. 11:25,26. 

If the wise and prudent, the keen and the shrewd, 
the learned and the great, really comprehended the 
situation,— if they really believed in this election 
which is in progress under divine direction, according 
to the divine Word, what haste there would be amongst 
them to "make their calling and election sure," as 
the Apostle exhorts. It is not that people are not 
appreciative of such honors and dignities of power 
and influence as this Kingdom offers, that they pass 
by God's election, and treat it with indifference; for 
their love of power, their love of influence, their love 
of position and prestige, is abundantly in evidence in 
connection, not only with the governments of this 
world, but also in connection with even the trifling 
offices in the nominal churches. The spirit of "Which 
shall be greatest?" has apparently not died out. 

But while those who seek for earthly offices of a 
brief tenure and comparatively small dignity are willing 
to sacrifice time, energy, money, etc., to attain 
these petty offices and honors, and while they can 
arouse enthusiasm amongst their friends and neighbors, 
leading to expenditures of time, money and 



energy to an astounding degree, and tho they think 
it strange that we "ran not with them to the same 
excess of riot, speaking evil of us" (1 Pet. 4:4), 
nevertheless, they affect to think it remarkable that 
we who are candidates for the superlatively high office 
for which God has nominated us should spend time, 

R2727 : page 342 

influence and means in making our calling and election 
sure, and in assisting "brethren" in their election 
work: they consider our time wasted. Altho they 
spend millions of dollars in speeches, brass bands, 
editorials, parades, etc., to determine which of two 
men should hold the most honorable office of this 
nation for four years, they consider it remarkably 
strange that we should spend a fragment of the amount, 
or make the one-thousandth part of the commotion 
to secure for ourselves and to all of the "elect" the 
great "prize of our high calling." 

DIFFERENT STANDPOINT-DIFFERENT VIEW. 



All this only illustrates the two very different 
standpoints from which matters may be viewed. From 
the world's standpoint the Lord's consecrated people 
who seek to make their calling and election sure to 
the heavenly Kingdom are counted fools, because to 
attain that they are willing to sacrifice present temporal 
interests; and this sentiment of the public is the 
same today that it was in the Apostle's time, when 
he wrote, "If any man among you seemeth to be wise, 
in this world, let him become a fool that he may be 
wise." (1 Cor. 3:18; 4:10.) From our standpoint, 
seeing the eternal things and the glories attaching to 
them, we cannot avoid the feeling that it is "the children 
of this world" who are foolish, in that they expend 
so much breath and energy upon things which, 
if attained, last but a short time, and bring with them 
large measures of perplexity and trouble and criticism 
of opponents to their election: and sometimes untenable 
injury to themselves, the ruled. 

But why this difference of opinion? Which party is 
sane, and which is lacking in sanity? We answer, that 
the difference is that the one class sees what the other 
class does not see, and that because God has specially 
revealed it unto the one. As it is written, "Eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into 
the heart of man [the natural man, unilluminated by 
the holy spirit] the things which God hath in reservation 
for them that love him; but God hath revealed 
them unto us by his spirit,... which searcheth all 
things, yea, the deep things of God."— 1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

The fact, then, is that the Lord's consecrated people, 



through faith and by God's holy spirit, have inside 
information respecting "the things not seen as 
yet." Hence we see that the two parties— the one 
seeking earthly honors and advantages, for themselves 
and each other, the other seeking the heavenly advantages, 
or election for themselves and each other- 
are both laboring for what they see; for what they 
consider to be the most valuable thing they see and 
may attain. O how precious, then, is this eye of 
faith, which the Lord's consecrated people have! No 
wonder our Lord said to some of his disciples, "Blessed 
are your eyes for they see, and your ears for they 
hear"— other eyes do not see and other ears do not 
hear these heavenly things. And in that sense of the 
word comparatively few even in civilized lands have 
been called or nominated of the Lord for his election 
—comparatively few know anything about it or the 
terms which must be understood and obeyed in order 
to make the calling and election sure. 

IGNORANCE RESPECTING GOD'S ELECTION. 



Even amongst professing Protestant Christians 
the majority do not know that there is an election. 
The leading denomination, Methodists, positively deny 
that there is an election; and even the large denominations 
which hold that an election is in progress 
(Presbyterians and Baptists, etc.) have totally false 
conceptions of its character: they regard God's call 
or nomination as being the election itself, and hence 
the words of the Apostle in our text confuse rather 
than help them. They think of the matter from the 
standpoint of divine foreknowledge and predestination: 
they consider the election as something done by 
the Almighty wholly regardless of the character and 
works of the elect, saying in their Confessions of Faith, 
that it takes place without consideration of any worthiness 
or merit on the part of the elect, but solely of 
divine grace. They thus make void the Word of God, 
and the election inducements which it holds out,— 
confusing their own minds, and in the end traducing 
the character of the divine ruler and his law. 

Would that they could see what is so plainly set 
forth in the divine Word; viz., (1) that the predestination 
on God's part was that he would choose a 
Church,— from amongst those whom his grace would 
redeem from the curse of death through the precious 
blood of Christ. (2) That he predestinated that this 
Church should be of a fixed, positive, limited number; 
—we believe literally 144,000— of whom the nucleus 
was found in the remnant of Israel which accepted of 
Christ at and after Pentecost: the number being constantly 
added to throughout the Gospel age, and to 
be fully completed with the end of this age. (3) That 



he predestinated what must be the fixed character of 
each one whom he would recognize as a member of 
this elect Church, the body of Christ— as the Apostle 
says, he "predestinated that we should be conformed 
to the likeness of his Son." (Rom. 8:29.) Consequently 
the predestination meant that none could be 
of the elect Kingdom class (however plainly they 
heard the call or nomination), unless they made their 
calling and election sure by cultivating the graces of 
the spirit and thus coming into heart-likeness of our 
Lord Jesus Christ— copies of him who set us an example, 
that we should walk in his steps.— 1 Pet. 2:21. 

R2727 : page 343 

Here we have an election which accords with every 
definition of the Scriptures and all the Scriptural facts 
relating to the divine plan of the ages. It is this election 
which we feel justified in securing at any cost, at 
any self-denial, any self-sacrifice; and these self-denials 
and self-sacrifices are works which must be performed 
if we would be of the elect; as the Apostle says, we 
must "work out our own salvation with fear and 
trembling." (Phil. 2:12; Jas. 2:22.) Yet these works 
are not ours (as men) but as "new creatures," members 
of the body of Christ. And they are God's works 
in the sense that they are incited by his Word and 
Spirit: for "it is God that worketh in you to will and 
to do. "-Phil. 2:13; Eph. 3:20. 

Let us not be misunderstood, however. Our justification, 
the basis of our call or nomination to this 
high position in the Kingdom was secured, not by 
works, but by simple faith without works. We were 
justified by faith, and had peace with God, before it 
was possible for us to do any works which would be 
acceptable in his sight. But when we were accepted 
in the Beloved, having made full consecration of our 
mortal bodies, and every interest pertaining thereto, 
—then the works began, the sacrificing began, the 
self-denials began, the overcoming of the world began, 
the battle with the world, the flesh and the devil began. 
This battle must be won in our hearts (even 
tho we will not attain perfection in the flesh) else we 
will not make our election sure and receive the crown 
of glory, the symbol of our joint-heirship with him 
who bought us with his own precious blood. 

So then we see (a) that only those who have 
heard something, at least, of the grace of God in Christ 
have been in the remotest sense in contact with the 
privileges of this election,— because "faith cometh by 
hearing." And (b) faith the result of hearing, rightly 
received, brings justification from the sins that are 
past, and peace with God. And (c) only those who 
are at peace with God (being justified by faith) are 
called to joint-heirship with Christ in his sacrifice, 
walking in his footsteps and thus attaining to joint-heirship 



with him in his Kingdom. And (d) only 

those thus called or nominated by God have the remotest 

opportunity of becoming the elect. And then 

mark, (e) the Lord's own declaration, "Many are 

called; few are chosen [elected— from the same Greek 

word]. "-Matt. 22:14. 

Let us not only assure ourselves of the fact that 
there is an elect class being selected during the Gospel 
age, to a special position of honor and service with 
the Lord, but let us at the same time note the lessons 
enjoined upon this class of called or nominated ones 
—the instructions given them of the Lord whereby 
they may make their calling and election sure. 

OTHER SCRIPTURE REFERENCES TO THE ELECT. 



"I endure all things for the elect's sake," writes 
the Apostle Paul. (2 Tim. 2:10.) The Apostle's 
sufferings whereby, as he said, he sought to "fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ [were] 
for his body's sake, which is the Church" (Col. 1:24) 
—not for the world. The reason for this is evident: 
The Apostle knew the Lord's plan to be to call and 
to elect during this Gospel age a little flock of overcomers 
of the world, faithful even unto death, as a 
Royal Priesthood, to share with the Lord Jesus in the 
Millennial Kingdom. He knew, therefore, that labor 
on behalf of the world before the world's day of trial 
or judgment would come, would be to a large extent 
at least love's labor lost; and hence he was not of 
those who would "beat the air" in the service of the 
Lord, accomplishing nothing; he would work according 
to the divine direction and thus be a co-worker 
together with God, that in due time as a member of 
the elect company, faithful to the Lord's call, he 
would be granted a share in the Kingdom, which is to 
bless all the families of the earth. 

"Even so, at this present time there is an election 
according to grace. ...Israel hath not obtained 
that which he seeketh for, but the election hath obtained 
it and the rest were blinded." (Rom. 11:5,7.) 
Here the Apostle is speaking of this same elect 
Church, and is referring to the Jewish remnant out 
of all the tribes with which this elect Church was 
started, and to which, after Israel's national rejection 
of the Lord, the special invitation went forth to the 
Gentiles, to "take out of them a people for his name 
[to bear the name of Christ]" to complete the predestinated 
number of the elect 144,000 (twelve 
thousand accredited to each of the twelve tribes of 
Israel). Thus we who are being called from amongst 
the Gentiles are invited to fill up the deficiency in the 
elect number of Israel, and will be, so to speak, divided 
amongst the twelve tribes, tho according to what 



rule of distinction the Scriptures do not show. 

"Put on, therefore, as God's elect, holy and beloved, 
a heart of compassion, kindness, humility, 
meekness, long suffering, forbearing one another and 
forgiving one another." (Col. 3:12,13.) Here we 
have an intimation of the character-likeness to God's 
dear Son which the same writer tells us God has predestinated 
respecting everyone who will make his 
calling and election sure. (Rom. 8:29.) God has 
called us with his high calling, and from the time we 
accept the call and make the requisite full consecration 
of ourselves to him he gives us the earnest of our 
inheritance, viz., the spirit of adoption, the spirit of 
sonship: it remains, however, for us to be tested,— to 

R2727 : page 344 

prove the depth of our consecration, the sincerity of 
our professed love. If we love the Lord with all our 
hearts we will seek to do those things which are pleasing 
to him, and these the Apostle is specifying in this 
Scripture, showing us that God's requirements are 
all in harmony with his holy spirit of love; that "Love 
is the fulfilling of the Law," and that we must attain 
to this condition of perfect love in our hearts if we 
desire to finish our course with joy, and make our 
calling and election sure— making sure a share in the 
inheritance to the spiritual body and the Kingdom 
glories of which our spirit of begetting is but the 
earnest or foretaste. 

"Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus 
Christ, according to the faith of God's elect." (Titus 1:1.) 
Here the Apostle not only reiterates that there 
is an elect class, but he specifically points out that this 
class has a special faith, a peculiar faith, that is not 
shared by others, neither can others know it, for "it 
is spiritually discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

"Shall not God avenge his own elect, tho they 
cry day and night unto him?" (Luke 18:7.) Here 
our Lord himself testifies respecting this elect class. 
He gave a parable of an unjust judge, who, tho careless 
respecting the doing of justice to a poor widow, 
nevertheless was so careful of his own convenience 
that he would give her justice, lest by her continual 
coming she would annoy him. And our Lord's inquiry 
is, if an unjust judge would thus render justice 
from a selfish motive, could we expect less from the 
all-wise, all-loving and all -just Heavenly Father? 
Verily, God shall avenge the cause of his elect, altho 
he has permitted them to be maligned, slandered, misrepresented, 
for over eighteen centuries; the time will 
come when he will give them justice, when he will 
exalt them; and when those who have wilfully and 
maliciously injured them shall certainly be punished 
—in the great time of retribution in which every such 
evil deed of mankind shall be rendered a recompense, 



and every good deed receive its reward— in the Millennial 
day. 

"He shall send forth his angels [messengers] and 
shall gather together his elect from the four winds of 
heaven." (Matt. 24:31.) Here our Lord not only 
testifies to the fact that there is an elect class, but he 
assures us that he himself will gather this elect class 
in due time; in the end of this age when he is ready to 
establish his Kingdom, in which, as the overcomers, 
the elect of God, they will be joint heirs and sharers, 
as in the present life they have been sharers in the 
sufferings of Christ.— Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:12; 
Matt. 13:43. 

For the elect's sake those days shall be shortened." 
(Matt. 24:22.) Our Lord here refers to the great 
time of trouble with which this age shall end, "the 
day of vengeance," the time of retribution, the day of 
avenging his elect; and he assures us that the trouble 
then coming upon the world, and which will largely, 
we see, be brought about by the world's own course, 
would, if not interrupted by the Kingdom and its intervention 
with power from on high, mean the utter 
obliteration of the race at the hand of its own selfishness. 
But for the elect's sake those days should be 
shortened, and the time of trouble will not be permitted 
to run the length which otherwise it would 
run. As at first, "He shall speak to them in his wrath 
and vex them in his sore displeasure," so afterward 
he shall not permit their utter destruction: his Kingdom 
will stay the trouble, for "He shall speak peace 
to the heathen [peoples];" he shall say unto them, 
"Be still and know that I am God; I will be exalted 
among the nations; I will be exalted in the earth."— 
Psa. 46:10. 

"Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's 
elect?" (Rom. 8:33.) The Apostle is here pointing 
out that altho this called class accepted of God to be 
his elect, and to run with patience the race set before 
them, and make their calling and election sure, have 
weaknesses of the flesh, in the overcoming of which 
they, as new creatures, are not always wholly successful, 
nevertheless, God looks upon the heart, and their 
judgment is not according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit, the will. Lest such should fear failure 
after all, he points out that in the great heavenly 
court there would be none to condemn them;— because 
God the Judge who once condemned us in Adam has 
himself justified us in Christ,— accepting on behalf 
of the Adamic sin and the resultant weaknesses the 
sacrifice of Christ. And then he points out that 
Satan, our Adversary, will have no hearing before the 
heavenly Court, and that there will be none to appear 
against us, and that on the contrary our Lord and 
Master, who redeemed us with his precious blood, 
will be our Advocate. Who then could lay anything 
to the charge of God's elect?— those whom God has 



justified, whom God has called, whom God has accepted, 

and who, according to the divine arrangement, 

make their calling and election sure. Who 

would they be who could find fault with these whom 

God accepts on his own terms? Surely none! "Yea, 

we are more than conquerors, through him who loved 

us and bought us with his own precious blood!" 

"Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the 
Father... through sanctification of the spirit unto 
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ." 
(1 Pet. 1:2.) The Apostle here marks out the terms 
of our election; none can remain in this elect company, 
nor make his calling and election sure, without 

R2727 : page 345 

being under the sprinkling of the blood— justification 
through faith in the great sacrifice; nor can any attain 
it without sanctification, a setting apart to God; and 
such a sanctification as will lead to obedience to 
God— to the full submission of his will to the will of 
the Father in heaven. Such must be the character of 
those who will be of the elect, and this class of which 
we are seeking to become members was predetermined, 
foreordained by God; it was not a new thing, but the 
carrying out of the original divine purpose, in which 
also our Lord Jesus shared. This the same Apostle 
shows (1 Pet. 2:4-6), declaring that our Lord Jesus 
himself was the elect of God, and that we who are 
now being chosen from amongst men to be "members 
of the body of Christ," members of the elect class, are 
chosen in him, chosen as members of his body, and as 
such must be conformed to the likeness of his character. 
He says: "To whom coming, as unto a living 
stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen [elect] of 
God and precious, ye also, as lively stones, are built 
up, a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up 
sacrifices* acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." 

"Wherefore also it is contained in the Scripture, 
Behold I lay in Zion a chief corner stone, elect, precious, 
and he that believeth in him shall not be confounded." 
Thus the whole Church of Christ, the 

elect little flock, are now being shaped, fitted and prepared 
for positions in the Temple of God, of which 
the dear Redeemer himself is the chief cornerstone, 
the foundation. 

"They that are with him are called and chosen [elect 
—the same word in the Greek] and faithful." (Rev. 17:14.) 
Here in symbol our Lord Jesus tells John, 
and us through him, of the glorious exaltation of the 
elect in the Kingdom, when they shall be with him 
and share his glory as the Apostle declares, and with 
him judge the world;— granting trial, with gracious 
opportunities to every member of Adam's race to return 
to full harmony with God through the merit and 
by the assistance of him who redeemed the race. 



"Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, 
in whom my soul delighteth: I have put my spirit 
upon him. He shall bring forth judgment to the 
Gentiles." "I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob 
and out of Judah, an inheritor of my mountain: and 
mine elect shall inherit it." "They shall not build 
and another inhabit; they shall not plant and another 
eat; for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, 
and mine elect shall make them continue long." 
— Isa. 42:1; 65:9,22, margin. 

Here our Lord Jesus, the Head, and the Church, 
"members in particular of the body of Christ," are 
unitedly declared to be God's elect, in whom he is 
well pleased. The Father was well pleased in the 
Son, who came not to do his own will but the will of 
him that sent him, and by his obedience won all the 
gracious things promised under the Law Covenant, 
and redeemed Adam and his race; and the Father is 
well pleased also in us, whom, tho "we were children 
of wrath even as others," he has accepted in Christ, 
justified and sanctified by his Word and spirit, and 
who, if we abide in Christ, faithful unto death, will 
be fitted and prepared for his promised Kingdom. 

In these statements of the Prophet reference evidently 
is made to the work of the Lord's anointed 
(Head and body) in conferring restitution blessings 
upon the world of mankind during the Millennial age; 
and this is in full accord with all the New Testament 
declarations respecting the work of the elect. 

"Brethren, give diligence to make your calling 
and election sure." This our text is one of the most 
forceful of the many references to God's elect, and is 
particularly clear in marking out the conditions upon 
which election may be surely attained by each one 
whom the Lord our God shall call or nominate to this 
grand office— the Royal Priesthood. The Apostle has 
been mentioning the various graces of the Lord's spirit 
which those who are seeking to be of this royal and 
priestly class must develop in their characters. He 
shows us that there is more or less of an addition 
in the matter: we put on one grace and add to it another, 
and to that another, and so on; and do this repeatedly 
in respect to all the graces, which keep growing, 
developing in us and rounding out and deepening 
and broadening us as spiritual new creatures. And 
he shows that those who do not have such experiences 
of growth in grace and in knowledge are deficient, 
and cannot hope to make their calling and election 
sure. 

But seeming to understand that some would question 
the possibility of their gaining so great a prize, 
the holy spirit, through the Apostle, gives to this 
called and chosen class a word of special encouragement, 
saying, "For if ye do these things ye shall never 
fall." There may be more or less stumbling on the 
part of the elect, not through weakness of the spirit, 



the heart, the new mind, but "through manifold temptations" 

of the flesh, the earthen vessel, in which 

temporarily resides the new creature, begotten of the 

spirit, the elect. The Apostle proceeds to give further 

assurances, saying, "For so an entrance shall be ministered 

unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom 

of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." The elect 

will not be received of the Lord with chidings and upbraidings 

for the imperfections of the flesh, which 

were unwillingly theirs, but on the contrary all the 



*The word "spiritual" is omitted in this verse as spurious, 
by old MSS. It is the flesh that is sacrificed, not the new creature. 

R2727 : page 346 

weaknesses of the flesh will be ignored, and the intents 
of the heart alone will be judged, and the heart-character 
formed will alone be tested and approved; and 
this will determine whether or not we shall stand the 
Lord's approval and be granted the glorious things 
which he has promised to them that love him— "glory, 
honor and immortality" and a share in the Kingdom 
and its work of blessing. 

"He that hath this [election] hope in him purifieth 
himself even as he [the Lord] is pure." But 
how is it with those who have not this hope, and who 
are totally ignorant of this election,— even tho they 
be Christians, in the sense of believing in the Lord 
Jesus Christ as their Redeemer? Surely they are at a 
great disadvantage, lacking as they do the proper conception 
of the exceeding great and precious promises 
which are the channel of the power of God working 
in the elect both to will and to do of his good pleasure. 

If we have seen that there is an elect class, it follows 
that there must be a non-elect class— those who 
are not making their calling and election sure, and it 
is proper in this connection that we see something respecting 
this class, and what provision God has made 
for them. This phase of the subject we reserve for 
our next issue. 



R2727 : page 346 

"SORROWFUL, FOR HE HAD GREAT POSSESSIONS. 

-MATT. 19:16-26.-DEC. 2.- 

"Children, how hard it is for them that trust in riches 
to enter into the Kingdom of God!"— Mark 10:24. 

OUR LESSON relates to what for centuries has 



been called "The Great Refusal." The rich 

young ruler, whose name is not given, altho possessed 

of an abundance of the things of this life longed for 

an assurance of everlasting life. As a Jew he knew the 

Law; he understood that God had made with this nation, 

and with no other, through Moses the mediator, 

a covenant, under which everlasting life might be attained. 

He perceived, however, that even the best men 

of his nation had failed to gain eternal life under this 

covenant— that all had died. He had heard of Jesus, 

and that "never man spake like this man," and he 

knew that in many respects his teachings were of a 

very positive character, and that his manner and instruction 

were not like those of the scribes and Pharisees, 

uncertain and equivocal;— that he taught as one 

having authority, and knowing what he taught to be 

true. He hesitated to go to this Teacher, but finally, 

seeing him leaving a house in his own neighborhood, 

he ran out hastily and point-blank put the question: 

"Good master, what good thing shall I do that I may 

have eternal [everlasting] life?" 

Instead of answering his question directly our Lord 
inquired why he thus addressed him as "good." Jesus' 
words do not imply, as some have surmised, a denial 
of being good. Rather, he would impress upon the 
young ruler the import of his own language, that when 
he got his answer he might appreciate it the more. 
Our Lord's words might be paraphrased thus: Are you 
addressing me as Good Master from the heart, or only 
as a complimentary salutation? If you really believe 
me to be good, you must believe in me as a teacher 
sent of God— the All-Good. More than this, you must 
believe my testimony, that I proceeded forth and came 
from God, that I am the Son of God. If my testimony 
is untrue in any particular I am not good at all, but a 
falsifier, a hypocrite, a blasphemer. If, then, you call 
me Good Master from the heart, and believe that I am 
the "sent of God," the Messiah, you will be the better 
prepared to receive my reply as the divine answer to 
that question. 

Without waiting to require that the young man 
should commit himself definitely on the point involved, 
but content with merely raising the issue in his mind, 
our Lord proceeded to answer the question. 

We are not to understand our Lord's answer to 
this young Jew, at a time when the Law Covenant was 
still in force, to be the same that he would give, or 
that we should give in his name, today, in reply to a 
similar inquiry. The young man was living under a 
covenant of works, of which the Apostle declares, quoting 
from the Law itself, "He that doeth these things 
shall live by them." (Lev. 18:5; Rom. 10:5.) The 
New Covenant had not yet been sealed with our Lord's 

R2728 : page 346 



precious blood, and hence it was not operative toward 
this young ruler or anybody else at this time. Our 
Lord could not properly direct the young man's attention 
to any other procedure than the keeping of the 
conditions of the Law Covenant which was still in force. 
Anyway, this was what the young man inquired: 
"What good thing must I do that I may have everlasting 
life?" It was for this reason that our Lord did not 
say, as we should say today in answer to such a question: 
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ— believe that he 
died for your sins, and arose for your justification, and 
accepting him as your Savior, as the Mediator of the 
New Covenant, present your life in full consecration of 
all its talents, powers and opportunities to the Lord's 
service. 

Our Lord did point out to the young man the only 
way to life everlasting then open— the keeping of the 
Law. He well knew that the young man could not 
keep this Law perfectly, and hence could not obtain 
everlasting life through it; but he would bring the matter 

R2728 : page 347 

before his attention in the most favorable form to 

be comprehended— without preaching the New Covenant 

or any other feature of the divine plan not yet due 

to be announced. Hence the form of his reply. 

The Law was divided into two parts or tables, the 
first relating to Jehovah and the second to the neighbor. 
Our Lord ignored the first of these, realizing that 
the young man, so far from desiring to make or worship 
idols or another god, was seeking to know and 
to do the will of the true God. Our Lord would bring 
the answer down to the simplest possible proposition, 
and hence referred merely to the commandments respecting 
duty toward his fellow-creatures, and got the 
response that so far as the young man had discerned 
the matter he had kept the Law; but altho he kept its 
outward form he realized that something was still lacking. 
He had no evidence that he had received any 
special blessing of eternal life, and wished to know of 
the Master what hindered, what he lacked of being a 
perfect man, keeping the Law and meriting the reward 
of that Law, life everlasting. No wonder Jesus, looking 
upon him, loved him; everybody who loves righteousness 
loves those who are righteous, or who are 
striving to the best of their ability to come up to the 
mark of righteousness,— perfection. 

THE GRACE OF ALL GRACES. 



Then Jesus told him plainly, "One thing thou 
lackest." You have been endeavoring to keep God's 
Law, and have done well, so far as the outward is concerned; 



but the spirit of the Law you have not apprehended 

at all— the spirit of the Law is Love. "The 

whole Law is comprehended briefly in one word." 

"Love is the fulfilling of the Law." (Rom. 13:9,10.) 

You have been getting the outside, or shell of the divine 

command, but have entirely overlooked the precious 

thing in it, the kernel, the essence,— love to God supremely 

and love toward your fellowman as toward 

yourself. Let me prove this to you, by suggesting that 

you demonstrate your love for your neighbors by disposing 

of your property for the assistance of poorer 

ones. Then consecrate your life in loving devotion to 

God's service, and come with me as my disciple, taking 

up the cross of self-denial thus involved. 

The test was a crucial one, and manifested clearly 
the distinction between the letter and the spirit of the 
Law. The cross was too heavy for the rich young ruler. 
He had gotten the answer to his question, but oh! it 
was so different from what he had anticipated. He 
had felt comparatively well satisfied with himself, altho 
realizing that something must still be lacking. He had 
rather expected Messiah's commendation, and perhaps 
some further advice, but nothing so radical. It was 
too much for him; he went away exceeding sorrowful, 
says Luke; his countenance fell, says Mark; it was 
a sore disappointment. For the time being he could 
not think of accepting the Master's prescription, the 
dose was too bitter, and he must at least think the 
matter over well. 

Whatever course this young ruler may have subsequently 
taken we are not informed; but of one thing 
we may be sure; he had learned a great lesson respecting 
the scope and significance of the Law. He had 
ascertained the impossibility of his attaining eternal 
life under the Law Covenant. 

It will be seen that we totally disagree with those 
who claim that the condition of this young man and our 
Lord's words to him apply to all young men or to those 
possessing wealth— tho the spirit of the matter is applicable 
to all, under the different conditions of the New 
Covenant. The New Covenant says to us, rich and poor, 
"Christ died for us, according to the Scriptures." He not 
only met the requirements of the Law, and fulfilled that 
Covenant and annulled it, but additionally he sealed 
and ratified the New Covenant under which he, its 
Mediator, can apply to all who come under its provisions 
through faith whatever share of his merit is necessary 
to make good the weaknesses and imperfections 
of our flesh to which our hearts, our minds, do not assent. 
Accordingly, even if when some come to Jesus 
to inquire the way of eternal life, they should be unable 
to say, as did this young ruler, "All these things 
have I done from my youth up,"— if it should be even 
necessary for such to confess with shame, "All these 
commandments have I violated," nevertheless, the provisions 
of the New Covenant are such that even the 



vilest sinner who has turned from sin and who at heart 
desires henceforth to walk in the way of righteousness, 
and who, repenting of the sins of the past, gladly makes 
such restitution as is within his power— all such are 
accepted in the Beloved One, and reckoned as justified 
freely from all things, from which the Law could not 
justify them. 

Then such are invited, as was the young ruler, to 
come, take up their cross, and follow Jesus— come, 
prove, demonstrate, their love for righteousness, their 
devotion to God and every feature of his will; come, 
crucify self and selfishness, and receive into their hearts 
instead the spirit of God, the spirit of holiness, the 
spirit of love. Not merely to love their neighbors in 
word, but in deed and in truth, so that so far from wishing 
to steal from them, or to kill them, or bear false witness 
against them, or to do any other evil toward them, 
their hearts' desire would be the reverse of these, to do 
them good, to bless them. God is Love; the spirit of 
his Law is Love; and the spirit of his faithful Son, Jesus, 
is Love. Love is the holy spirit, of which the Apostle 
declares, "If any man have not the spirit of Christ 

R2728 : page 348 

[love, in some measure] he is none of his." Under 

the New Covenant, if the heart be full of love, it is acceptable 

with God even tho the heart may not be able 

at all times to control the flesh in respect to every 

thought and word and act, and to show forth through 

it this holy spirit of love which rules paramount in 

the heart. 

The New Covenant is God's agreement, under which 
he accepts, through Christ, the intentions of our hearts 
as tho the same were actually and fully demonstrated 
in our lives; and certainly our hearts' desires will find 
expression through the flesh in large measure, tho not 
always perfectly. Thus our hearts may to some extent 
be read by our fellowmen, tho not perfectly, while to 
our heavenly Father they are an open book. Moreover, 
the love which enters and fills our hearts expands them 
and crowds out more and more of the natural and selfish 
propensities, crossing this natural, or earthly will 
with the heavenly one, the new mind. Thus gradually 
making progress in the new way, the Lord's saints are 
growing in knowledge and in grace, and more and more 
are having the love of God shed abroad in their hearts. 

"TRUST NOT IN UNCERTAIN RICHES." 



Our Lord took advantage of this episode to impart 
a lesson to his disciples, showing them the danger of 
riches— any kind of riches, honor of men, political influence, 
many and large talents or abilities, social standing, 



fine education and material wealth— for one may 
be rich in any of these senses. "It is hard for a rich 
man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven." (Revised 
Version.) Our Lord does not here undertake to explain 
why there would be greater difficulties for those possessing 
riches to enter into his Kingdom, but from other 
scriptures we learn the reasons, and why it is that the 
heirs of the Kingdom will be chiefly found amongst 
the poorer classes. "Ye see your calling, brethren, 
how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many 
mighty, not many noble are called; but God hath 
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the 
mighty." (1 Cor. 1:26,27; Jas. 2:5.) The rich are 
"called," in one sense of the word, but not in another; 
they are equally invited but they are much less likely 
(than others who are poorer) to accept the Lord's invitation 
and to present themselves according to the 
terms of the Kingdom call. In this sense of the word 
"called" only those who accept the call are meant; and 
they then divide themselves into two classes— those 
who make their calling and election sure, and obtain 
the Kingdom, obtain a part in the first resurrection to 
glory, honor and immortality, obtain a place with Messiah 
in his throne, to share with him in his Millennial 
Kingdom; and others who do not make their calling 
and election sure, either by becoming reprobates, and 
subjects of the Second Death, or by a failure to manifest 
a sufficiency of zeal in the race for the prize, and 
on this account being remanded to the class known as 
the "great company," who must come through great 
tribulation, washing their robes in the blood of the 
Lamb.-Rev. 7:9-15. 

It is well that we note carefully what are the hindrances 
of these "rich," preventing them from having 
so favorable an opportunity as their (in earthly respects) 
less favored brethren. (1) The possession of 

R2729 : page 348 

earthly good things, "riches," is less favorable to the 
development of faith, without which it is impossible 
to be pleasing to God. (2) These earthly advantages 
are more likely to develop pride, a serious barrier to 
every grace, and an impossible barrier as respects the 
Kingdom, which can be attained only through humility. 
(3) Riches of any kind bring with them friends 
and associates of the earth, whose hearts being generally 
out of sympathy with the Lord and the Kingdom 
will constitute them adversaries to the new mind, from 
whose influence it will be the more difficult to break 
completely away. (4) And summing up all of the 
foregoing, those possessed of such earthly riches have 
proportionately more to sacrifice than those who are 
poorer in these respects; and the greater the things 
sacrificed the greater the difficulty in performing the 
sacrifice. 



However, on the other hand, it may be said that 
whenever one who is rich in this world's goods (talents, 
etc.) does present himself a living sacrifice to the Lord 
and his service it witnesses to a deeper heart-loyalty 
than if he were poorer. It implies a greater sacrifice, 
and it implies also the exercise of greater opportunities 
in the Lord's service. The servant who has five talents 
and who uses them faithfully, and doubles them, 
accomplishes a greater work than the servant who, having 
one talent, uses it faithfully and doubles it, and 
our Lord's understanding of this matter is shown in 
the fact that according to the parable the one will have 
granted to him authority over ten cities, and the other 
authority over two, altho both will be commended— 
"Well done, good, faithful servant. "-Matt. 25:14-30. 

If we would look for illustrations showing wherein 
the rich (in talents, etc.) have been faithful, we would 
find at the head of the list our Lord himself, "who was 
rich, but for our sakes became poor." As he was richer 
than all others in every sense of the word, so proportionately 
his sacrifice was greater than that of all others 
in every sense of the word, and his honor, glory and 
power are greater. "He is Lord of all." "Him hath 
God highly exalted and given a name that is above 
every name." Similarly the Apostle Paul was rich— 
if not in money and property, he was at least rich in 
education, in social advantages and privileges, and in 

R2729 : page 349 

life's opportunities; and we may say that since the 
Apostle so faithfully sacrificed all these earthly riches 
for the sake of the privilege of preaching the Gospel of 
Christ, his must have been a much larger sacrifice than 
that of the majority of men: and proportionately we 
anticipate that his reward in the Kingdom will be great 
because he counted these earthly "riches" but "loss and 
dross that he might win Christ and be found in him [a 
member of the Anointed One]."— Phil. 3:8,9. 

So then, while we call attention to the fact that 
few will be in the Kingdom who have had great opportunities, 
privileges, property or other "riches" of this 
world, we nevertheless encourage those who possess 
this world's goods of any kind, to consider that they 
thus hold within their grasp grand opportunities which 
rightly used will yield riches of grace, not only in the 
life that now is but also in the life that is to come; 
working out for them a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory, proportionate to their sacrifices and 
faithfulness in their stewardship. 

We cannot wonder that the disciples were astonished 
to learn that few of the rich would enter the Kingdom, 
for did they not see on every hand that the rich 
had the more important places in the synagogues and 
in the offices of the Jewish system? Did they not see 
that comparatively few of the poor in this world's goods 



were rated amongst the saints? No wonder they inquired, 
where would the Kingdom class be found, if 
the rich were excluded? How, then, could the salvation 
which God had promised should come through his 
Kingdom ever be attained? 

The time for explaining these features of the divine 
plan having not yet come, our Lord contented himself 
with merely assuring the disciples that they must leave 
such a question to the Father; that the truth of his 
statement did not imply that no Kingdom could be 
formed, but that with God the matter was possible, and 
that his original promise to Abraham would be fulfilled, 
a Kingdom class be selected, and the blessing of salvation 
be communicated through it. To have told them 
of the rejection of the Jewish nation, all except the 
"remnant" of believers, mainly the poor, and to have 
explained to them that the elect Church, the elect Seed 
of Abraham, would be completed from amongst the 
Gentiles, of a similarly poor class as respects this world's 
advantages, would have been going beyond what was 
then due to be explained,— beyond what the disciples 
would have been able to comprehend at that time; and 
hence our Lord, using the true wisdom from above, 
refrained from saying more than would be to their advantage 
to know— leaving such information, as he explained 
to them subsequently, for unfoldment to them 
by the Comforter— the holy spirit which would come 
upon them at Pentecost— John 14:26. 



R2729 : page 349 

ENTREATY ANSWERED-BLIND EYES OPENED. 

MARK 10:46-52.-DEC. 9. 

"Lord, that I might receive my sight." 

WHILE PASSING along a road in the vicinity of 
Jericho, possibly going from the old city to 
the newer one of the same name, a great multitude 
following him, our Lord passed by two blind men, 
sitting begging by the wayside. (Mark mentions only 
one, the chief subject of the lesson, but Matthew mentions 
a companion.) Bartimeus, one of the two, as 
he heard the multitude passing and learned from some 
of them that they accompanied Jesus, the reputed 
Messiah, of whom he had no doubt heard before, was 
struck with the fact that his opportunity for a blessing 
was near at hand and rapidly passing from him. He 
began to cry out, his voice rising above the din of the 
multitude, saying, "Jesus, thou Son of David, have 
mercy on me!" 

Our Lord paid no heed at first, but passed on. The 
multitude rebuked the blind man, so to speak, saying, 



"You, poor beggar, should not thus cry out and annoy 
and seek to take the attention of so great a one as this, 
whom we verily believe to be the Messiah, and whose 
mission is the establishment of God's Kingdom; keep 
quiet!" But so much the more did he cry out for 
mercy. He longed for sight, and had faith to believe 
that the great Messiah might be prevailed upon to 
rescue him from darkness. Jesus stopped and gave 
the word to the multitude to bring the blind man to 
him. He might have gone to the blind man, or he 
might have lifted up his voice and spoken to the blind 
man, bidding him to come; but instead he chose to use 
instrumentalities— to give those about him an opportunity 
of sharing in the work of blessing. So the word 
was passed from one to another, and the blind man was 
helped forward and thus greater attention was brought 
to the whole miracle and to the divine power which it 
manifested. Those who had but a moment before upbraided 
the blind man for his temerity in expecting a 
blessing from the Messiah, now gladly bore the message 
of hope to him, saying, "Be of good cheer! arise; he 
calleth thee." And he sprang up, casting away his 
outer robe that he might go the more quickly to Jesus 
for the blessing. 

Everything connected with the case shows us that 
Bartimeus possessed a large amount of faith, and that 
he was very earnestly desirous of the blessing which 

R2729 : page 350 

he received. When he came to Jesus, altho the latter 
knew well his desire, he inquired respecting it. He 
would have the blind man express himself respecting 
his hopes and desires. He answered, "Rabboni, that 
I may receive my sight!" The word "lord" here is 
"rabboni," the most reverential term of four titles 
used amongst the Jews at that time (rab, rabbi, rabban, 
rabboni). Then Jesus touched his eyes (Matt. 20:34), 
saying, "Go thy way; thy faith hath made 
thee whole." Sight came immediately, and Bartimeus 
became one of the followers of Jesus. 

The lesson itself is a very beautiful one in demonstration 
of the Lord's tender compassion and divine 
power; and from its incidents we might draw other 
lessons, parallels, as it were. For instance, sin brought 
alienation from God, and moral blindness, which prevails 
today in every land and on every hand. The 
Apostle thus pictures some of the heathen, desirous of 
having the light of truth, as blind men groping after 
things desired. He speaks of such as crying out to 
the Lord in prayer, and "feeling after God, if haply 
they might find him;" just as Bartimeus had cried out 
to the Lord and then went to him. And as Bartimeus 
cast away his outer robe that he might go to the Lord 
the more speedily, so the sinner should cast away 
everything found to be a hindrance— he should make 



acknowledgement and repentance of sins, and he should 
make restitution also as far as possible, and thus approach 
the Lord. 

And such, when their eyes are opened to see the 
blessings of God bestowed upon them, should look, 

R2730 : page 350 

as Bartimeus looked, first into the face of the Savior 

with gratitude and appreciation, and look unto the 

Father through him. Indeed, their eyes being opened 

by the word of truth, they will gradually come to see 

everything in a new light, and be able to say, "Old 

things [of darkness and sin] are passed away; all things 

are become new"— lighted by the knowledge of God; 

for we have been "translated out of darkness into marvelous 

light." It is unnecessary to add that such 

transformed sinners should thenceforth follow Jesus as 

his disciples, seeking to walk in his steps. 

Another lesson might profitably be drawn from 
this narrative. Bartimeus was not a sinner, in the 
sense of being an alien, stranger, foreigner and outcast 
from the divine favor. He was a member of the household 
of faith, an Israelite, to whom belonged the promises 
and the covenants, etc. (Rom. 9:4); yet he was 
blind. And so there are today in spiritual Israel many 
who are not sinners, strangers, aliens from God, but 
members of the household of faith and heirs of the 
promises, who are mentally, spiritually, blind. They 
are blind to the goodness of God as it shines in the 
face of Jesus Christ our Lord: they do not appreciate 
the love of God, having been blinded thereto by false 
theories and traditions of men. Because of their blindness 
they are unable to "comprehend with all saints 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths and 
to know the love of Christ," as they should do. Perhaps 
some of them are accountable to some extent for 
their own blindness, and quite possibly others are in 
no measure responsible. 

We notice that in the case of Bartimeus Jesus did 
not inquire respecting his responsibility for his condition. 
It was sufficient that he realized that he was 
blind, and that he earnestly desired from the heart to 
receive his sight, and that he demonstrated this by his 
prayers and his efforts to obtain sight. So today, to 
those spiritual Israelites who are blind to the beauties 
and harmonies of the divine character and plan, if they 
are willing to admit their blindness, and so anxious 
for the light that they will cry aloud and not be dissuaded 
from their good desires, they will undoubtedly 
get the blessing they crave, the opening of their eyes 
of understanding, that they may be able to understand 
"the deep things of God."— 1 Cor. 2:10-12. 

We see many blind people of this latter sort today. 
Nearly all of the nominal churches are full of 
them. But alas! the vast majority are unlike Bartimeus 



—they do not realize their condition nor hunger 
and thirst for the light, nor come to the Master in the 
humble attitude necessary to receive it. Their pitiable 
condition is described by the Lord himself (Rev. 3:17) 
under the name Laodicea. He tells why they do not 
receive their sight— why they cannot comprehend the 
lengths and breadths and depths of divine love: "Because 
thou sayest, I am rich and increased in goods, 
and have need of nothing, and knowest not that thou 
art wretched and miserable and poor and blind and 
naked." 

As it was not within the power of the multitude 
to give Bartimeus his sight, neither is it within our 
power to give sight to the spiritually blind. All we 
can do is to let the blind ones know that Jesus of Nazareth 
passeth by— that the great Physician is able and 
willing to grant them the opening of the eyes of their 
understanding. Those who long for sight, who love 
the truth, who hate darkness and error, and none 
others, will be attracted by the information, and lift 
up their voices in supplication for assistance. But, 
alas! when they do cry aloud for help there are sure 
to be some, even amongst the Lord's friends, to rebuke 
them for their earnestness, instead of encouraging it. 
However, such oppositions only serve to demonstrate 
the amount of faith and the measure of love for the 
light, and the Lord evidently intends that only those 
who seek for truth "as men search for silver" shall find 
the knowledge of God.— Prov. 2:4. 

R2730 : page 351 

When the faith and earnestness of the seeker for 
light have been sufficiently demonstrated the Master 
will grant him the opportunities he desires. Nevertheless 
he will require that even in their blindness all 
shall manifest and exercise faith, and come to him 
through evil report as well as through good report, to 
receive the enlightenment sought. And when they 
obey thus they surely receive a good reward in their 
appreciation of the Lord's character and plan. From 
this new standpoint they can sing with the spirit and 
with the understanding also,— 

"How happy and blessed the hours, 
Since Jesus I always can see; 

Sweet prospects, sweet birds and sweet flowers 
Have all gained new sweetness for me." 
They will surely acknowledge that whatever their joys 
in the Lord previously they are multiplied by the 
opening of the eyes of their understanding. And is it 
surprising that such will follow the Lord? Nay, verily! 
How could we do otherwise than "show forth the 
praises of him who hath called us out of darkness into 
his marvelous light"?— 1 Pet. 2:9. 



R2730 : page 351 

ILL-GOTTEN WEALTH RESTORED. 

--LUKE 19:1-10.-DEC. 16.- 

"The Son of Man is come to seek 
and to save that which was lost." 

ZACCHAEUS was a Jew and a chief publican, 
which signifies that he was in the employ of 
the Roman government as a tax-gatherer, a very lucrative 
office, but one greatly despised amongst the Jews, 
because (1) their views of patriotism led them to resent 
the service of their conquerors; (2) their tax-gatherers 
collected for a per centage of the tax, and were at the 
same time assessors of the amount of the tax, and 
charged (probably generally with good reason), with 
gross violations of justice— taking advantage of their 
position and of the necessities of their neighbors to reap 
large usury by advancing them money for the tax and 
requiring superabundant security for both tax and 
usury. Publicans, then, it will be seen, were a disreputable 
class amongst their own people, esteemed as 
financially immoral, and unworthy the confidence and 
honor of faithful Jews. Zacchaeus as a "chief" probably 
employed under-collectors to assist him in his contract, 
and for this reason was designated chief publican. 

He had heard of Jesus evidently, and curiosity and 
possibly other nobler sentiments operated in his heart 
and led him to desire to see the great Teacher. Possibly 
indeed he had qualms of conscience respecting his business 
and business methods, and a longing for peace 
with God, which his riches could not take the place of. 
These nobler and better thoughts and aspirations were 
quickened as he found himself in the presence of the 
celebrated Nazarene, of whose holiness and exalted 
teachings he had heard. Quite probably, too, he had 
heard that, unlike the Pharisees, this great Teacher did 
not spurn publicans and sinners, but, on the contrary, 
treated them kindly. Zacchaeus sought a glimpse of 
the Master's face, but there being a throng in the way, 
and he being of small stature, could not discern him. 
There was a throng anyway at this season, going up to 
the Passover, and so notable a person as Jesus would 
always be an attraction. 

Zacchaeus soon resolved what to do, for he was a 
resourceful man; he would run ahead and climb into 
a tree, and thus get a good view of the Master. We 
cannot help admiring the courage of this little rich 
man, ordinarily probably dignified enough in his bearing, 
but now his heart swelling with feelings of interest 
in righteousness and a desire for reconciliation with 
God, and ran along like a boy and climbed the tree. 
When Jesus and the multitude came to the place the 



Lord addressed Zacchaeus by name, possibly by that 
power of knowledge which is beyond our comprehension; 
or possibly by reason of hearing the crowd jeer 
and laugh at the little rich publican in his lugubrious 
position. 

How astonished he must have been when the Master 
said, "Zacchaeus, come down, for I must lodge at 
thy house!" So great an honor as this Zacchaeus had 
not dreamed of, and the multitude of Jews were likewise 
surprised. The latter murmured against Jesus 
because he, as a holy man, should have nothing whatever 
to do with this publican. Perhaps it was in part 
to give the Pharisees a lesson, as well as to provide for 
his own entertainment or to put himself in the way of 
Zacchaeus, that our Lord proposed this visit to the 
publican's house. In any event, nothing could have 
pleased the serious thinking little man more. He came 
down from the tree immediately, and joyfully took Jesus 
(and the disciples also we may presume) to his 
home for entertainment. Thus does the Lord look for 
and care for and assist those who are of a contrite heart 
—those who are feeling after God, and longing, as prodigals, 
to return to the Father's house. Had Zacchaeus 
been of other condition of heart we may reasonably 
presume that our Lord would have paid no attention 
to him whatever. 

What a surging of sentiment took place in the 
heart of little Zacchaeus! His name in the Hebrew 
comes from a root signifying pure, and the inference is 
not unreasonable that his ancestors had been noble and 
holy people, and that back of his love for money and 
dishonest practices lay good principles, which now, 
under favorable conditions, were asserting themselves 
and clamoring for a change of life,— worrying his conscience 
and embittering all his pleasures and causing 

R2731 : page 352 

him to long for righteousness in his own heart and life. 

In no other way can we account for his sudden determination 

to reform. Nor was he content merely to determine 

upon reform in his heart; he would seal the 

matter by a public confession. As we read, he stood 

forth in the presence of his own family, in the presence 

of Jesus and his disciples, and probably numerous 

friends and neighbors who had gone along, and publicly 

acknowledged that he had gained part of his 

wealth by unjust exactions, and pledged himself to restore 

all such wrongfully obtained money, to the extent 

of his ability, fourfold. More than this, realizing that 

there were probably many cases of small injustices 

which it would be impossible for him to ever correct in 

detail, he publicly pledged one-half of all his possessions 

to the poor in off-set of these. 

Noble Zacchaeus! Well did his conduct show that 
the Master knew what he was doing when he went to 



lodge with this little man, so much despised by some 
of the Pharisees. Jesus knew that notwithstanding his 
wrong course of life he was much nearer to the right 
attitude of heart than some of the self-righteous who 
denounced him— altho outwardly they were living a 
cleaner life and a more moral one— making clean the 
outside of the cup while inwardly it was full of vile 
affections and selfishness, abominations in God's sight. 

Our Lord's reply is striking: "This day is salvation 
come to this house; forasmuch as he also is a son 
of Abraham." While it is true that "salvation is to be 
brought unto us at the revelation of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ"— at his second advent— it is nevertheless 
true also that this salvation begins in the present life 
to all who are of the spiritual house of Israel, who, repenting 
of their sins, come into harmony with the Lord, 
and seek to walk according to his ways. It is a salvation 
of the heart, reclaiming it from sin and selfishness 
and meanness— filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit." 
-2 Cor. 7:1. 

This salvation means reformation and transformation; 
and while the Lord can read the heart and see 
there more than men can see respecting the change, 
yet, as Brother D.L. Moody suggests, the change, the 
conversion, the transformation of life, must have been 
appreciable even by the most unsympathetic of Zacchaeus' 
neighbors when, the next morning after this event, 
Zacchaeus' servant presented himself to the neighbor 
with a purse of money, and when asked what it was 
for replied, "My master says that he extorted from you 
a sum of money years ago, and now returns it fourfold." 
The conversion that includes recompense— and 
that not merely in a skimped manner but abundantly 
—four-fold— undoubtedly signifies a true conversion, 
one that is not likely soon to be forgotten or ignored. 

We might find parallels to this incident, which 
belonged to the end of the Jewish age and to fleshly 
Israel, in the end of this age and to spiritual Israel. 
We find today some backsliders from the Lord's Covenant 
of Grace, as Zacchaeus was a backslider from the 
Lord's Covenant of the Law. We may perhaps find 
them living in a measure of sin, in business which they 
admit is unjust and in violation of their consciences. 
We are not, therefore, to pass by them with the Gospel 
message, the good tidings of great joy; but if any such 
manifest an interest in the present truth we are to seek 
to assist them as our Lord and Head assisted Zacchaeus. 
And there is an encouragement to this class in Zacchaeus' 
case, for tho they may feel themselves sadly short 
of the stature of a man in Christ, if they have in their 
hearts a longing desire for righteousness and to behold 
the Lord's face, they will find opportunity to do so, if 
they will but humble themselves to take the necessary 
steps. And sincere reformation today must be like 
that of Zacchaeus; it must make some outward manifestation 
expressive of contrition and of a desire to 



make reparation to the extent of ability. Some one 
has said, and quite truly, we think:— 

"No religious profession amounts to anything if it 
does not include a readiness to put one's property at 
the service of the Lord. It has been well said that 
'a personal consecration' should be spelled 'a purse-and-all 
consecration.' And the full restitution of all 
that had been taken wrongfully must be made by a 
Christian disciple— even to the stripping of himself of 
all his earthly goods." 



R2731 : page 352 

CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



We have a choice assortment of Scripture and Motto Text 
Cards of our own importation from London. Some are of dark 
red and dark green color, assorted shapes and sizes, embossed 
with silver lettering and with hanging cords; others on light 
tinted cards with flowers or other illumination, etc. The mottoes 
are too numerous to specify but all good. The prices range 
from five cents to twenty cents each: and these prices are considerably 
less than the usual. 

Another drawback has been the difficulty in preparing 
small quantities for mail, so as to prevent their getting damaged. 
We believe we can best surmount all these difficulties by putting 
them up in $1.00 packages as follows:— 

2 mottoes dark, 5c each 10 

2 " light, 5c " 10 

2 " dark, 10c " 20 

3 " " 20c" 60 

2 "To Us the Scriptures Teach" 10 

2 Text Easels, 2c each 04 

4 Text Cards 08 

Total 1.22 

Postage and packing free. 

We will put these up in four different 
-A,B,C,D,- 
assortments, so that persons ordering more than one package 
need not get duplicates except the fifth item. If you order 
more than one package and want variety, say so. 

Importing these ourselves and saving jobbers' profits and 
saving time, etc., by packing them in this way, we can afford to 
supply these bundles for the price named, one dollar. We 
would not offer them were we not sure that our readers will 
appreciate them and thank us for bringing them to their attention. 
The card marked above, "To Us the Scriptures Clearly 
Teach," is our own get up, of rose pink color printed in maroon 
ink, size 1 1x14 inches, with silk cord hanger. On one 
side is the statement which appears at top of page 2 of each 
WATCH TOWER in good sized type. It is a statement of Bible 
faith which none need feel ashamed of; and which should be 



seen in the homes of all WATCH TOWER readers. We have gotten 
out a large quantity and can therefore supply them very 
cheaply,— at five cents each (plus five cents for tube and postage). 
In lots of 20 for $1.00 postage free. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 


