Vol. XXXIX 


PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER 15, 1918 


No. 24 


WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
ANNUAL REPORT FOR FISCAL YEAR— 1918 

Although we cannot report as great activities in the pro- oate this; and the reports of the Pilgrim brethren agree with 

mulgation of the truth during the past year as in previous this. It is apparent that those classes which are /^-operating 

years, we are neither dismayed nor discouraged; and we do most heartily with the Society in its work are in the best 

not feel that any of the Lord's people have reason to be thus spiritual condition, and show a larger degree of spiritual growth. 

cast down. On the contrary, we are happy and are rejoicing in The evidences of divine favor upon our work are too 

the Lord. We rejoice in the privileges and opportunities which numerous and too positive to admit of the thought that the 

have been ours. We rejoice in the trials and hard experiences Lord is no longer recognizing or using the Watch Tower Biwhich
 have fallen to our lot. We remember the Apostle's ble & Tract Society, A few, taking this view of the matter, 

words that a "good soldier will endure hardness." (2 Timothy are not cooperating with us. It is not our mission to judge 

2:3) We rejoice yet more because we realize that in all these or condemn them; but it is our mission to continue our endeaexperiences
 and trials we are able to recognize the Lord's vor to strengthen the weak hands and confirm the feeble knees, 

hand, meting out to his faithul ones needed experiences, to and to say to them of a fearful heart: "Look up!" Instead 

teach them necessary lessons. of separating ourselves from the Lord's people and from the 

We rejoice still further because we have seen fulfilled work, we should heed the Apostle's exhortation not to neglect 

before our eyes the various things which "many prophets and to assemble ourselves together, but thus to do more and more 

righteous men" have foretold and have "desired to see" ful- as we see the day approaching. — Hebrews 10:25. 

filled, and which the "angels have desired to look into." (Mat- We remember that the service of the six messengers to the 

thew 13:17; 1 Peter 1:12) Again, we rejoice because we are church continued for long periods after they had finished their 

one year's march nearer to "Mount Zion, the city of the living earthly course. Undoubtedly this is true also of the work of 

God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company the seventh and last messenger. We are convinced that the 

of angels, to the general assembly and church of the first- Laodicean messenger will finish the Laodicean work, which we 

born, which are written in heaven, and to God, the Judge are aware is a judgment work upon all who profess the name 

of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to of Christ. The Apostle assures us that the judgment begins at 

Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant and to the blood the house of God (1 Peter 4:17) ; and it will not end until all 

of sprinkling, which speaketh better things than that of the "judgments written" are executed. The Psalmist tells us 

Abel." — Hebrews 12:18-24. that the honor of executing these judgments will be given to 

THE PBET MEMBERS OP CHRIST all the saints. (Psalm 149:5-9) The Seventh Messenger inIt
 is a grand privilege to be in this army which has terpreted this to include the living and the resurrected saints, 

been marching upward to Zion for nearly thirteen hundred WHAT THE WATCHES SEE 

years; and although we are in the rear guard of this great Surely the most interesting year of the harvest period 

army, we are not to assume that we are less necessary and our is the year just past. It is almost exciting to watch the 

work any less essential than those who have gone before. On the fulfilments of prophecy as they crowd one upon another, 

contrary, ours is a glorious part. Hear the prophet of the Lord, and to realize that we are witnessing the setting up of Mesin
 beautiful, poetic language, portray the part which these last siah's kingdom in the earth. Many wonderful events are 

faithful marchers have in the service ot their King: "How yet to occur ere this kingdom is fully set up; and so we look 

beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bring- forward to other and grander fulfillments of prophecy in the 

eth good tidings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth good year to come. We are indeed grateful for the share which our 

tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto heavenly Father has given us in. the work of the year just 

Zion, Thy God reigneth!" — Isaiah 52:7, 8. finished; and we gladly hold ourselves ready to do whatever 

Poor/ tired feet! Long have they marched! Long have he will permit us to do in the year to come, 

they waited for this home-coming! Long have they watched Below we append a brief summary of the year's work. For 

for the evidences that the kingdom is at hand ! And now, as several reasons it is not possible to report accurately on some 

they near their journey's end, the Watchers are rewarded with things; as for instance, the number of letters sent out will 

a vision of the glory of the King and his kingdom. The pro- exceed the number reported, because the new executive did 

phet describes their joy in these words: "Thy watchmen shall no t realize the necessity of keeping a record of the corresponlift
 up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing; for dence. Again, the number of Studies ix the Scriptures sold 

they shall see eye to eye when the Lord returns to Zion." include only those sold by Colporteurs, and not those sent out 

The burden of the song is: "Thy God reigneth!" to classes and individuals by our Shipping Department. It 

But there is a still further reason for rejoicing; namely, j 8 also impossible even to approximate the amount of volunteer 

that we continue to love these truths and this work, and that work done. On the other hand, the friends seem to have apprethe
 Lord continues to count us worthy of his favor and to give ciated the convention privileges to a wonderful degree. Over 

us a part in the singing of this glad song. How grateful we forty conventions of a general character have been held during 

ought to be for these privileges! the year, besides probably as many more of a local character. 

The unparalleled conditions in the world during the past Glowing reports have been received from all these conventions, 

year have greatly curtailed our work, especially for the pub- Formerly all conventions were held during the late summer 

lie; and we suggest that possibly this may be the fulfillment or the early fall; but now every month in the year has its 

of our Lord's words in John 9:4: "The night cometh when conventions. Several large conventions are announced for the 

no man can work"; and that this text may have no reference near future. The annual report follows: 

to the work of comforting and encouraging one another, a CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 

work which is still possible for all to do. Letters received 130,754 

VARIED EXPERIENCES A BUBSSlNa Letters sent out 100,000 

We should remember, however, that ours is not the only ^ GOIdPORTETTR DEPARTMENT 

work which has been curtailed; for many other business and Colporteurs in active service 225 

religious enterprises have been thus affected. We believe that Output of Scripture Studies 275,000 

this was all of divine arrangement, and therefore we have no , . PILGRIM DEPARTMENT 

complaint to make. We are glad to submit to what our heaven- Pilgrims in the service 101 

Jy Father permits; for, while our public activities have been Cltie ? &"<* towns visited 7,809 

much restricted, we believe that the Lord permitted this re- Public meetings held . * 2,131 

straint in order that we might have more time for study and Tota } attendance at puMjc meetings ,' ,X 

for learning lessons which we could not otherwise learn. The Semi-public meetings held 3,110 

Lord gives his people a variety of experiences so that they may Total attendance at semi-public meetings . . . 291,341 

learn to "stand" in them all. As the eagle stirs up the nest Parlor meetings held ^ ™>™ 

and pushes the young eaglets out so that they may learn to T <? tal attendance at parlor meetings 300,687 

fly, and then lends assistance by swooping beneath ' them and Miles traveled . .^ 784,295 

bearing them aloft again, so the Lord gives his children cer- Grand total meetings held 16,089 

tain experience until they become accustomed to these condi- Grand total attendance 949,444 

tions, measurably at ea.se, and then he forces them into other FINANCIAL REPORT 

and harder experiences, for their strengthening, for their good. Cash on hand, Nov. 1, 1917 $ 28,927.05 

And without these experiences we could never be properly fitted Donations to the Tract Fund 203,581.49 

for the kingdom work. — Deuteronomy 32 : 11-13. Pilgrim Service $43,586.90 

We are sure that the varied experiences of the past year Foreign Branches 36,470.19 

have been a blessing to those rightly exercised thereby. Num- Free Literature 49,782.19 

erous letters coming in to the correspondence department indi- Literature in storage 65,578.93 