Questions From Readers
● In view of what is said in the book “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules! are we to understand that the “great tribulation” spoken of at Matthew 24:21, 22 refers only to what happens at Armageddon?
On pages 629 and 630 of the book “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules! it states: “As the seven-headed, ten-horned wild beast and the false prophet are symbols, they are dealt with separately from the ‘kings of the earth and their armies.’ When those symbolic things are burned up, all world unity in political organization and all political alliances will break down before the victorious Rider on the white horse. There will be wild confusion and disorganization, as other prophecies foretell. Jesus Christ when on earth foretold it, saying: ‘There will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again. In fact, unless those days were cut short, no flesh would be saved; but on account of the chosen ones [the remnant of the 144,000 yet on earth] those days will be cut short.’”
In these paragraphs the book is discussing only the final part of the “great tribulation.” This is not intended to imply that the “great tribulation” occurs only at Armageddon. No, for in the next paragraph on page 630 it states: “At Har–Magedon, where the height of that ‘great tribulation’ is reached, the kings and their armies and those having the mark of the ‘wild beast’ will all be ‘killed off’ in execution of the death sentence that proceeds out of the mouth of the victorious King of kings like a ‘long sword.’”
Note that expression, “the height of that ‘great tribulation,’” in reference to Armageddon. So the paragraphs show that, while they are dealing with the last part of the “great tribulation,” they do not exclude the fact that there was another part before Armageddon.
Therefore, this is not a new thought on Matthew 24:21, 22, confining its application only to Armageddon. It has a twofold application, first to the tribulation Jehovah brought upon Satan and his organization when Jehovah’s Son Christ Jesus warred against Satan and his demons in heaven beginning in 1914. That tribulation against Satan and his organization was halted in 1918 to allow the gathering out of Jehovah’s anointed remnant. The second application, the one the book referred to, is the resuming of the “great tribulation” against Satan and his organization at Armageddon.

