VOL. XXIII. FEBRUARY 1, 1902. No. 3. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 35 

A Gloomy Outlook 35 

"Church Peril— Ground Being Lost" 35 

Water Again Flows in Siloam 35 

Zionism's Prospects as Seen 
by the N.Y. Tribune 35 

Zionism from a Literary Jew's 

Standpoint 36 

God's Message on Peace 36 

The Word of God our Spiritual Food 37 

Persecution Rightly Received 38 

Decision in Character Building 41 

Deacon Stephen, Christian Martyr 43 

page 34 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



ZION'S GLAD SONGS, 5 CENTS-POST-PAID. 



We have arranged for a new edition of Zion's Glad Songs, 
and propose to supply them at 5 cents per copy— post paid. 



HAVE YOU RESPONDED FOR 1902? 

We revise our memoranda for "Pilgrim" service yearly, now, 
as we find that a year is apt to make many changes in conditions. 
Do not blame us if you are passed by, if your Secretary 
has made no request for Pilgrim Visits. 

We find that some of the friends have refrained from requesting 
"Pilgrim" visits because they supposed they would 
be expected to contribute for his railway fare and also for his 
support. This is a mistake: the services of the preaching 
"Pilgrims" laboring under the auspices of the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY are absolutely without charge;-nor do 
they take up any collections. The Society pays their railway 
and all other expenses out of its funds, which are all voluntary 
donations, from such as are able and anxious to serve thus. 

All we ask of the friends visited is that they provide a 
parlor, hall, school-house or church building for the meetings 
and that they board and lodge the "Pilgrim" during the two 
or three days of his visit. We attend to all else. 

RENEW REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM-SERVICE, 1902. 

The Pilgrim routes are made out months ahead; so it is too 
late to write us, as some do, when they learn from last page 
that a Pilgrim is coming to their vicinity. If you desire visits 
write us a Postal Card (or on a card of that size) answering the 
following questions: (a) Have you regular meetings now? 
(b) How many usually attend? (c) Who are the chosen leaders 
of the class? (d) Did the class vote its desire for Pilgrim 
visits? (e) Are you able and willing to secure a suitable room 
for private meetings? (f) Could you arrange also for one public 
meeting? and what number could probably be gathered? 
(g) Where are your meetings held and at what hours? 

You can answer briefly, thus: (a) Yes. (b) 14. (c) John 
Smith and Amos Brown, (d) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) Yes: 100 to 300. 
(g) Bro. Jones' No. 614 First street, at 3 p.m. every Sunday. 

When you see a notice of a "Pilgrim Visit" near you and 
do not know the meeting address, enquire of us by Postal card 
immediately. Those arranging for "Pilgrim meetings" will 
please notify us early respecting their arrangements. If off the 
railroad, name nearest station and further conveyance. 



R2946 : page 35 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
A GLOOMY OUTLOOK. 



President Eliot, of Harvard University, takes a 
rather gloomy view of the future outlook. He says 
that "churches, courts and legislatures command 
less respect and have less influence now than thirty 



years ago." He thinks the church has degenerated 
into poetic generalities or to ritualistic pomp. He 
notes in the judiciary a decline in personal merit and 
in public estimation. "Legislative bodies," says the 
president of Harvard, "have fallen into popular contempt." 
But, gloomy as all this is, he does not despair 
of his country. While the years have been laying 
successive layers of black paint on the religious 
bodies, on the judges of our courts, and on the lawmakers, 
there is still one ray of light shining through 
the gloom. For meanwhile, the school has become 
more powerful, "and education is the one agency for 
promoting intelligence and righteousness which has 
gained strength in the last half century." 

"CHURCH PERIL-GROUND BEING LOST." 



Dr. George C. Lorimer, the noted Boston preacher, 
now pastor of the Madison Avenue Baptist Church, 
says the Protestant Church is in peril; that the dangers 
are from within, not without; that the church is losing 
hold on intelligent thought. In his Sunday sermon he 
said: 

"Every now and then certain things are said which 
betray an uneasy feeling as to the future stability and 
supremacy of Protestantism. 

"But whatever may be said of the gloomy outlook, 
it is not due, as many suppose, to the hostility of Romanism. 
The Papacy has its own troubles. 

"The present perils of our faith are not primarily 
from without. They are from within, and they are 
similar to those which endangered the standing and 
usefulness of the Galatian Church. 

"Romanism is dogmatic. She has come to the 
front as the champion of the Bible against the destructive 
critics, and as the defender of the sacred mysteries 
against the naturalism of the rationalists, while we have 
fallen into the cheap and idle fashion of decrying 
doctrine; and we fail to see that as we drift from the 
theologia sacra we are losing our hold on intelligent 
thought. 

"An additional peril springs from the present 
spirit of Protestantism. The peril is that genuine 
Christians may desire to make their churches centres 
of social influence rather than sources of regenerating 
power. Protestantism today suffers from worldliness. 

"Diminished congregations and depleted treasuries 
are other danger signs."— N.Y. Journal. 

WATER AGAIN FLOWS IN THE POOL OF SILO AM. 



"For over ten years the Pool of Siloam has been 



only a name. Visitors to Palestine who have seen 

this historic spot of late years have found that its 

healing waters have vanished. Just recently the waters 

of Siloam have been made to flow once again, 

and there has been great rejoicing in the Holy Land. 

It appears that Jerusalem has been especially short 

of water of late, and it occurred to some of the inhabitants 

of Siloam to try to find out whether the spring 

which used to supply the pool was really dry. Tons 

of accumulated rubbish were cleared away, and after 

about a month's work the spring was found. The excavators 

discovered behind some fallen rocks an old 

aqueduct running into the valley of the Chadron, 

and into this aqueduct the beautiful, cool, clear water 

had run and been wasting for years." 

ZIONISM'S PROSPECTS AS SEEN BY THE N.Y. TRIBUNE. 



"Has the Zionist movement any prospect of attaining 
its end? 

"Very little. It looks as though the scornful indifference 
of the intellectual and wealthy among the 
Jews were sufficient to promptly dissipate their co-religionists' 
dream of returning to the promised 
land. The latter, to be sure, have in their favor the 
greater number and faith, but against these are arrayed 
the rationalists, for whom the true Messiah is 

R2946 : page 36 

the French Revolution that brought them emancipation; 
the prudence of the rabbis, proclaiming that 
henceforth the Jews have no other country but that 
of their birth (declaration of the grand rabbis of 
France, England, Austria, Hungary, at the Congress 
of Basle, 1897); the money dealers, without whom 
nothing can be done, and who are not willing to exchange 
their banks, their industries, their palaces, for 
the barren and poor soil of Palestine; the politicians, 
for whom the integrity of the Ottoman Empire has 
become a dogma, and who would not permit a Jewish 
state to rise in the midst of the Sultan's Asiatic 
dominions. All these powers of the modern world, 
rationalism, wealth, politics, are barring the way of 
those simple minded, pious souls who persist in striving 
for a redemption of Israel, who dream of a 
temple other than the Exchange and who long for 
the promised land with all the ardor of the Jews of 
the Babylonian captivity." 



Just so! Worldly wisdom fails to discern some 
matters even while they are transpiring. The Watch 



Tower and Dawns pointed out the present Zionist 

movement from God's Word long before its founders 

thought of it. Ever since 1878, when Israel's 

"double" of chastisement expired, the land has been 

preparing for the people and the people for the land. 

In God's due time, and that soon, they will come together. 

Meantime persecutions in various lands are 

the prods, the "staff" of their Shepherd, to awaken 

them and direct their hearts toward the promises of 

which they are heirs.— Rom. 11:26-29. 

ZIONISM FROM A LITERARY JEW'S STANDPOINT. 



To the Editor N.Y. Journal: 
I am not a prophet, but it certainly seems to me 
that without the Zionistic movement, and without 
persecution from without, isolated Jewish communities 
have no sufficient seeds of permanence in a world 
whose civilization is already built up on Old Testament 
lines. Unfortunately, persecution is still unfailing, 
especially in Russia and Roumania, and fortunately 
Zionism is making great strides. Nineteen 
hundred and one will be memorable as the year in 
which the ruler of Palestine— the Sultan of Turkey 
—received Dr. Herzl, and will end characteristically 
with the fifth Zionistic congress. Every congress 
shows an augmentation in enthusiasm and in the prospects 
of what seemed five years ago to be the mad 
vision of a dreamer of the Ghetto. In striking the racial 
chord Dr. Herzl has struck the chord which rings 
truest, and there is no doubt the brotherhood of 
Israel contains the elements of a political force. When 
even America is beginning to exclude Jewish emigrants, 
there will be no place left for the sole of their 
foot but Palestine, and thus forces external and internal 
are beginning to coincide and work together 
for good— the evil force of persecution, the righteous 
force of Zionism. Faithfully yours,— I. ZANGWILL. 



R2946 : page 36 

GOD'S MESSAGE ON PEACE 



Psa. 34:14. "Depart from evil and do good; seek 
peace and pursue it." 

Heb. 12:14. "Follow peace with all men and holiness 
without which no man shall see the Lord." 

Rom. 14:17. "The kingdom of God is not meat 
and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the 
Holy Spirit." 



Rom. 14:19. "Follow after the things which 
make for peace and things wherewith one may edify 
another." 

Rom. 12:18. "Live peaceably with all men." 

I Cor. 14:33. "God is not the author of confusion, 
but of peace." 

I Cor. 7:15. "God has called us to peace." 

I Tim. 2:2. "Lead a quiet and peaceable life in 
all godliness and honesty." 

Jas. 3:17. "The wisdom that is from above is first 
pure then peaceable." 

Isa. 26:3. "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, 
whose mind is stayed on thee." 

Prov. 16:7. "When a man's ways please the 
Lord, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with 
him." 

1 Thes. 5:13. "Be at peace among yourselves." 

2 Cor. 13:11. "Be of one mind, live in peace and 
the God of love and peace shall be with you." 

Mark 9:50. "Have peace one with another." 

Job 22:21. "Acquaint now thyself with God and 
be at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee." 

Jas. 3:18. "The fruit of righteousness is sown in 
peace of them that make peace." 

2 Tim. 2:22. "Follow righteousness, faith, charity, 
peace with them that call on the Lord out of a 
pure heart." 

Col. 3:15. "Let the peace of God rule in your 
hearts, to the which also ye are called in one body." 

Eph. 4:3. "Keep the unity of the Spirit in the 
bond of peace." 

Rom. 10:15. "Preach the gospel of peace." 

Rom. 8:6. "To be spiritually minded is life and 
peace." 

Zech. 8:19. "Love the truth and peace." 

Prov. 12:20. "Deceit is in the heart of them that 
imagine evil: but to the counsellors of peace is joy." 

Psa. 119:165. "Great peace have they which love 
thy law, and nothing shall offend them." 

Psa. 37:37. "Mark the perfect man and behold 
the upright: for the end of that man is peace." 

Psa. 37: 11. "The meek shall inherit the earth; 
and shall delight themselves in abundance of peace." 

2 Peter 3:13,14. "We, according to his promise, 
look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness; wherefore, beloved, seeing 
that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may 
be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.' 

Rom. 14:18. "He that in these things serveth 
Christ is acceptable to God and approved of men." 



R2949 : page 37 

THE WORD OF GOD OUR SPIRITUAL FOOD. 



BY ARCHBISHOP LEIGHTON (ABOUT A.D., 1675). 

THIS IS THE END of the ministry, that you 

may be brought unto Christ, that you may 

be led to the sweet pastures and pleasant 

streams of the gospel; that you may be spiritually fed, 

and may grow in that heavenly life, which is here begun 

in all those in whom it shall hereafter be 

perfected. 

As the milk that infants draw from the breast, 
is most connatural food to them, being of that same 
substance that nourished them in the womb: so when 
they are brought forth, that food follows them as it 
were for their supply in that way that is provided in 
nature for it; by certain veins it ascends into the 
breasts, and is there fitted for them, and they are by 
nature directed to find it there. Thus as a Christian 
begins to live by the power of the Word, he is by the 
nature of that spiritual life directed to that same 
Word as his nourishment. 

Whereas natural men cannot love spiritual things 
for themselves, desire not the Word for its own sweetness, 
but would have it sauced with such conceits as 
possibly spoil the simplicity of it; or at the best love 
to hear it for the wit, and learning, which, without 
any wrongful mixture of it, they find in one delivering 
it more than another. But the natural and genuine 
appetite of the children of God, is to the Word, for 
itself, and only as milk, "sincere milk;" and where 
they find it so, from whomsoever, or in what way 
soever delivered unto them, they feed upon it with 
delight. 

Desire the Word, not that you may only hear it; 
that is to fall very far short of its true end; yea, it is 
to take the beginning of the work for the end of it. 
The ear is indeed the mouth of the mind, by which it 
receives the Word (as Elihu compares it, Job 34:3), 
but meat that goes no further than the mouth (you 
know) cannot nourish. Neither ought this desire 
of the Word to be only to satisfy a custom; it were an 
exceeding folly to make so superficial a thing the end 
of so serious a work. 

Again, to hear it only to stop the mouth of conscience, 
that it may not clamor more for the gross impiety 
of contemning it; this is to hear it not out of 
desire, but out of fear. To desire it only for some 
present pleasure and delight that a man may find in 
it, is not the due use and end of it; that there is delight 
in it, may help commend it to those that find it 
so, and so be a means to advance the end; but the 
end it is not. 

To seek no more but a present delight that vanisheth 
with the sound of the words, that die in the air, 
is not to desire the Word as meat, but as music, as 
God tells the prophet Ezekiel of his people. "And 



lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one 
that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well upon an 
instrument; for they hear thy words, and they do 
them not." 

To desire the Word for the increase of knowledge, 
although this is necessary and commendable, 
and being rightly qualified, is a part of spiritual accretion, 
yet take it as going no further, it is not the 
true end of the Word. Nor is the venting of that 
knowledge in speech and frequent discourse of the 
Word and the divine truths that are in it; which, 
where it is governed with Christian prudence, is not 
to be despised, but commended: yet certainly the 
highest knowledge, and the most frequent and skilful 
speaking of the Word, severed from the growth here 
mentioned, misses the true end of the word. If any 
one's head or tongue should grow apace, and all the 
rest stay at a stand, it would certainly make him a 
monster; and they are no other, that are knowing and 
discoursing Christians, and grow daily in that, but 
not at all in holiness of heart and life, which is the 
proper growth of the children of God. 

And as we ought in preaching, so you in hearing, 
to propound this end to yourselves, that you may 
be spiritually refreshed, and walk in the strength of 
that divine nourishment. Is this your purpose when 
you come hither? Inquire of your own hearts, and 
see what you seek, and what you find, in the public 
ordinances of God's house. Certainly the most do 
not so much as think on the due intendment of them, 
aim at no end, and therefore can attain none; seek 
nothing; but sit out their hour, asleep or awake, as 
it may happen, or, possibly, some seek to be delighted 
for the time, as the Lord tells the prophet, "to hear 
as it were a pleasant song;" if the gifts and strain of 
the speaker be anything pleasing. 

Or, it may be, they want to gain some new notions, 
to add somewhat to their stock of knowledge, 
either that they may be enabled for discourse, or, 
simply, that they may know. Some, it may be, go a 
little further: they like to be stirred and moved for 
the time, and to have some touch of good affection 
kindled in them; but this lasts but for a while, till 
their other thoughts and affairs get in, and smother 
and quench it; and they are not careful to blow it up 
and improve it. How many, when they have been a 
little affected with the Word, go out and fall into 
other discourses and thoughts, and either take in their 
affairs secretly, as it were, under their cloak, and their 
hearts keep a conference with them; or if they forbear 
this, yet, as soon as they go out, plunge themselves 
over head and ears in the world, and lose all which 
might have any way advantaged their spiritual condition. 
It may be, one will say, "It was a good sermon." 
Is that to the purpose? But what think you 
it hath for your praise or dispraise? Instead of saying 



"Oh! how well was that spoken," you should say, 
"Oh! how hard is repentance! how sweet a thing is 
faith! how excellent the love of Jesus Christ!" That 
were your best and most real commendation of the 
sermon, with true benefit to yourselves. 

How sounds it to many of us at least, but as a 
well contrived story, whose use is to amuse us, and 
possibly delight us a little, and there is an end?— and 
indeed no end, for this turns the most serious and 
most glorious of all messages into an empty sound. 
If we keep awake, and give it a hearing, it is much; 
but for anything further, how few deeply beforehand 
consider, 'I have a dead heart; therefore will I go unto 
the Word of life, that it may be quickened; it is frozen, 
I will go and lay it before the warm beams of that 
sun that shines in the gospel: my corruptions are 
mighty and strong, and grace, if there be any in my 
heart, is exceeding weak: but there is in the gospel a 
power to weaken and kill sin, and to strengthen grace: 

R2949 : page 38 

and this being the intent of my wise God in appointing 
it, it shall be my desire and purpose in resorting 
to it, to find it to me according to his gracious intendment; 
to have faith in my Christ, the fountain of my 
life, more strengthened, and made more active in 
drawing from him; to have my heart more refined and 
spiritualized, and to have the sluice of repentance 
opened, and my affections to divine things enlarged; 
more hatred of sin, and more love of God and Communion 
with him. 



R2947 : page 38 

PERSECUTION RIGHTLY RECEIVED. 

-ACTS 5:33-42-FEB. 16.- 

"Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' 
sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven."— Matt. 5:10. 



WE SAW, in a previous lesson, Peter and John 
before the Sanhedrin, and the subsequent 
growth of the Church in numbers and in the 
graces of the holy spirit, including joy and peace with 
God and with each other and with fellow-men. The 
Lord's blessing upon the apostles, through the gifts of 
the holy spirit, enabled them to heal the sick, and at 
the same time to declare that the work was done by 
the power of Jesus, whom the rulers had crucified; but 
whom God had raised from the dead, and who was 



now in heavenly glory, a prince, a Savior, a glorified 
High Priest, ready and willing to grant forgiveness 
of sins and the blessing of the holy spirit to those who 
would accept. 

For a time the chief priests and their associates in 
religious power, ignored the new movement and the fact 
that it reflected against them; but by and by they were 
aroused, and used the power at their hand for the arrest 
of the apostles; at the command of the chief ones 
the latter were put into prison. The account says 
they had "indignation"— margin, "envy." Thus the 
truth, in whatever way presented, has either a savor 
of life unto life, or of death unto death, according 
to the heart-conditions of those coming under its 
influence. In the present case the simplicity of the 
apostles, their earnestness in presenting their message, 
their power and kindness in respect to the healing of 
disease and casting out of devils, and their evident sincerity, 
had a right influence upon all "Israelites 
indeed;" but the formal, perfunctory Israelites, in 
favored positions of honor and affluence, were provoked 
to hatred and envy; envy because of a power 
over the people which they could not exercise; hatred, 
because of a feeling that these teachings were assailing 
and weakening their influence, and tending to break 
down the religious system which they represented. 

So, too, we see matters to-day in nominal spiritual 
Israel. The spirit of sectarianism is jealous and envious, 
and resents and opposes whatever is not in accord 
with it;— fearful of its own fall,— realizing continually 
the weakness of its own position. On the contrary, 
now as ever, the truth, presented in simplicity 
and under the guidance of the holy spirit, will appeal 
to all who are in a right attitude of heart, all Israelites 
indeed, all whose eyes of understanding are open to 
see the inconsistencies of sectarianism and formalism. 
Sectarian leaders in our day have not the power to imprison 
those toward whom they feel enmity; nevertheless, 
having the same spirit as their prototypes, they 
manifest it to the extent of their ability. For instance; 
during the "Volunteer" service in Allegheny 
—in which brethren and sisters quietly and pleasantly 
tendered tracts and booklets free to Christian people 
on Sunday— some of the modern Pharisees and Sadducees 
were envious, and manifested their envy as 
nearly as possible after the manner described in our 
lesson. Some of the preachers commanded their congregations 
not to take the pamphlets, and heaped abuse 
and scandalous epithets upon God's faithful children, 
whose only object in the matter was to serve his cause, 
and to feed his flock. A committee of preachers 
waited upon the city officials and endeavored to have 
their cooperation— to secure the arrest and imprisonment 
of the brethren and sisters unless they would 
cease to preach this "gospel of the Kingdom," and let 
them alone to continue their blinding and deceiving 



of the Lord's flock. They perceive that the truth is 
against them; against their positions; against their 
false theologies. They perceive that the truth has 
Scriptural support, which they cannot answer; and they 
fear lest it should "turn the world upside down," and 
that, in the melee, they would lose some of their dignity, 
honor of men and good salaries. As one of them declared, 
"My bread is not buttered on that side!" 

The city officials, desirous of being on good terms 
with influential citizens, called at our office, rehearsed 
the facts, and notified us to discontinue the work. We 
replied that we are living in the United States, and not 
in Russia; and that there is no law here yet, against 
giving men booklets, any more than against giving 
them bank-bills, if they desire to take them, and if the 
procedure is conducted in a quiet, orderly manner. We 
assured them that if there were any breaches of the 
peace they would not come from the distributors, and 
explained further that those who engaged in this Volunteer 
service were as truly preaching the gospel by 
the printed page as were those who taught orally inside 
the church buildings; and further, that the real objection 
was, that our friends were circulating the true 
gospel, "good tidings of great joy which shall be unto 
all people," while those inside the churches were deceiving 
their confiding flocks, misrepresenting God's 
character and plan, and withal reaping goodly rewards 
for their evil services;— whereas our friends, the Volunteers, 
were preaching the true gospel without money 
and without price;— seeking to educate the people in 
a knowledge of God and of his plan, as revealed in the 
Scriptures. The civil authorities readily saw the justice 
of our position, and there was no interference. Is 
not this a case of the blind seeing better than those 
who boast of having escaped from blindness? 

The Lord's power was wonderfully manifested in 
the early days, not only in the healing of the sick, but 
afterwards in the deliverance of the apostles from imprisonment. 
The angel of the Lord opened the prison 
doors and brought them forth; instructing them to 
proceed in the proclamation of the truth as before. 
The apostles and early Church at this time almost 

R2947 : page 39 

walked by sight; for, under such conditions, faith 
would be very secondary. However, we see that 
the object of this was the establishment of the Church 
upon broad, sure foundations. Subsequently the 
miraculous features were withdrawn, and are still 
withdrawn: frequently the Lord's people have been 
imprisoned and otherwise mistreated throughout the 
age, without any special physical deliverance,— even 
as the miraculous gift of healing also passed away. 
We walk by faith, not by sight; we can see the spiritual 
healings and casting out of evil spirits progress, 



but are not granted physical demonstrations; and if imprisoned 
or otherwise despitefully used, our consolations 
must be those of the heart, grasped by the arms 
of our faith. 

The next morning, on the assembling of the Sanhedrin 
(also termed the Senate), when it was found 
that the apostles were not in the prison, but boldly 
teaching as before in the Temple, the chief priests 
found matters more complicated; and fearing the 
influence of such miracles upon the minds of the 
people, they caused the next arrest of the apostles to be 
made with great leniency, bringing them before the 
Sanhedrin. Thus another opportunity was afforded 
God's servants to testify, and to the chief priests and 
rulers to hear a strictly gospel sermon; and the 
speaker failed not to impress the same points as on 
previous occasions. What an opportunity this would 
have been for honest men, Israelites indeed! What a 
blessing it might have brought them! But being in an 
evil condition of heart they were merely angered, embittered, 
"cut to the heart." 

Their words betray the source of their fear, when 
they said to the apostles. We have already forbidden 
you to teach the people, but instead of obeying us you 
have "filled Jerusalem with your doctrines" (teachings), 
and you evidently intend to bring upon us the 

R2948 : page 39 

ill-will of those who receive your teachings, by charging 
us with the blood of this Jesus. They feared not 
only for the safety of their sectarian systems, but they 
had a personal fear as well. And so we believe it is 
with the chief priests, scribes and Pharisees of to-day; 
they feel not only a necessity for supporting their various 
denominational structures, but, additionally, they 
realize that their personal standing is at stake. In 
proportion as what we present as the truth is accepted 
by the people, the ministers of the nominal churches 
are seen to be false teachers, false prophets, deceivers, 
who ignorantly or wilfully have woefully misrepresented 
the divine character and plan. 

However, if the chief priests, etc., had only understood 
matters better they would not have been so 
alarmed. They would have realized that the apostles 
and their teachings would influence only a comparatively 
small number;— that the large majority of Israelites 
were such only in name; drawing nigh to God 
in outward forms and lip service, but far from him in 
heart. The same is true to-day. The preachers of Babylon 
need have little fear that the true gospel will affect 
the majority of their hearers in the least. On the contrary, 
now, as at the first advent, only such as "have 
an ear to hear" will hear, can hear: the remainder will 
continue under the leading of their blind guides, until, 
by and by, both shall fall into the ditch of general doubt 



and unbelief here, as their prototypes did in the 
trouble which closed the Jewish age. Subsequent 
events proved that, altho' the apostles filled Jerusalem 
with their doctrine (teachings), a comparatively small 
number were ready and able and willing to receive the 
good messages, as the Apostle and the Prophet declare. 
-Isa. 10:22; Rom. 9:27. 

Gamaliel was a great teacher amongst the Jews. 
It will be remembered that the Apostle Paul, as Saul of 
Tarsus, was one of his pupils. Gamaliel was a member 
of the Sanhedrin, and present on the occasion of 
this trial, and his wise counsel turned aside the murderous 
intentions of the chief priests toward the apostles. 
His wise and moderate language draws our esteem, 
and it swayed fully those who heard him say,— 
"Refrain from these men and let them alone; for if 
this counsel or this work be of men it will come to 
nought; but if it be of God ye cannot overthrow it, 
lest haply ye be found even to be fighting against 
God." We must esteem these words as merely worldly 
wisdom, and their author not as an Israelite indeed, 
but simply prudent and, possibly, a just man. So to-day, 
we find men in the councils of the nominal church 
and in the civil councils who are broad-minded, wise 
and liberally disposed. This does not mean, however, 
that these, any more than Gamaliel, are Israelites, indeed. 
They are noble-minded, and should have our 
respect accordingly; but we are not to be surprised if 
we find that they do not accept the truth, and that they 
are not of the "little flock." We are to remember, on the 
contrary, the inspired word— that not many great or 
wise or mighty hath God chosen, but "chiefly the poor 
of this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom." 
(I Cor. 1:26-29; Jas. 2:5.) We would like to 
press this point, because we have found at times that 
some of the Lord's people who have received the truth 
themselves are more or less stumbled by the fact that 
they see good, honorable, noble people who seem 
to have no ear to hear the truth, and no heart to accept 
discipleship amongst the Lord's people under the terms 
of his discipleship— full consecration, even unto death. 
The number of wise, learned people who are willing to 
become fools, in the estimation of men, for Christ's 
sake, is exceedingly small now, as ever. 

The Sanhedrin warned the apostles to preach no 
more in this name,— the name of Jesus— and sentenced 
them to be whipped. Thus they would discredit the 
ministers of the new teaching in the eyes of the many, 
for then, as now, the majority of people were disposed to 
look to their leaders, and to accept their judgment as 
superior. It is well indeed that wise, true leaders 
should be appreciated and acknowledged and followed; 
but it is a lesson that all need to learn, that the 
Lord is the real leader and commander of all those 
who claim to be his people; and that while looking to 
leaders of ability for guidance and for help, all of the 



Lord's people need to look beyond the leader also to 
the Lord; and to have their senses exercised in respect 
to the righteousness, the justice, the truthfulness, of 
the advice and example of their leaders. 

REJOICING IN TRIBULATION. 

As the apostles departed, at liberty, altho' sore 
from the thirteen strokes of a three-tailed whip ("forty 
stripes save one") they doubtless remembered our 

R2948 : page 40 

Lord's words, "Blessed are ye, when men shall revile 
you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil 
against you falsely for my sake." So far from being 
cast down, their experience, because rightly received, 
made them stronger in the Lord. They went again 
before the people to teach, but in no wrong attitude. 
They did not threaten the scribes and Pharisees, reviling 
them as corrupt, etc., nor did they bemoan their 
fate, thinking it strange that the Lord should permit 
these fiery trials to come upon them. No; they were 
true soldiers of the cross; they knew that they had enlisted 
in the Lord's army for service, and not merely 
for dress parade. They realized that present lessons 
and experiences were under providential guidance, and 
would work out for their good. They suffered pain— 
we are not to suppose that a miracle was performed 
to hinder their feeling the lashes, else there would 
have been no merit in endurance;— but their faith so 
firmly grasped the situation, and the Lord's word of 
promise, that we read, "They rejoiced that they were 
counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name." 
The world is full of grumblers, and with good 
cause often; as the Apostle remarks, "The whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth together." But as he 
also declares, "We, who have the first-fruits of the 
spirit, groan within ourselves." The Lord's people 
are not to parade their difficulties, bemoaning their 
lot; on the contrary, they have the throne of grace, 
and the instructions of the Word of God teaching them 
why present evil conditions are permitted at all; and 
how and when and why the time is nearing in which all 
tears will be wiped off all faces, and there shall be no 
more sighing and crying and dying. Instead therefore 
of groaning before the world they should rejoice and 
show forth the praises of him who has called us out 
of darkness into his marvelous light. Our sympathy 
for the poor world without these advantages should 
so bestir us to tell them the gospel, that our own woes 
would be smothered;— partially forgotten. And if 
faithfulness to the Lord and his truth brings us extra 
hardships, as it did to the apostles, this, also, is a 
cause for rejoicing as it was with them. The Master 
instructed us that we should first have sat down 



and counted the cost of discipleship, so that thereafter 

none of the things coming to us as his disciples would 

move us. True, we may all have in our natural dispositions 

a tendency to repine, to grumble, to bemoan 

afflictions which come to us, even in the service of 

the truth; but as we become more and more developed 

in the heavenly character the Lord surely will expect 

of us that we shall gradually attain more and more 

to that standard which he sets for us; in which the 

trials and difficulties of the present will be more than 

offset, more than over-balanced by his gracious promises, 

and by the witness of his spirit, that all these 

things are working together for good to us,— working 

out for us the greater glory by preparing us therefor. 

The developed Christian will surely find himself counting 

present trials and difficulties, even tho' severe to 

the natural man, to be but "light afflictions, not worthy 

to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed 

in us." 

The record is that the apostles so rejoiced that the 
threatenings of the Sanhedrin were powerless to stop 
them from declaring the good tidings— they preached 
not only in the Temple, but in their homes,— wherever 
they had opportunity. And so it must be with the 
same message in all those who receive it now, as well 
as then. They do not need to be "called" by a large 
salary to the ministry of the truth; but without any 
salaries, and even with the wages of tribulation, stripes 
and imprisonment, they rejoice in the privilege saying, 
"He hath put a new song into my mouth;— even his 
loving-kindness." 

We must again call attention to the attitude of the 
apostles— their boldness and their meekness. They 
knew well the Lord's regulation, that his people should 
be "subject to the powers that be," and that they 
"should not speak evil of the rulers of their people;" 
and following this instruction we find that while 
stating the truth very plainly their words contain 
nothing of venom or bitterness or threat. No wonder 
that the people took note of them, that they had been 
with Jesus ! At the same time, in respect to religious 
matters they recognized a higher law, and that the 
same God who directed that they should be subject to 
the powers that be, had given them a message of peace 
and joy and blessing which was to be declared everywhere. 
They could not permit the civil power nor the 
religious power of their time to hinder their obedience 
to God in this matter. 

So it should be with us to-day; we are to be 
strictly law-abiding, speaking no evil of the government, 
nor of its servants: if God sees fit to permit 
them, that is reason enough why we should be subject 
to them. When his time shall come he will institute 
his own King upon his own throne, and we shall rejoice 
thereat; but meantime we can have neither part 
nor lot with those who defame the laws and defame 



the rulers. We may see various things which our consciences 

and judgment of the Lord's Word indicate 

to us are seriously wrong; yet we are to remember 

R2949 : page 41 

that even the poorest government in the world is far 
superior to anarchy, and our sentiments are to be always 
on the law-abiding side of every question. This, 
however, must not hinder us from defending the 
truth and its interests whenever they are assailed;— 
in love, and with the wisdom from above. If the 
Lord has opened a door of opportunity for us for the 
promulgation of the truth, and if, in his providence, 
the laws are favorable, we are to use the opportunities, 
and to protest against any obstruction of them— 
yet not with bitterness. (For instance, our appeal 
from illegal Postoffice rulings.) If special privileges 
then are closed to us, we are to submit, remembering 
that no power could prevail against us except as God 
would permit it. But, like the apostles, we are to continue 
to use our talents, our tongues, our pens, in the 
service of the truth, in making known the good tidings 
of great joy, wholly regardless of what this obedience 
to God shall cost us in the way of earthly 
interests. 

While touching this subject we urge upon all of 
our readers to copy the methods of the apostles in 
their quiet, forceful speaking of the truth. Rarely 
have we found much good to result from boisterous 
argument; and frequently it has, to our knowledge, 
resulted in evil. Those who seem to need boisterous 

R2949 : page 41 

argument evidently have not an ear for the truth, and 
should be let alone. If the Lord's servants adopt such 
methods they are likely not only to do no good to 
their hearers, but evil, and especially likely to do injury 
to their own hearts. The spirit of strife is not 
the spirit of the Lord: his spirit is described in the 
Scriptures as "the meek and quiet spirit," not the contentious, 
boastful, arrogant spirit; and whoever attempts 
to serve the truth and to spread it abroad in 
boisterous argument and boastful manner, is doing 
injury to the cause as well as to himself and his hearer. 

The truth was impressed by the plain, simple statement 
of the facts of the case, by men whose hearts had 
been cleansed by the truth and whose lives were irreproachably 
moral— whose conduct demonstrated their 
honesty, whose joy and rejoicing proved that they had 
in them the new mind of the holy spirit making them 
glad. It was by these manifestations of the spirit and 
power of the truth that the Lord was glorified, and 
that the hearers were blessed; and so it will be to-day, 
and we should order our conduct and words and sentiments 



accordingly. 

R2950 : page 41 

DECISION IN CHARACTER BUILDING. 

How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be 
God follow him, but, if Baal, follow him."— I Kings 18:21. 



MULTITUDES are in an undecided condition of 

mind, not only as respects the worship of God, 

and as respects their faith, but also in regard 

to the common affairs of life. They are not devoid of 

good intentions, good resolutions, hopes and ambitions; 

but these are rather vague and shapeless. Their 

thoughts, their intentions, have not crystalized. As a result 

they are making little progress and accomplishing 

little good, either in or for themselves or others. Even 

worldly people who manifest great decision in business 

and social and moral matters lack decision in religious 

affairs. 

The poet has truly said, "Life is real, life is earnest; 
and the grave is not the goal;" but the difficulty 
with many is that they have not even so good a goal as 
the grave would be. If they could even have that before 
their mind as an end; if they could even think of 
how they would wish to terminate their lives eventually, 
and leave some luminous foot prints in the sands 
of time that would be helpful to others and an honor to 
themselves, it would be very much better, indeed, than 
to pass through life with no aim, no wish, no thought, 
except to eat, to drink, to sleep, to gratify earthly 
tastes. We believe that it is even much better that men 
set their ambition upon money or fame or some other 
object, than to have no fixed purpose before them in 
life; yet money and fame and such matters end with 
the grave, and the Lord's consecrated people, inspired 
by new hopes, new aims, new ambitions, beyond the 
grave, have much advantage every way over all others. 

Nevertheless, even those who have been so highly 
favored of God that the eyes of their understanding 
have been opened,— that they have caught glimpses of 
the glorious things in reservation for the Lord's faithful, 
are frequently lax and measurably indifferent to 
these wonderful things which should induce them to 
zeal and inspire them with courage and strength. 
What is the difficulty? Why do they not accomplish 
more? The answer frequently should be that it is because 
of indecision. They should decide promptly, 
but they hesitate,— holding important questions in 
abeyance, and continuing to balance and to weigh matters 
which they already determined are right. They 



halt between two opinions; they hesitate to take the 
Lord's Word fully and entirely, and to walk boldly 
forward in the right direction, even when they clearly 
discern the footsteps of Jesus and the proper course for 
them as his followers. As one point after another comes 
up and is thus set aside indefinitely, the whole Christian 
course of that individual is stagnated and fresh 
duties and privileges as they appear, are stopped in the 
way by the muddle of mind which unsettled questions 
of years produce; thus indecision has more or less 
hindered them all their lives. By and by there is such 
an accumulation of undecided points and matters that 
they feel the case is almost hopeless, become discouraged, 
grow cold, indifferent, and perhaps fall completely 
away from the faith and its service. 

For all such our text is specially appropriate. We 
want to decide, first of all, who is our Master, who is 
our God; then, having concluded, we want to decide 
promptly that his servants we should and will be. The 
Master warned us of the impossibility of any other 
course being satisfactory, saying, "Ye cannot serve God 
and mammon." Attempt to do so will make us and all 
with whom we are particularly identified unhappy. 
Almost everyone will acknowledge that there is a Supreme 
Being, and that it is the duty of his creatures, to 
serve and obey him. The whole question then should 
be, not as to obedience and service, but merely, Who 
is our God? We see many of the worshipers of Baal, 
Mammon, energetic in their service, and we should 
feel ashamed if we who, by the grace of God, know 
the true God and his gracious plan, are not as zealous, 
as persevering, as energetic, as are the servants 
of error. "What manner of persons ought we to be?" 
We ought most positively to be committed to that 
which we believe to be the truth, and we ought to be 
most zealous in its service. 

A part of the mistake is in the exercise of a wrong 
kind of caution;— proper enough in respect to earthly 
affairs, in which we have to guard our interests 
against unscrupulous fellows; but out of place, impedimenta, 
in our dealings with God. This wrong 
caution says,— Do nothing, until you see how it will 
all end;— I must walk by mental sight at least. But 
this kind of worldly wisdom will not do, in dealing 
with God. He makes the rules by which we may approach 
him and progress in his favor. One of his 
rules is, that every item of truth we learn must be 
accepted and acted upon before we are ready for 
more. They that receive the truth in the love of it, 
will surely serve it with all the decision they can command 
and acquire;— piece by piece, as they receive it. 
They who on receiving truth balance it and ponder 
long whether it will not ultimately cost too much, thus 
give evidence that their love for the truth is not great 
enough,— that it is mixed with selfishness. Such must 



R2950 : page 42 

cultivate love of the truth until it outweighs all other 
things, else they will not be fit for the Kingdom. The 
Lord's charge against those who are about to fall in 
the present testing time, is that,— They received not 
the truth in the love of it— 2 Thes. 2:10-12. 

"CHOOSE YE THIS DAY." 

After Israel had reached the promised land, 
Joshua sought to bring them to such a point of decision. 
He called them together, recited to them the 
Lord's favor and blessing enjoyed thus far, and expressed 
himself in noble language, saying, "Choose 
ye this day whom ye will serve;. ..as for me 
and my house, we will serve the Lord." (Josh. 24:15.) 
So, dear friends, we who realize that the 
Lord has been blessing, guiding and sustaining us in 
the past, should come to a full, positive decision as respects 
our course of life. We should not be content 
for one moment longer to go along indefinitely, serving 
whiles the Lord, and whiles Mammon (selfishness). 
We should settle the matter at once, and for all time, 
that we will be the Lord's. 

The very fact of coming to a positive decision is 
a great blessing, and a great help in the formation of 
character. Every time we come to a decision, on any 
question, it strengthens mind and character and makes 
us that much more ready for another test— along some 
other line, perhaps. One decision for the right prepares 
the way for others in the same direction, just 
as hesitancy, indecision upon one point prepares us 
for hesitancy upon all points, and more or less stops 
our Christian progress and character-building. 

We are not advocating rashness— the doing of 
something without a reasonable, proper amount of 
consideration. But we are urging upon the Lord's 
people the cultivation of promptness, decision of mind, 
in respect to questions we have sufficiently examined. 
Some things may of necessity require pondering, but 
many things in life require no such delay to reach 
a proper decision. The majority of the questions 
which present themselves before the bar of our minds 
could be decided in a moment; and the less time we 
take in reaching a decision on such problems the better 
for us, and for the upbuilding of proper character 
in this regard. 

We need to have some touchstone, as it were, 
some matter which will help us to decide, which will 
enable the mind to reach a decision quickly. This 
touchstone should be God's will; so that to perceive 
the Lord's will in respect to any question would be to 
settle it— as quickly as discerned. There should be 
no thought of opposing the divine will. There should 
be no temporizing, no haggling to see what a thing 



would cost, once we discern that it is the Lord's will. 
There should be no further question about the rejection 
of any matter which we discern to be contrary 
to the Lord's will; no matter how enticing, no matter 
how much of profit or of advantage there may be 
connected therewith. 

Ability to decide quickly, and to decide always 
on the right side, what the Lord's will is, requires 
some experience and discipline; but the sooner we 
begin the sooner we will become proficient; the more 
energetically we set ourselves to know the Lord's will 
and to do it, and to show him by our promptness that 
we delight to do his will, the better and the quicker 
will we find our characters established on proper 
lines. 

There are many gods presenting their claims to 
us, and seeking our reverence. To some, perhaps to 
the vast majority, self is the most prominent idol and 
false god; to others it is fame; to others the family; to 
others wealth. But all these false gods are more or 
less related, and the one name, Mammon, selfishness, 
is appropriate to them all. It requires not a great deal 
of discernment to decide that none of these ambitions 
is worthy of us, and that the worship of our hearts 
and the sacrifices of life should all be to the true God. 

TO-DAY IF YOU SHOULD HEAR HIS VOICE, OBEY! 

The Scriptures appeal to us along these lines of 
prompt decision, and it is because these appeals are 
neglected, not obeyed, that many of the Lord's people 
are so lean and so undeveloped, both in knowledge 
and in character. Mark the appeal, "Today, if ye will 
hear his voice, harden not your hearts." The suggestion 
is that the matter be not put off for another day. 
We cannot tell how distinctly we will hear the voice 
of the Lord's providence speaking to us tomorrow. 
On the contrary, we know that even as we may become 
accustomed to an earthly call, or an earthly 
alarm, so that by and by it would cease to awaken 
us, so our spiritual ears become accustomed to the important 
messages reaching them from the Lord's 
Word. They will have less and less weight and influence, 
and will become less and less helpful to us in 
proportion as we neglect them and fail to act upon 
them. Does not this explain the fact that some who 

R295 1 : page 42 

have newly come into the truth, are farther along 
both in faith and good works than some whose ears 
were blest long ago? 

We are still in the beginning of a new year and 
a new century, and now is a favorable time for us to 
make good resolutions. One of these should surely be 
that henceforth we will cultivate decision of character; 



—that when we hear the voice of the Lord we will respond 
promptly. So that when we see a work of the 
Lord, which we have the privilege of attending to, it 
will be performed not only willingly and well, but also 
speedily. "The Lord loveth a cheerful giver"— a 
prompt giver;— not merely as respects money matters, 
as this text is generally applied, but in respect to all of 
our little offerings and sacrifices to him and for his 
cause' sake. If we would be pleasing to the Lord and 
grow in his favor and in nearness to him, we must 
bring our hearts more and more into the condition that 
he approves, that he loves, viz., heartiness, cheerfulness, 
promptness in every service we may render. The 
trouble with many Christians is, that they have not 
thoroughly learned what a great privilege we of this 
Gospel age enjoy,— in being permitted to present our 
little sacrifices and self-denials to the Lord, under 
the assurance that our imperfect works shall be acceptable 
through Christ to God. 

We have all noted with pleasure the wonderful 
success of that wonderful Apostle Paul. It is well, 
therefore, that we shall note that one of the chief 
elements contributing to the success of his apostleship 

R295 1 : page 43 

was this element of character— decision. Mark how 
this quality of his shines out in the statement, "This 
one thing I do," etc. He had only one real aim or 
purpose in life, toward which he was bending all his 
energies. He had cast aside all others as weights and 
hindrances, and as not being worthy to be compared 
with this one service, so high in its point of privilege. 
The one thing he did was to serve the Lord, to serve 
the brethren, to serve the truth. All other matters 
were secondary to this. If he could accomplish this 
one thing the results would be so blessed, so happifying, 
both now and everlastingly, that he could afford 
to count all other things and objects and aims as loss 
and dross and not worthy of comparison.— 
Phil. 3:7,8,13,14. 

This is the spirit that all of the Lord's overcoming 
people should have. All do not have this character 
or quality of disposition by nature; but in proportion 
as we lack, the Lord will reckon to us of his 
own merit to compensate, if he finds in us the spirit, 
the will, the disposition, to thus follow the example of 
Jesus and the apostles and all the faithful. If we are 
weak in this respect, lacking in this quality of decision 
and firmness of character, we need to be more alert, 
and to go the more frequently to the throne of grace 
to obtain mercy and to find grace to help. But those 
who are naturally weak, and who yet have tried this 
matter according to the lines here laid down,— who 
have sought to cultivate this principle of character and 
decision and firmness for the right, give abundant 



testimony that the Lord is their helper and that in thus 
following the directions of his Word and the examples 
of faithfulness, they have become strong in the 
Lord and in the power of his might. May this be a 
blessed year for all the faithful in Christ Jesus, along 
the lines of character-building, energy and firmness 
for the right and for the truth, as God grants us to see 
these. 

Let us not forget that it is just such a class that 
the Lord is seeking, to be the Bride and joint-heir of 
his Son. He is not looking for those who are perfect 
in this respect; for there is weakness along this line 
throughout the whole human family; there is none 
perfect in this or in other respects, none fit for the 
Kingdom by nature. It will encourage us, perhaps, 
to remember that the Lord is taking the weak things 
of the world and making them strong, and that in proportion 
as we submit our wills to his will we are 
transformed by the renewing of our minds, and that 
he thus works in us to will and to do his good pleasure 
in the establishment of strong, decisive characters, 
through the promises of his Word. To it, as represented 
in Jesus, he exhorts us to look, while we endeavor 
to run with patience the race set before us, 
trusting in him who has redeemed us and called us, 
and who has promised to be our ever-present helper 
in every time of need. 



R2951 : page 43 

DEACON STEPHEN, CHRISTIAN MARTYR. 

-ACTS 6:7-15-FEB. 23.- 

"Fear not them which kill the body, 
but are not able to kill the soul." 

STEPHEN may be acknowledged the second 
Christian martyr— for surely our Lord Jesus 
was the first. We must begin with the first 
verse of our lesson-chapter in order to trace the history 
of this worthy soldier of the cross. An emergency 
arose in the Church, calling for a force of seven deacons 
to look after various temporal matters, and Stephen 
was one of these seven, all of whom were chosen by the 
congregation, not by the apostles, as men of honest 
reputation, wise, and full of the holy spirit. This incident 
suggests to us the loose character of the organization 
of the early Church. It had not cast-iron rules 
and laws, except that the Lord, the Redeemer, was the 
Head of the Church, and that none could be recognized 
as members thereto except as they recognized him as 
their Savior and Lord, and made consecration to him, 
receiving his spirit, and recognized as of his appointment 



and of the holy spirit's designation his specially 
chosen apostles, as the authorized instructors of the 
Church. Aside from this, the necessities of each case 
seem to have guided: and yet, we may safely presume 
that in all the arrangements in the Church, as well as 
in the teachings of the apostles, the holy spirit directed; 
—for the benefit also of those believing on the Lord 
through their word, throughout the entire age. 

In a previous lesson we saw that a measure of 
communism was early established in the Church; but 
the incidents of this lesson clearly imply that it was 
only limited, and not a complete division of property. 
It was evidently the intention of the early Church to 
provide for the poor of their number who were without 
means of livelihood. Prominent amongst those 
provided for, if not the only ones, were widows without 
income; such at that time must have been comparatively 
helpless and dependent upon charity, since there 
were so few opportunities for earning a living, especially 
amongst women. 

We are not to suppose that there was any intentional 
partiality or neglect of the Grecian more than of 
the Hebrew women. Apparently it was unintentional, 
and possibly arose from the fact that the apostles, 
native-born, appreciated more keenly the needs of the 
native widows than of the foreign-born. These were 
all Jewesses, of course, whether born in Palestine or 
born in Greece. Up to this time the Gospel had not 
been sent to others,— Gentiles. No doubt there was 
some reasonable cause for the murmur. In any event 
the apostles manifested their honesty of purpose in the 
matter by promptly instituting measures for the correction 
of the difficulty. There is a lesson in this for 
all of the Lord's people: if difficulties arise, based upon 
temporal questions, likely to sprout a "root of bitterness" 
or to cause a schism in the Church, the proper 
course would be to throw the responsibility upon the 
shoulders of the whole congregation— to ask for the 
election of some of the number who could give the matter 
better attention, and see that all were justly dealt 
with. We are not to forget that in this as in other ways 
the Lord has clearly indicated that the Church as a 
whole is under his supervision, his care, and that it is 

R295 1 : page 44 

therefore proper that the general affairs of the Church 
be conducted by the congregation and not by one man, 
nor by a clerical class. 

No doubt some of those chosen for the serving 
of tables— the money collection and the food distribution 
—were representatives of the Grecian brethren who, 
knowing the peculiarities of the Grecian customs, would 
be the better able to see to the welfare of the Grecian 
widows. It is here that we get acquainted with 
Stephen, as one of the seven chosen deacons. The 



word "deacon" signifies runner, attendant, servant. 
The "elders" of the Church were more 
particularly chosen according to their Christian 
character and aptness to teach, while the deacons 
were chosen according to Christian character and aptness 
in business affairs. In both instances, however, 
the Christian character, the holiness of spirit and wisdom 
were primary considerations. So with the Lord's 
people to-day: those chosen to any part of the service 
should first of all be recognized as the best and the 
wisest of the number— the possession of a holy, meek 
and quiet spirit, of great value, being carefully considered 
—then natural abilities. 

In Stephen's case we see an illustration of the 
Lord's methods of advancing his people step by step 
in his service: (1) He was honored with a knowledge 
of the truth: faithful in his acceptance of it, and zealous 
toward the Lord, he ere long manifested these qualities; 
and under the guidance of the holy spirit, was 
chosen a deacon. (2) Faithfulness in this, serving 
tables, prepared him for further opportunities, and (3) 
we find him exercising the gift of healing and performing 
signs in attestation of his ministry of the truth; 
which implies that he had actually attained to the position 
of an elder in the Church tho' the apostles residing 
in Jerusalem, perhaps, made an unnecessary election of 

R2952 : page 44 

elders,— for they were all elders. (I Pet. 5:1.) Stephen 
was so full of the spirit of the truth and devotion to its 
service that he had the high honor (4) of being the 
first one of the brethren to follow the Master's footsteps 
in a sacrificial death. Here surely was an advancement 
in service and its honor that may well 
quicken and energize all of the Lord's people to greater 
efforts to serve and please the same Master. He who 
thus accepted the consecrated Stephen, and advanced 
him step by step in his service, is ready and willing 
to-day to take and use those who are similarly consecrated, 
and burning with heavenly zeal. He is willing 
to make of such burning and shining lights in the 
Church, if they in turn are willing to suffer with him, 
that they may also be glorified together in due time.— 
Rom. 8:17. 

Stephen's faith and power and opportunities for 
service came to him along the same lines as faith and 
power have come to the Lord's people since— whole-hearted 
devotion to the Lord, to his people and to his 
truth. "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted." 
Had Stephen been selfseeking and ambitious for honor 
of men or of the brethren we may be sure we would 
have heard little of him, unless, like Ananias, his approbativeness 
had resulted in his being made an example 
of evil-doing. This is a danger which besets every 
brother chosen by the church to any service. Hence 



the apostle's caution "Be not many of you teachers 
brethren." Hence the necessity that the Church choose 
for its servants only those of humble mind; and the 
need of care amongst these servants that they fall not 
into the snare of the Adversary, and after having 
preached to others, themselves become castaways.— 
Jas. 3:1; I Tim. 3:6,7; I Cor. 9:27. 

Stephen in preaching got into a debate with some 
of his day, and was more than a match for them. As 
we read, "They were not able to withstand the wisdom 
and the spirit by which he spake." We are not to suppose 
that Stephen was the greatest of all orators, nor 
even that he had no peers amongst those with whom 
he disputed. In this case the adage was well applied, 
"Thrice armed is he who hath his quarrel just." It 
was because Stephen had the truth, the right side of 
the controversy, and because God was with him, that he 
was more than a match for any of his adversaries. 

The same God is still with his people; and the 
Lord's Word, therefore, is still worthy of all acceptance, 
—"I will give you a mouth and wisdom which 
none of your adversaries shall be able to gainsay or 
resist." (Luke 21:15.) Do we not see this same 
principle illustrated to-day, when humble ones amongst 
the Lord's people are more than a match for all their 
adversaries? The truth being powerful, prevails, though 
it is not always acknowledged to prevail, even as it 
was not acknowledged by Stephen's enemies. 

We are not advocating public debating of the 
truth. We believe that debates, as a rule, accomplish 
little good; because the opponents of the truth are apt 
to conduct their arguments unfairly, deceptively— apt 
to strive for victory, rather than to strive for the truth. 
However, there are cases to-day, like this case of 
Stephen's, in which the opponents of the truth are the 
aggressors; and in such cases those who have the truth 
are not to be ashamed of it, nor fearful, but to trust in 
the promise of the Lord for words and wisdom for the 
occasion. We are not given a report of the discussion, 
but from what we know of Stephen's character, so 
well illustrated in the discourse subsequently delivered, 
we cannot escape the conviction that he spoke to his 
opponents in a kind, generous, reasonable manner— 
that he neither ranted nor stormed nor endeavored to 
throw a dust of false arguments. He had the truth, 
which is sharper than a two-edged sword, and we may 
be sure that he spoke the truth "in love," according to 
the apostolic command.— Eph. 4:15. 

Stephen's disputants were evidently of the Grecian 
Jews, and Stephen himself was also probably of this 
class. Possibly Saul of Tarsus, afterwards the Apostle 
Paul, was amongst those who disputed with him, as 
he himself tells us that he was a sort of ringleader 
amongst those who killed him. (Acts 22:20.) We 
cannot help wondering to what extent young Saul, the 
lawyer, instructed by Gamaliel, and an adept in logic, 



may have taken some lessons and caught some ideas 
from Stephen's reasoning— not enough, however, to 
make transformation of his career. 

It was Stephen's turn to be called before the 
Sanhedrin, that he might give the leaders of his people 
a gospel sermon, the basis of which was Jesus and the 
resurrection. His opponents, who could not down him 

R2952 : page 45 

in argument, were determined to destroy him; and, 

like other zealots, deluded by superstition, they were 

nevertheless influenced by their higher principles to 

desire to accomplish his destruction legally— that is 

to say, with a form of law. Alas, how many people 

now, as well as then, of comparatively noble mind, succeed 

in "deceiving their own selves" into thinking that 

a wrong becomes a virtue, becomes right, if to any extent 

they can wrap it in the folds of the law! The 

Lord's people need to have the spirit of the law, the 

spirit of justice, the spirit of righteousness: without 

this even the best balanced minds may be led astray 

under the pressure of zeal, superstition, or error. 

The doctors of the law and members of the Sanhedrin 
(Saul of Tarsus is supposed to have been a member) 
did not wish to be parties directly to the charges, 
nor to seem to be interested in the destruction of a noble 
man. They therefore procured others to give testimony 
that would be of the kind desired— testimony 
upon which it would be possible for their distorted 
judgments and consciences to render a death verdict. 
Strangely enough, the second martyr, like the first, was 
convicted of blasphemy against God and against the 
Temple, and without any more foundation for the 
charges than in the case of his illustrious Master. Of 
course the charges were distorted, and yet there was 
a measure of truth in them. Just how much allowance 
should be made for those who convicted the Lord and 
Stephen on such evidence is perhaps difficult for us 
to judge. Nor is it necessary, because the judgment 
of such matters is not yet put into our hands. The 
Lord alone knows to what extent the prejudiced mind 
was unable to discern the truth, and to what extent 
the Adversary succeeded in blinding the judgment, 
so as to make the light appear darkness, the truth appear 
error. 

Doubtless, as Stephen heard the charges against 
him, and noticed the advancement of the case, he mentally 
remarked the correspondence between these 
charges against him and those upon which his Master 
was convicted. We may be sure that some such thoughts 
were passing through his mind when his face was so 
wonderfully lit up with the indwelling joy, that it is 
recorded that all sitting in the Sanhedrin "looking steadfastly 
on him saw his face, as it had been the face of an 
angel." But even an angelic face could not move such 



hearts, some of the same, doubtless, that had sat in condemnation 

of the Master himself. Seemingly, Stephen's 

witness was fruitless, so far as his auditors were concerned; 

the same might have been said respecting our 

Master's trial and testimony. And yet, as the latter 

bore fruit on the day of Pentecost and afterward, so, 

doubtless, Stephen's testimony bore fruit subsequently. 

Who can say that that beaming and angelic face was 

not one of the "pricks" against which Saul of Tarsus 

had been contending for some time, when the Lord interrupted 

him enroute to Damascus? 

Who can tell that experiences connected with this 
martyrdom may not have been valuable not only to 
Saul, but to others? At all events, it was Stephen's 
duty, as it is our duty, to be faithful under all circumstances, 
under all conditions, regardless of whether 
appearances indicate the accomplishment of much, or 
of little good. We are to remember that the Lord's 
work is in his own hands, and that our part is to be 
faithful to him and to the truth, to the extent of our 
opportunities. 

The Editor would like, for himself and for all the 
Pilgrims, and for all the elders of the Church everywhere, 
and for all the brethren who speak at all, publicly 
or privately, in the name of Jesus, that Stephen's 
beaming face might be impressed upon our memories. 
If it is, and if every time we stand forth before men 
publicly or privately, as the representatives of our 
Lord, we could so realize his blessing and our privilege 
as his servants, that it would fill our hearts, and beam 
forth from our faces, in gladness, in thankfulness, for 
the privilege of serving, then indeed we would have 
the highest degree of blessing to ourselves, and doubtless 
also would bring the largest degree of blessing to 
all those whose hearts would be prepared for the truth, 
and also for those not yet ready for it, but who are 
under the Lord's discipline and guidance, in preparation 
for it, as was Saul of Tarsus. 

Our Golden Text is very appropriate in this connection. 
It is well that the Lord's people, especially 
when they come into trying positions on account of 
their fidelity to the truth, should remember these, the 
Master's words. Men may kill our bodies, or they may 
speak evil of them, or despitefully use them otherwise; 
but it is beyond their power to injure us as new creatures, 
or to ruin our prospects as respects the future 
life. That life which the Lord has promised to his 
faithful,— the resurrection life,— is beyond the power of 
man. It is the eternal, the invaluable life. If we gain 
it, no matter what the cost may be, as respects the present 
life, and mortal-body condition, we shall have 
made a great bargain, we shall have gained a great 
prize. All who really appreciate it see it to be a "pearl 
of great price," for which they, like the Master, are 
willing to lay down all,— to sell all that they have, 
that they may obtain it. 



R2953 : page 45 

God is able to kill the soul— able to blot out existence 
entirely— and he has threatened to do so in all 
cases of wilful deliberate sin, against full light and 
knowledge. This is a cause both for comfort and for 
fear. For comfort, as opposed to the false human 
teaching that the masses will spend an eternity of woe: 
for fear, lest after having tasted of divine goodness 
and learned of God's gracious provisions for such as 
obey him, any of us should seem to come short and 
lose our all— life! 

To have the proper course in life, to be able to 
meet the trials and difficulties of life as they come to 
us, and to meet them in the proper spirit which the 
Lord directs— in the spirit of rejoicing in tribulation, 
and counting such experiences all joy,— it is necessary 
that all fear of man, which brings a snare, shall 
be removed. And it is our Lord's direction that we 
shall fear Jehovah, and not fear our mortal fellows. 
The righteous are bold as a lion, as well as gentle as a 
dove, and meek as a lamb. This peculiar combination 
should be found in every Christian, and we doubt 
if it will be found elsewhere. 



R2953 : page 46 

"BETWEEN EVENINGS"-A JEWISH VIEW. 



Dear Brother Russell:— Allow me to express to 
you my deep gratitude for your kindness in supplying 
me gratuitously with the Watch Tower and booklets. 
I have not language at my command to convey to you 
how thankful I feel to our heavenly Father for raising 
you up as one of his honored servants in the spreading 
of the present truth, and trying to build up and 
assist those of the household of faith in their walk in 
the narrow way. It is proving a great blessing to me. 
I lay awake for hours meditating on the great and 
precious promises of God and the glorious prospect 
there is in store for those whom he has called according 
to his purpose. 

In reading the last Tower for Dec. 1st, I was 
much helped by your interpretation of "The Voices of 
the Three Signs," also with the typical meaning of 
"The Passover Lamb." But I can not quite understand 
what you mean when you say, "On the fourteenth 
day of the month it was to be killed between 
evenings (between six o'clock the one evening and 
six o'clock the next evening— the usual Jewish day)." 
If the lamb had to be killed on the fourteenth day, 



between the evening of that day and the evening of 
the next, which would be the fifteenth, it would have 
to take place after six o'clock in the evening on the 
fourteenth day, and that would not correspond with 
the time of the death of the antitype as recorded in 
Matt. 26:45,46,50; Luke 23:44,46; and yet the properties 
which the passover lamb was to possess, the manner 
in which it was to die, the effects which were to 
be produced, and the ceremonies which were to be 
observed, as recorded in the twelfth chapter of Exodus, 
have been fulfilled in a most remarkable and striking 
manner in the promised Messiah, Jesus of Nazareth, 
our blessed Lord. 

Having been brought up in the Jewish faith up 
to the age of 20, 1 always understood the matter to be 
thus: The killing of the lamb was on the evening of 
the fourteenth day, or more correctly speaking, according 
to the original, Bain haarbayim, between the 
evenings, that is, between the sun's declining west 
and his setting about three o'clock p.m. For the 
Jews observe two evenings in each day. The first 
commences after twelve o'clock at noon, and the second 
at three o'clock, p.m. Between these two 
evenings the daily evening sacrifice was offered up 
and immediately after the passover lamb was killed 
and prepared. But if the passover fell on the weekly 
Sabbath, i.e., on Friday, they began an hour sooner, 
that they might despatch their business by the time 
that the Sabbath began. Hence that day is called the 
preparation of the passover.— John 19:14. 

The Jews computed their days from evening to 
evening; i.e., from the setting of the sun of one day 
to the setting again on the next day. This appears 
to be the command given by Moses, "From even to 
even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath." (Lev. 23:32.) 
Moses, in giving an account of the Creation, says, 
"And there was evening, and there was morning, one 
day." (Gen. 1:5.) By the evening and the morning 
the Jews understand the same portion of time that we 
call day and night, or twenty-four hours; the former 
continued from the rising of the sun until its setting, 
and from that time till his reappearance was called 
the night. The division of time into hours was not 
known in the days of Moses.— Compare Gen. 15:12; 
18:1; 19:1. 

The day was again divided into two equal portions; 
from the rising of the sun until noon was the 
morning, and after that, until the sun had gone down, 
was the evening. Hence we read only of morning 
and evening sacrifices. Again, the morning and the 
evening were divided each into two equal parts, for 
the regulation of the morning and evening sacrifices 
and prayers. 

The morning sacrifice and prayer was allowed to 
be offered at any time between the rising of the sun 
and the third hour, i.e., 9 a.m., and the evening 



sacrifice and prayer may be offered up at any time 
during the first evening, Hebrew, erev katon, the 
short or lesser evening, i.e., from noon until ninth 
hour, or 3 p.m.; and from that time until sun 
setting, is called in the Hebrew erev gadol, i.e., the 
greater evening. It was between these two evenings 
the paschal lamb was to be slain, and so was Jesus, 
the antitype, the Lamb of God, who taketh away the 
sin of the world as recorded. 
I remain, dear Brother Russell, 
Faithfully yours in the Lord, 

J. Gronowsky,— England. 



page 46 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Dear Brother Russell:— I have been just a little 
tardy in sending in my offering to the "Good Hopes" 
fund; but I have desired to tell you how the Lord is 
blessing the efforts put forth by one of his weak and 
timid children. Praise his holy name, he has such 
wonderful power! About two weeks ago the pastor 
of the M. E. church gave me a conditional promise 
to take my name from the record. This did not 
satisfy me, and I requested a prayer-meeting at our 
home in the country. Yesterday a half dozen of the 
church members, including the pastor and wife, came 
out, and I had the opportunity I had long wished 
and prayed for. I asked God to help me to tell some 
of the good things which he has given me to see and 
understand from the Bible, through the use of the 
Key, which he allowed you to supply. Praise his 
name, he did help me boldly to tell of them. I was 
strongly criticised, but it was done quietly. Bro. U. 
again promised that he would take my name from the 
record, as I told him the Lord had given me assurance 
that it was his will that I do so. (Rev. 18:4.) 

Bro. U. once told me that he read Dawn fifteen 
years ago, and thought he burned it. He tried 
to persuade me not to read such books, saying they 
were the work of the devil. Yesterday he and his 
wife told me they had a set of "Dawns," and that 
there were many good things in them. I wonder if 
they secured them after my first talk with them. 

One sister told me of the influence of a talk I 
gave the Epworth League last year, when I was assigned 
to lead the meeting. How glad I was that the 
topic given was the Parable of the Draw Net! I 
tried to bring out prominently the idea that the Lord 
is not trying to save the world in this, the Gospel age, 



page 47 

since their time is in the future; the Gospel age being 
for the choosing of the little flock, the bride of Christ. 
So the sister said that on account of my influence 
they could not get any one to join the church. How 
I wish she was not too blind to discern the Lord's 
work! 

One of the friends to whom I had the "Tower" 
sent, has written thanking me, and stating that it 
was just the kind of reading she enjoyed. The Lord 
is pouring out great blessing upon our home, tho 
my brother is the only one who has come fully into 
harmony with the Truth. 

I pray God's blessing to rest continually upon 
you, and ask that you pray that his work here may 
continue to grow. 

Yours in the work of the Master, 
Jessie Ganson,— Nebraska. 



Dear Brother:— 

I am so glad to tell you that two or three in 

are becoming interested in "Dawn" writings. I took 
two Towers to a friend to whom we had previously 
lent some. He delighted me by saying, "They are 
always welcome." We then loaned him a "Dawn," 
and were told that he said to another friend that "he 
had a book now which helped him to sort it out for 
himself." 

A poor, old, but intelligent friend of ours was 
speaking in her parson's presence of what she had 
read in the Dawn. He said, "Have you seen them? 
Burn them, burn them!" He warns all not to be led 
astray by us. He lately got up a sermon on Hell, 
and had the town filled with bills. We, of course, 
did not go, and have not been for many months. We 
study our Bibles, Dawns and Towers, and get more 
good than we ever thought to get in this life. 

We delight in the Towers, and when they are 
read, count the days until the next one will come. 
And how we are longing for the next volume of 
Dawn, I cannot tell you. We can't keep the light to 
ourselves, but feel as though we must try to share it 
with others. Faithfully yours, 

Mrs. S. J., -Cumberland. 



Dear Friends:— Through the kindness of some 
brethren here I have been supplied with Millennial 
Dawn, Vols. I. and II, and have not the language to 
express the joy and comfort afforded me through the 
Divine Plan of the Ages, revealing more abundantly 
the inexpressible loving-kindness of our Heavenly 



Father. I have been an ordained minister of the 
Baptist church for ten years, endeavoring to enlighten 
the people and comfort the saints. In fact, I have 
spent my time and living in the work, and have just 
come to the understanding that very much that I 
thought to be meat in due season, and which I gave 
them, was but the husks of tradition. Imagine, then, 
the comfort, the joy, the consolation since the pall 
of gloom is removed, and I begin to understand the 
teaching of the Word concerning Restitution, etc. 

Some of my friends are getting alarmed; they 
think such exposition of Scripture very dangerous, 
and I desire to be fully prepared to meet their 
objections. Yours in much love, 

L. B. Pounds,— Alabama. 



Dear Brother Russell: 

Will you kindly give me some instruction as to how 
I am to answer the "world" when questioned about my 
Church? The people who know me ask why I do not go 
to church. I tell them that I belong to no man-made 
systems; that the Lord Jesus is my Teacher, and the Bible 
my Church; that Christ Jesus has set me free, and I 
belong to him, and to do his will is more to me than my 
daily bread. 

To this Churchianity answers: "So do we belong to 
him; and we assemble ourselves together to show the 
world that we love to serve him, and you do not." I can 
only make answer that my trust is in him; that I know 
he leadeth me, and that so long as I walk by the light 
he has given me I shall never be alone nor fall; and that 
by the grace of God I am called to be a witness to the 
fact of his presence now in this sick old world. Blessed 
be his holy name! I can not say that I belong to your 
church, for I do not even know by what name your church 
is called. Besides, I do not know if you recognize me as 
a sister. I can not say that I am a Second Adventist, for 
I know nothing about them, except that they are looking 
for Christ to come at any moment with an audible "shout" 
and visible "great glory," which I do not believe to be the correct 
view. 

I have found only four persons here that know anything 
of your publications; and they have only a vague 
idea as to the purport of your teaching. One woman told 
me she had been informed that Millennial Dawn and Ingersoll 
taught on parallel lines (Oh!), and her pastor told her 
to have nothing to do with it for it was "a dangerous book." 
Well, I sent her home with Dawn Vol. II., and a handful 
of Towers. She will read them and get a blessing, for 
she has "ears to hear." The second person, a man who 
has a set of Dawns, says that he bought them just to 
help on an agent, that he was a good (?) Baptist and that 
he could not afford to read Dawns, as he did not want to be 
called a crank. The third person, a woman, held up her 



hands, and cried out: "Oh, my! I am a Baptist! a Baptist, 
from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet!" 
Adding, "I suppose you are waiting to hear the trumpet 
sound." I told her the trumpet was sounding now, and that 
I was awake and conscious of every note it made. 

She stared at me, as though she thought I had lost 
my mind; and finally said she would read the Tower to 
please me, but as for the Dawn, it was "too much for her" 
(which is the literal truth). I gave her a few "Towers" 
and left her. A few days after her father (a preacher) 
came on a visit, and the Towers were bundled up and sent 
back to me. I long to point out Jeremiah 25:35,36 to such. 

As to my experience with "Babylon" at large,— I am 
laughed at and looked upon as a sort of harmless lunatic. 
My old friends, who have known me as a devout church-woman 
for years, are really concerned about my sanity and 
spiritual condition, because I do not attend church services, 
nor participate in their sociables, fairs, etc. And 
when I refused to have anything to do with the "Ladies' 
Aid Society" the climax was reached, and I am now a 
dangerous person to know. 

Glory be to God the Father, I rejoice and am "exceeding 
glad" to be counted worthy to suffer the least bit for "his 
name's sake." I know I am gaining knowledge, and I feel 
that I am growing in grace, according to his good pleasure. 
I have the faith, and, thanks be unto God, I have 
the witness of the spirit, by which I am exercised daily to 
do his holy will with joy and thanksgiving. 

Will you excuse this long letter? There is no human 
being of our faith near with whom I can commune. In 
that respect I am utterly alone. I feel that your great 
loving heart will respond to my call for instruction, and 
a word of encouragement. 

May his peace, grace, and love ever rest upon you and 
yours. Pray for me. 

Yours in the faith, 

B. L. PALING.-Alabama. 

[Answered by letter— and printed matter. Editor.] 



page 49 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 