R228 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1881. 

NO. 12. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... BRADDOCK, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance- 
includes postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R228 : page 1 

HE ON THE HOUSETOP. 

"In the day that the Son of man is revealed; in that day, he 
which shall be on the housetop and his stuff in the house, let him 
not come down to take it away; and he that is in the field, let 
him likewise not return back. Remember Lot's wife. Whosoever 
shall seek to save his life shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose 
his life shall preserve it." Luke 17:30-33. 

The description is relative to matters due to take place after the 
Lord has come. The six preceding verses explain how he will be 
present in his days as the lightning-invisible, its presence 
recognized only by the thunder and the flashes of light which 
come from it. Present while mankind will be eating, drinking, 
planting and building; present, but unrecognized; but not long 
will it be so; his presence will soon be made known; he will be 
revealed in this day so that all shall recognize his presence and 
power. 

First to recognize him will be the "little flock" soon to be made 
His Bride, otherwise called his friends, from whom he hides no 
good thing, but reveals to them all things and shows them not 
only things present but also "things to come." These will know 
first the blessed news of the presence of the heavenly 
Bridegroom; then by-and-by as the judgments begin to come, 
first on the nominal church and then on the world, all men will 
come to know of his presence, for He shall be "revealed in 
flaming fire." (Great and notable judgments.) We find from our 
lamp-God's word-that the Bridegroom has come, is now 
present, consequently the revealing of his presence has 
commenced; it is revealed to us through the "sure word of 
prophecy" and we do not wait to see in the light of flaming 
judgments. Seeing, then, that we are living in the day of 
revealing, it is due time that we should understand our text 
which treats of matters due to transpire here and now; let us 
therefore give heed to our text and obey its teachings. [Read it 
again.] 

We first inquire what house is referred to, and find that the 
nominal church is meant. There is a sense in which only the 
overcomers are spoken of as the house- "Christ as a son over his 
own house, whose house are we if we hold fast," etc. Again the 
Jewish Church and the entire nominal church of wheat and tares 
are called houses, and we read that Jesus shall be for "a stone of 
stumbling and rock of offence to both the houses of Israel." Isa. 
8:14. 

This is the house referred to in our text— the nominal Gospel 
house- which we elsewhere read is to stumble. They in the 
house are the members of the nominal household; they on the 
housetop represent those nearest heaven-the most devoted and 



consecrated ones-the jewels which the Lord says he will gather; 
"the stuff in the house" represents the individual interests 
centered in the organizations, such as honor, respect, family ties, 
friendships; these are valuables indeed; we all love these things, 
but the Lord says that in this day, as soon as we discern his 
presence we must flee and escape from the house-the house is 
stumbling and about to fall. A terrible gale is coming on; we 
know it is just at hand, for we see the flashes from the dark 
clouds of trouble which indicate the presence of him who is as 
the lightning. 

It is the same message which is put in other words in Rev. 18:2. 
"Babylon is fallen; come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues." But how 
loathe are the inmates to leave their old and comfortable home; 
they will not believe that their house can fall—these will not 
obey the voice; they will be buried in the ruins. "Woe unto them 
that are at ease in Zion." 

But there is another class which cries and laments for Zion's 
transgressions, who are not at ease. Some of these housetop 
saints hear and believe the call, but some stay and try to prop up 
the shaking house and hope against hope; some of them take the 
alarm and attempt to escape, but loving their stuff (goods) seek 
to take it with them; this involves delay, and is dangerous. It is 
this danger our Lord warns us against, saying: "Let him not go 
down to take it away. And let him that is in the field likewise not 
return back." Those who have got out of the house and are 
fleeing from the coming storm let them not think it a false alarm 
and return, for the destruction of the house (nominal church) 
lingers only until such sheep as hear the shepherd's voice, 
"Come out of her, my people," and are obedient, shall have had 
opportunity to escape; then will come the crash and fall. 

Now mark the illustration given: "Remember Lot's wife." In the 
days of Lot they of Sodom ate, drank, etc., as usual, but the 
same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and 
brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. We all recall the 
story, how Lot was called out of Sodom before sunrise; how he 
endeavored to get his relatives, who were wedded to Sodomites, 
to flee with him; how his words seemed to them like idle tales; 
how even Lot and his family were so tedious that the angels laid 
hold of their hands and urged them out. They had hardly 
escaped when the destruction came upon the city. So here God 
pronounces certain judgments upon the world and on a worldly 
church. He tells his "friends" (represented by Abraham), who 
live separate from the world-from under the influence of 
Sodom, of what is coming upon Sodom, and delivers the class 
who have become almost overcharged with the cares of this life- 
-if they will hear his voice, obey and come out into separateness 
of life. 



But Jesus called special attention to Lot's wife, who, when on 
her way out, began to remember her goods, and slacked her pace 
for a moment to sorrowfully look back. Let us see the 
application of this to those who are now called in this day of the 
revealing of the present Lord to come out from the Gospel 
"house." He that loveth houses, or lands, or reputation, or 
relatives, or friends, more than the Bridegroom is not worthy to 
be of his Bride; let him stay with his stuff, and they will; but let 
each one who has consecrated all to the Lord remember that he 
has 

R229 : page 1 

nothing of his own, and let him leave all and obey the voice, 
"Come out of her." 

Here the test seems to be entire consecration; every interest of 
life and comfort draws and binds you to remain in the now 
condemned house. [We understand that the nominal church was 
given up in 1878, the exact parallel of time to the giving up of 
the Jewish house when Jesus said to them: "Your house is left 
unto you desolate;" as he now says to this house: "Because thou 
art neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth; "--my 
word of truth and knowledge will no longer be uttered through 
you. We believe also, as previously shown that there are three 
and one-half years of favor to those in the house, during which 
the Lord is revealing his presence to the saints and calling on 
them to come out- that this three and one half years of 
individual favor ends with October of this year, and by that time 
"the voice of the Bride will be heard no more in the Babylon 
(confusion) house. Hence we would urge, Flee out of Sodom; 
"flee out of Babylon;" stay not in all the plain-leave the stuff - 
sacrifice it in obedience to the Lord's word. 

Yes, it will test you sorely— "every man's work shall be tried so 
as by fire." He that loveth his life, (honor, reputation, friends, 
etc.,) shall lose it, and he that sacrifices all these elements of the 
human nature, shall find that which God hath promised to the 
overcomers, viz: The crown of life"— immortality. 



R229 : page 1 

ONE SHALL BE TAKEN 
AND ANOTHER LEFT. 

Continuing the above discourse on the things due during the 
day of the revelation of his presence, Jesus says: "I tell you in 
that night (before the day has dawned yet a part of that day) 
there will be two in a bed; one will be taken and the other left. 
Two will be grinding together; the one will be taken and the 
other left." [Diaglott.] 



A bed is a place in which to rest; it is here used, we believe, to 
represent the resting place of the church~the belief or creed. The 
same bed is here referred to as that mentioned last month 
described in Isa. 28:20. The prophet is speaking of the stumbling 
of the church (v. 13) and of the flood of trouble coming upon 
them (v. 18), and says (see margin): "When the overflowing 
scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it; 
from the time that it goeth forth it shall take you (The trouble 
will commence with the church); for morning by morning shall 
it pass over, by day and by night (increasing like a flood of 
waters); and it shall be a vexation only until he shall make you 
to understand doctrine. [The church has largely substituted 
doctrines of men for those of God, and they will be vexed and 
perplexed by the spread of Infidelity, etc., until they come to 
understand God's word and plan. Then their perplexity and 
trouble will be at an end, for they will see 

R229 : page 2 

that the whole plan is working out gloriously to the praise of 
God and the good of his creatures.] For (the vexation is because) 
"the bed (creeds -belief) is shorter than that a man can stretch 
himself on it. " The creeds cramp any who have any degree of 
development. When we were babes we could rest in them, but 
by reason of growth in grace and knowledge some are coming to 
find themselves in a very uncomfortable place- no rest there 
now; it will be quite a relief to get out of such a bed. 

It is from this short bed that some will be taken in the day when 
the Son of man is present turning the light of truth upon error, 
and bringing to light all the hidden things of darkness. During 
this time before the sore vexation of the falling house comes, 
some will awaken and get out of such a short, uncomfortable 
man-made bed, into the liberty wherewith Christ hath made 
them free, and some will be left; some will be so short that they 
will feel no inconvenience, and others so sleepy and drowsy as 
to not notice the matter, and will so remain until the Gospel 
house, beds and all, become a mass of ruins; then these will 
"come out of great tribulation." 

"Two will be grinding together." Grinding is the preparing of 
food for the household— this, then, seems to refer specially to the 
teachers in the church; some of these will be taken and some 
left. 

The disciples inquired where they would be taken to, and Jesus 
answered: "Where the body is there will the eagles be 
assembled." The ones taken from the bed and from grinding are 
likened to eagles; they live high up above the world, in the 
mountains, far-seeing; having eyes adapted to looking at the 
light (How they represent the intelligently earnest Christians). 
What causes the assembling together of the eagles from various 
quarters? It is hunger, and because they see the prey-the food-a 



long way off —the food attracts them; they come to eat the 
carcass-the food. 

Now look at the wonderful figures Jesus has given us. First, he 
will be present invisibly, as the lightning, and men will eat, 
drink, and know not in the days of the Son of Man; second, in 
this day all that are on the house-top should escape before the 
storm destroys the house (nominal church) and injures many in 
it; third, in the night, before the day has fully come, some, both 
of grinders and of those not at ease in the short bed will escape; 
fourth, these thus attracted away, will be like eagles; fifth, the 
thing which takes them away is a desire for food; sixth, such as 
thus seek food find it and meet the others similarly hungry and 
feed together. 

How true this picture is; the church has more preaching and 
teaching and forms than it ever had, yet no food is found by the 
"eagle class "--the eagles are hungry, and it is their hunger which 
takes them away, and every such hungry one thus separated, the 
Lord will feed, and as they come to feed, they find others of 
"like precious faith" and character, who have forsaken all for 
truth-the food. 

Thus the "gathering" of the ripe wheat-of the jewels~of the 
eagles is now in progress, and bye and bye these will be 
glorified with their head -Jesus-changed in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye from human and mortal conditions, to 
spiritual and incorruptible. Let us say in the words addressed to 
Lot; "Escape for thy life, look not behind thee, neither stay thou 
in all the plain; escape to the mountain lest thou be consumed. "- 
Gen. 19:12-17. 



R229 : page 2 

FLEE BEFORE WINTER. 

The above subject (Luke 17:31) is found with other connections 
in Matt. 24:17-21, viz: "Let him which is on the housetop not 
come down to take anything out of his house... and woe unto 
them that are with child and to them that give suck in those 
days ! But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter (neither on 
the Sabbath day) for then shall be great tribulation such as was 
not since the beginning of the world to this time; no, nor ever 
shall be." 

This has been very generally applied as having its fulfillment 
with the Jews, after their house was given up and at its 
destruction, which followed the end of its seven years of favor. 
We believe that they did have a fulfillment there, but that they 
apply to the end of this age especially— in fact as we have seen, 
everything which occurred to them during their harvest was a 
shadow of what occurs now during this harvest. To the Jew, it 



was literally fulfilled; they fled from literal Zion, left literal 
housetops, fields, beds and mills, and Josephus tells us that 
mothers ate their own offspring in those days. 

But we are looking for the substance there shadowed; we have 
found the meaning of the "bed" and of the "grinding mills" and 
of the "house-top," and now let us see who in Zion are they that 
give suck and are with child in these days. We suggest that Paul 
and Peter and Isaiah tell us who the children are. Written to new 
converts, we read: "As new-born babes, desire the sincere milk 
of the word that ye may grow thereby." (1 Pet. 2:2.) Again, 
written to those who made slow progress in divine grace and 
knowledge, we read: "I have fed you with milk and not with 
meat—even as unto babes." (1 Cor. 3:2), "for when for the time 
ye ought to be teachers [suck givers] ye have need that one teach 
you again, which be the first principles [milk] of the oracles of 
God; and are become such as have need of milk, and not of 
strong meat. For every one that useth milk [first principles only] 
is unskillful in the word of righteousness: for he is a babe. But 
strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age [men-it is 
when grown to this full age and size of manhood in Christ, that 
the bed is found too short-that a man cannot stretch himself on 
it] even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised." 
Heb. 5:12. 

In Isa. 28:9 we read: "Whom shall he teach knowledge? and 
whom shall he make to understand doctrine [the deeper elements 
of his Word and plan]? Them that are weaned from the milk and 
drawn from the breasts." 

The nominal church to-day is composed largely of those who 
give no evidence whatever of being begotten of the Spirit- 
consequently are not even (embryo) babes in Christ, and have 
neither part nor lot in spiritual things; and of those who are 
spirit-begotten, how few have reached any degree of growth- 
how few are men-nearly all are babes in Christ. We love babes- 
-new-born 

R230 : page 2 

babes especially, but we feel disappointed, and disposed to chide 
them (as Paul did), when for the time they ought to be teachers 
and still have need that one teach them the first principles. They 
themselves are much to blame that they are "unskillful in the 
Word," for the strength comes "by reason of use." We should 
not confound these babes with the class referred to as babes by 
Jesus, unto whom he says God reveals his plans, hidden from 
the prudent. There is a sense in which we always should be 
babes-in meekness and simplicity; we should always be Christ's 
"little ones." Paul defines the distinction between the two classes 
of babes in 1 Cor. 14:20. 

If now we have found that nearly all the true Christians of to- 
day (like the Corinthian church of Paul's day) are babes not 



weaned from the milk, but still needing it, who shall we suppose 
to be those who give suck in these days? We answer, they are 
the ministers, class leaders, and Bible class teachers of the 
church. They almost all boast of giving only first principles - 
milk; and they seek by all means to prevent those in their charge 
from wandering off and getting even a morsel of meat—from 
hearing anything which would cause their "senses" to be 
exercised. 

As we progress into the time of the church's trouble, (Zion's 
travail) when truth and error are both attacking her and causing 
her pain, until all of God's true children are delivered out of her- 
-the brunt and severity of anguish will come mostly upon those 
that "give suck." They will find (and even now are beginning to 
be alarmed) that not only will the babes cease to come into her, 
but many (yes, ultimately all) of those now being fed with milk 
will be weaned and learn to eat meat or die of starvation. "It 
shall be for a vexation only until He shall make you to 
understand doctrine" -or to eat meat. Isa. 28:19, margin. 

One day is with the Lord as a thousand years. (2 Pet. 3:8.) The 
seventh thousand (or Sabbath~"the seventh day is the Sabbath") 
commenced in 1873, consequently we are now in the Sabbath 
day of our text: Pray (desire) that your flight be not on the 
Sabbath. The Jewish law placed restrictions upon the people on 
the Sabbath, and hindered them from journeying as much as 
they might desire—therefore, if bound by those laws it hindered 
flight. How is it now? Is there any special hindrance to escape 
from nominal Zion since we entered the seventh day? We 
answer, Yes; those who stood fast in the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free, and were not entangled by any yoke of 
bondage or creed of men, were in a favored position- those who 
get weaned now and eat the strong meat of present truth (See 
Matt. 24:45,46— which shows that "meat in due season" will be 
given when the Lord shall have come and is present), and hear 
the Lord's word, saying: "Come out of her, my people, that ye be 
not partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues." If they 
now attempt to obey they will find such laws in force in Zion as 
will make it difficult to get out quickly unless those man-made 
laws are disregarded. 

During the last seven years nominal Zion has sought by every 
means to prevent escape from her house; it is easy, very easy, 
for almost any sort of creature to gain admittance, but vile 
indeed must be the one she casts out; but be you ever so faithful 
a child of God, and attempt to go forth in obedience to His call, 
you will find your way wondrously hedged up, and unless your 
senses have been exercised-unless God has taught you 
knowledge and made you to understand true doctrines, you will 
be unable to make your escape. You will first be fawned upon, 
told how indispensable are your services, how much good you 
are doing, how you would be throwing away all your Christian 



influence, how you would lose your social standing, etc. You 
will also be reminded of the extent of learning (worldly wisdom) 
of the church and her ministers, of the comparatively few 
"peculiar people" who hold these views, etc. And, unless you 
have had your spiritual senses exercised in the Word [not by 
merely reading, but by searching] you will be unable to force 
your way against these barriers. Unless possessed of a 
knowledge of the Word you will be unable to test their ministers 
by the evidences of heavenly wisdom~the understanding of 
God's Word, as shown in Isa. 29:10-14. You will be unable to 
prove whether or not they are the Lord's friends by the tests of 
John 15:15, and 16:13. Unless you have laid all on the altar, you 
cannot break away from the social ties and flattering influences; 
but if you have you can say: "We ought to obey God rather than 
men." Yes, you must say: 

The dearest idol I have known, 
Whate'er that idol be, 
Help me to tear it from thy throne, 
And worship only Thee. 

And not only say, but do it. You will be severely tested, for if 
you have been blameless before, an example in conduct, and 
insist on withdrawing, your character will be carefully 
examined, and if possible some pretext will be found to let you 
down and out- as though you had been expelled. 

But we read: "Pray that your flight be not in winter." How shall 
we understand this? We believe that we are now in the 
"harvest," that it is composed of two parts, or as shown in Rev. 
14:14-18, two harvests. The first seven years of gathering the 
"first fruits of the wheat" and a succeeding period of (33 years) 
harvesting of the "Vine of the Earth." The first a time of favor, 
the latter a "time of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation." It is with reference to this first (7 years) harvest (which 
ends we believe in Oct. this year,) that we understand all 
reference and exhortation to the Bride or "little flock" stands 
related: it is her harvest time and if we rightly interpret the Word 
all who will have part in that company and be overcomers will 
come out of "Babylon" before this harvest ends. Harvest always 
comes in summer and is followed by the destructive frosts of 
winter and in the figure used by our Lord we believe that the 
second harvest or time of trouble stands to the first harvest soon 
to end, in the relation of winter. With this thought see the force 
of Jesus' words pray (seek, desire) that you may get out before 
winter—in season to be an overcomer. 

We know that some will say: "The harvest is past-the summer 
is ended and we are not saved." "Yea, the stork in the heaven 
knoweth her appointed times; and the turtle and the crane and 
the swallow observe the time of their coming; but my people 
know not the judgment [dealings] of the Lord. How do ye say, 
we are wise and the law of the Lord is with us? Lo, certainly in 



vain made He it. [They use very little of it].... The wise man is 
ashamed, they are dismayed and taken: lo they have rejected the 
Word of the Lord and what wisdom is in them?" (Jer. 8:7-9, 19- 
22.) No, Zion knows not the time of her visitation, and soon, 
when the harvest and 



[Continued on seventh page.] 

R230 : page 7 

[Continued from second page.] 



summer are ended, it will also be true that the Lord is not in 
Zion-there is no king in her, there is no balm in Gilead~no 
physician there and those then in Zion will have lost the 
"especial" salvation, the prize of being made the heavenly Zion. 

This "winter" time coming, is the time of Zion's travail when the 
great majority of her children will be brought forth but those 
who will be members of the first-born will come forth before the 
travail [and we know not how soon thereafter, they will be 
"changed in a moment in the twinkling of an eye."] 

Thus we read "Before she travailed she brought forth; before her 
pain came she was delivered of a man child [the overcomers]. 
Who hath heard such a thing?... for as soon as Zion travailed she 
brought forth her children" [the great company.] Isa. 66:7. 

In view of these things can you wonder that Jesus says escape 
from the house before winter? The harvest is nearly over; the 
summer will soon be ended, and the winter of trouble will soon 
be here~"Come out of her my people." 



R230 : page 3 



GOD KNOWS. 

God knows—not I-the devious way 
Wherein my faltering feet must tread, 
Before into the light of day 
My steps from out this gloom are lead, 

And since my Lord the path doth see, 
What matter if 'tis hid from me? 
God knows—not I-how sweet accord 
Shall grow at length from out this clash 

Of earthly discords which have jarred 
On soul and sense; I hear the crash, 
Yet feel and know that on His ear 
Breaks harmony-full, deep and clear. 



God knows—not I-why, when I'd fain 
Have walked in pastures green and fair, 
The path He pointed me hath lain 
Through rocky deserts, bleak and bare. 

I kindly trust-since 'tis His will— 
This way lies safety, that way ill. 
His perfect plan I may not grasp, 
Yet I can trust Love Infinite, 

And with my feeble fingers clasp 
The hand which leads me into light. 
My soul upon His errand goes- 
The end I know not-but God knows. 



-Selected. 



R231 : page 3 

EVIDENCE OF FRIENDSHIP. 

"Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. 
Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not 
what his Lord doeth, [his plans, etc.] but I have called you 
friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made 
known unto you." lohn 15:15. 

The end of lesus' earthly ministry was come; during those three 
and a half years he had uttered truths which served to test his 
followers, which proved to some causes of stumbling, to all who 
were not "Israelites indeed:" -truths which had brought the 
opposition of the nominal Jewish church, and of which even 
some of his followers, had said: "This is an hard saying; who 
can hear it?" and walked no more with him. But now this work 
of separating was all over; even Judas had gone out, and Jesus 
and the eleven are alone. He has been telling them some things 
regarding their new and high privileges, their new relationship 
toward God about to be purchased by his death, into the 
enjoyment of which they should enter after he should ascend to 
the Father, and His work as ransom be recognized as perfect. 
Then would come the "power from on high"— the Spirit which 
would endue them with ability to understand spiritual, or 
heavenly things. 

It may have escaped the attention of some that at this time the 
disciples were not begotten of the spirit, though they were 
justified by faith- justified human beings, but not begotten new 
creatures, consequently Jesus' teachings contain little reference 
to the highest things except in parables; he explained little 
concerning the "high calling" of the Bride, but said: "I have yet 
many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. 
Howbeit, when he the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you 



into all truth." How this corroborates Paul's statement: "The 
natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God," 
"neither can he know them because they are spiritually 
discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. Though justified men, they must be 
begotten of the Spirit to comprehend things above the human 
plane. 

After telling them of the future unfolding of truth and of his 
words he tells them why his revelations are for them, viz: 
because he will henceforth treat them as friends and reveal all 
things to them. 

There are two important lessons conveyed in these words of the 
Master, as applicable to us as to the eleven Apostles: first, the 
rule by which He judges who are His friends~"ye are my friends 
if ye do whatsoever I command you." If we submit our wills 
completely to his will, thus becoming dead to the world and 
alive toward God—then he reckons us friends; second, the rule 
by which we may judge whether he reckons us among this class 
of special "friends," viz: If he reveals his work and plans to us, 
even all things which he has heard of the Father. 

Now apply these rules to yourself. If you can say, "Not my will 
but thine be done" -not my plan of saving the world, not my 
plan relative to the preaching of the Gospel-not my will 
regarding the nominal church-not my will regarding myself and 
what I shall do or be-but "Thy will be done" in all these things, 
then you are a "friend" in this special sense spoken of by Jesus. 
Now try the other rule, have you evidence that you are a special 
friend? Is the Spirit leading you daily into more and more of an 
understanding of his words and plan-revealing more and more 
of the "mystery" kept hid in former ages, and showing you 
"things to come." Do you say yes? Very good, then yours is the 
blessed experience of heavenly wisdom, which at the same time 
is a proof that you are a special "friend." Continue and if 
possible increase your consecration, and you shall continue to 
abide in his love and to have fresh evidences of his friendship by 
growth "in grace and in knowledge." 

If the Word and plan of God are not opening before you: [The 
Spirit often uses human agencies for communicating truth.] If 
you are not being led of the Spirit into all truth- if he is not 
showing you "things to come," (John 16:13.) then it looks 
indeed as though you were not of the special friends, and it 
should be your first work to gain this divine friendship by self- 
surrender— consecration. 

All who believe themselves acceptable servants of our Master 
should look for and not be satisfied without this witness of the 
Spirit that they are Christ's friends. 



R231 : page 3 



THE CREDIBILITY OF THE SCRIPTURES. 

Extracts from an Address Delivered by Dr. J. H. Thomas before 
the "Liberal League" (an Infidel Society), of this City and 
published in the Restitution. 

[We have selected these from among other able arguments, 
thinking they might be of interest to our readers, though 
probably most of them you are already familiar with. -ED.] 

If then we believe those things that are unaccountable by law, 
and contrary to our experiences which are the discoveries, and 
works of men, why should we discredit those things that are the 
work of God, as evidenced by competent and creditable 
witnesses? Again I ask in the words of Paul, "Why should it be 
thought a thing incredible that God should raise the dead?" 

We believe there was a time when man did not exist. We know 
he exists now. What has been, may be again; therefore, if man 
ceases to exist, he may exist again, which would not even be 
contrary to our experiences. I contend, therefore, that the Atheist 
and Infidel, in accordance with their own reasoning are bound to 
accept the testimony of the apostles that Jesus rose from the 
dead, whereby the divinity of the Scriptures is proved: for, if 
God raised Jesus from the dead he was divine; and as he 
acknowledged the authority of the old Scriptures, and they 
testified of him, they are divine. 

Having noticed a few of the arguments that might be adduced 
under this head, I call your attention to the New Testament 
prediction of an apostasy and its fulfillment as another reason 
why I believe the Bible to be the word of God. 

If the New Testament prediction be divine authority, there 
should be to-day not only an apostasy from the faith once 
delivered to the saints, but there should be a dominant 
Christianity (at least so-called) political, tyrannical and corrupt. 
As proof of this we call your attention to the predictions. 

Says Paul (Acts 20:28): Take heed to yourselves, and unto all 
the flock over which the Holy Spirit hath made you overseers; 
feed the flock of God, which he hath purchased with his own 
blood; for I know this, that after my departure shall grievous 
wolves enter in among you not sparing the flock; also of your 
own selves, shall men arise and speak perverse things. 

Again, writing to Timothy he says: The time will come when 
they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts 
shall heap to themselves teachers having itching ears, and they 
shall turn away their ears from the truth and shall be turned unto 
fables. 

This is a plain prediction of a departure from the truth as 
proclaimed by Christ and his apostles; and before the apostles 
had finished their work this departure from the truth, or apostasy 



had commenced, and we find Paul writing to the Galatian 
believers, saying: "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from 
him that called you into the favor of Christ unto another gospel; 
which is not another, but there be some that trouble you, and 
would pervert the gospel of Christ." 

We see the predicted apostasy had commenced in Paul's day. 
This was to go on and grow into a political form and become in 
the world an ecclesiastical system supported by the sword. This 
is clearly predicted by Paul. The Thessalonian believers had 
become anxious about the return of Christ as an event about to 
happen, but Paul writes them, saying: "Let no man deceive you 
by any means, for that day shall not come except there come a 
falling away first and that man of sin be revealed, the son of 
perdition who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is 
called God, or that is worshiped so that he as God sitteth in the 
temple of God showing himself that he is God." 

Paul further says: "This wicked one the Lord shall consume with 
the breath of his mouth and destroy with the brightness of his 
coming. " 

According to these predictions then, there ought to have been in 
the past an extensive departure from the faith, a corruption of 
Christianity, developing a pretender to divine authority, lording 
it over the kings, and governments of the earth. 

I ask if this prediction has not been fulfilled-realized in every 
particular? What has been in the past, and what is to-day the 
most notable feature of European history? Is it not a man at the 
head of an ecclesiastical system exhibiting himself as an object 
of the highest homage upon earth, and in the name of Christ 
claiming the highest authority, and the right to lord it over the 
kings and governments of the earth? 

I contend then that the developments of this apostasy-a 
prominent feature of which is a union of church and state -is an 
exact fulfillment of Paul's prediction, and is therefore a good 
and valid reason why we should believe the Bible to be the word 
of God. What human being unassisted by divine inspiration 
could have predicted 1 800 years ago with such clearness of 
vision— such accuracy of detail an apostasy such as now exists, 
headed up in Rome and extending nearly, if not quite, to every 
inhabited part of the globe, and embracing every false system of 
religion-teaching 

R232 : page 3 

for doctrine the commandments of men, and which is fully 
ascribed in the apocalypse and symbolized by a woman sitting 
upon a scarlet colored beast, upon whose forehead is written: 
"Mystery, Babylon the Great. The mother of harlots and 
abominations of the earth." 



This is symbolical and expressive of all names and 
denominations of the great apostasy, from the church of Rome 
to the most extreme division of Protestantism who make void 
the truth by their traditions, and so fill up the measure of Paul's 
predictions, which is evidence that Paul spoke not of himself but 
as he was instructed by the Holy Spirit. 

We call your attention to the wonderful fulfillment of prophetic 
history in relation to the Jews, or Jewish nation, and their 
distinct racial existence at the present time as another reason 
why I believe the Bible to be the word of God. 

That a race of people with no national organization, no 
centralized power, banished from their own land, scattered 
among every nation under heaven, despised, cast out as evil, 
down-trodden, robbed again and again of their wealth, should 
still exist as a distinct people is a remarkable thing, 
unaccountable from any human standpoint. A people massacred 
by tens of thousands, yea more; in A.D. 70, 1,300,000 perished 
at the destruction of their city and temple, and 97,000 were 
carried away captive. Sixty years after, in attempting to return, 
half a million were slaughtered. A.D. 135, the Emperor Adrian 
destroyed 50 castles, 800 cities, and slew 530,000. Under King 
John of England 1,500 were massacred at York in one day. 
Under Ferdinand and Isabella 800,000 by a single decree were 
forced out to sea in boats, and the most of them perished. And 
still they live. 

Does the history of the world record another case like it? Over 
3,000 years ago going down into Egypt a family of 70 persons 
and in 430 years coming out a great nation. They saw the proud 
Egyptian perish in the Red Sea. They witnessed the fall of great 
Babylon and the rise and fall of the mighty empire of Medo- 
Persia -in the words of another: "They out-lived the Caesars 
and the terrible visitation of the dark ages, and here they stand 
to-day as distinct as ever; occupying no country of their own, 
scattered through all lands; identified in their immemorial 
physiognomy, earth's men of destiny, before the venerableness 
of whose pedigree the proudest escutcheons of mankind are but 
trifles of yesterday." 

We return to the works of creation; to the world of liberal- 
minded, to the Atheist, or Infidel for an explanation. Tell us how 
it is that such a remarkable race of Jewish people, in whose days 
nations have been born, kingdoms established, empires formed, 
great and magnificent cities builded, and passed away, leaving 
no sign of their glory, and scarcely a relic to show that they ever 
had an existence; while this people, persecuted, 

R232 : page 4 

banished from place to place, massacred, robbed, and cruelly 
deprived of their wealth by almost every government on the 



earth, still live a powerful people, distinct in their facial and 
racial peculiarities, and still hold the wealth of the world? 

We read no answer in the Infidel's revelation~the works of 
nature~to such a question, and we contend that apart from the 
Bible-apart from a revelation from the Deity no answer can be 
given. 

How different has been the course of the other people! What 
Englishman can say with a certainty to-day he is from Briton, 
Roman, Saxon or Norman stock? But find the Jew where you 
may, in Russia, Germany, England, or our own great republic 
where English, Irish, Germans and all nations amalgamate like 
metals in a furnace, and he is a Jew still claiming Abraham as 
their father, clinging to Moses, holding fast their traditions, 
looking toward Jerusalem, longing for their Messiah, as when 
their fathers trod the vine-clad hills of Judah's land- wandering 
for centuries, weary and foot-sore, in every land but their own; 
surviving the greatest persecutions ever inflicted upon a people; 
suffering enormous and almost incredible butchery again and 
again for over eighteen centuries, they have risen again as a 
great power among mankind. Holding the money power of 
Europe, among the foremost in science, literature, or 
government, you find the Jew the marvel of nations, the 
standing miracle of the world's history, which no human tongue 
untouched by spirit power has ever been able to explain apart 
from that book, the Bible— that book from whose divinely 
inspired pages comes the solution of the mystery in the words of 
Jeremiah, the prophet: 

"Fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, neither be dismayed, O 
Israel, for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to save thee; though I 
make a full end of all nations, I will not make a full end of thee; 
but I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee 
altogether unpunished." 

Surely there are none so blind as not to see a solution of the 
mystery and the voice of God in this prophetic announcement: 

"O Israel be not dismayed, for though I make a full end of all 
nations whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not make a full 
end of thee; for lo! the days come, saith the Lord, that I will 
bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, and I 
will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, 
and they shall possess it; for lo, I will save thee from afar, and 
thy seed from the land of their captivity, and Jacob (or Israel) 
shall return and be at rest, and none shall make him afraid." 

From this book, the Bible, then, we learn why the Jews still 
exist, why they still retain a distinct racial identity, why they are 
a power among mankind, why they hold the wealth of the 
world! —because God hath said he will not make an end of them, 
but will deliver them from their captivity and bring them again 
to their own land, where they shall have rest. 



I contend, then, that the Israelitish people are a living testimony 
of the divinity of the Bible-of the spoken word of God. Like the 
bush of Moses-ever burning yet never consumed- an 
unanswerable refutation of the blasphemous sophistry of that 
class of Atheists who, like Col. R. G. Ingersoll, dare to speak 
with solemn mockery of the word of God, and defy Yahweh the 
Elohim of Israel, who hath said again, by the same prophet: 

"Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and declare it in the 
isles afar off: Say, He that scattered Israel will gather him, and 
keep him as a shepherd doth his flock; for the Lord hath 
redeemed Jacob from the hand of him that was stronger than he. 
Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather 
them from the coasts of the earth.... I will say to the north give 
up, and to the south keep not back; bring my sons from far, and 
my daughters from the ends of the earth (Isa. 43:6.), for I am a 
father to Israel and Ephraim is my first-born." 

Let me assure you that as certain as this prophecy has been 
fulfilled in the preservation of down-trodden Israel in all lands, 
so certain will it be fulfilled in their restoration to their own 
land. Even now the Jews number 30,000 in Jerusalem and 
vicinity, and every day increasing. I ask what better reason need 
we give for believing the Bible to be the word of God? 

But no greater reason is the one I have just advanced than the 
one which follows why I believe the Bible to be the word of 
God. I refer to the prophecies in general and the wonderful and 
marvelous accuracy of their fulfillment. 

How different from the vague, incoherent predictions of the 
Greek and Roman augurs, and the doubtful, hesitating utterances 
of diviners, soothsayers, psychologists, and false prophets of all 
ages. The latter, speaking from the inspiration of nature and an 
intuition common to an animal creation, there is no certainty of 
their predictions coming to pass; while the prophecies, being 
accurately fulfilled, compel us to believe that they spoke as they 
were moved by the spirit or inspiration of God. 

The prophets, being inspired by Him who knoweth all things, 
and who hath said to the world by the prophet Isaiah: "I am God, 
and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, 
and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying 
my counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure." 

Their predictions are always fulfilled. I contend that if we 
carefully consider the prophecies and their fulfillment the 
evidence of the divinity of the Scriptures is overwhelming. 

Take for instance the prophecies concerning the Jews. It is 
admitted by Atheists and Infidels that the Jews are an ancient 
people, going back at least 3,000 years, that they have 
documents which they regard as those of Moses, and hold as 
divine. 



We turn, then, to Moses and read what is written, and we find 
that God informs Moses that after he has brought Israel into the 
land, which he swore unto their fathers, that floweth with milk 
and honey, and when they shall have eaten and filled themselves 
and waxed fat, then will they turn unto other gods and serve 
them, and "provoke me, and break my covenant." 

And Moses was required to write the words in a book as a 
witness against them, and tell the words to the people. Moses 
did so, and you will find them in the 31st chapter of 
Deuteronomy, and Moses said to the people: "I know that after 
my death ye will utterly corrupt yourselves and turn aside from 
the way which I have commanded you, and evil will befall you 
in the latter days, because you do evil in the sight of the Lord, to 
provoke him to anger through the work of your hands." 

Then follows a prediction of the evils that should fall upon them 
in the latter days of the Mosaic constitution of things which was 
then being laid or founded. Some of the evils predicted 

R233 : page 4 

are as follows: "I will scatter you among the heathen, or nations, 
and will draw out a sword after you, and will bring a nation 
against thee from afar, from the end of the earth, as the eagle 
flieth, a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand, a nation 
of fierce countenance... and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates 
until thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou 
trustedst throughout all thy land: and thou shalt eat the fruit of 
thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters ...in 
the siege, and in the straightness wherewith thine enemies shall 
distress thee." 

I ask you to read the history of the passing away of the Mosaic 
constitution of things at the destruction of Jerusalem, and you 
cannot help being awed by the accuracy of the fulfillment. The 
Roman eagles were planted upon her walls, and in the midst of 
the siege so great was the distress that women took their babes 
from their breasts and roasted them for food. 

Every line and word of the prophecy by Moses was fulfilled 
with awful reality. One million three hundred thousand Jews 
perished and ninety-five thousand were carried away captive; 
and so the Jews were scattered among all nations. Jerusalem was 
laid in the dust, not one stone of their magnificent temple was 
left standing upon another, and to-day Jerusalem continues to be 
trodden down by the desecrating footsteps of the Mussulman 
and Turk. A marvelous fulfillment of that prophecy of Jesus 
when he stood and cried: 

"These be the days of vengeance that all things that are written 
may be fulfilled: for there shall be great distress in the land, and 
wrath upon this people, and they shall fall by the edge of the 
sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations, and 



Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles until the time of 
the Gentiles be fulfilled." 

Jerusalem to-day is a standing fulfillment of this prophecy. 

Don't tell me this prophecy was written after the event, for the 
preponderance of evidence is against you. There is little if any 
doubt that this prophecy was written as early as A.D. 50. But it 
matters not when it was written, as it is testified by the apostles 
that it was spoken by Christ, and their testimony has never been 
impeached. Not only so, but the prophecy is in course of 
fulfillment before our eyes, and speaks for its own divinity; the 
Jews are still scattered, Jerusalem still trodden down. Why? 
Because the times of the Gentiles are not yet fulfilled. 

But we turn to other prophecies equally remarkable. Of the city 
of Tyre, once the stronghold of the Phenicians, that stood a 
thirteen-years siege by land and water, and even then not 
conquered, it is said: 

"Behold! I am against thee, O Tyre! and will cause many nations 
to come up against thee: and they shall destroy the walls of Tyre 
and break down her towers. I will also scrape her dust from her, 
and make her like the top of a rock, and it shall be a place for the 
spreading of nets, for I have spoken it." 

History informs us that Alexander scraped the ruins from the 
site of the old city. The Infidel, Volney, states that it is a place 
where fishermen spread their nets. It is evident, then, that the 
prophecy was the voice of God, and not man. 

Again the prophet says concerning Samaria: "I will make 
Samaria as an heap of the field and as a planting of a vineyard, 
and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley, and I 
will discover the foundations thereof." Was this fulfilled? Says 
Dr. Keith: "The people of the country, in order to make room for 
their fields and gardens, have swept away the old houses and 
poured the stones down into the valley. The hill is left like the 
plantings of a vineyard. Every clause of the prophecy has been 
fulfilled with awful minuteness. 

Do we need a better reason for believing the Bible is the word of 
God? Could a man whose lips were not touched with the 
inspiration of Deity have spoken with such unerring certainty? 
Every man of sense, of culture, of reason, must answer "No." 

The same is true of the Babylonian, Medo-Persian, Grecian and 
Roman kingdoms. Their rise and fall were accurate fulfillments 
of prophecy. Even the Roman empire to-day, in its divided state, 
fills the prophetic vision. 

But for a moment we must call your attention to prophecies that 
relate to our own times; and what are they? I answer, it is 
declared in the prophecies that "in the latter days"-- mark, it says 
in the "latter days"-- that the land of Israel shall be "brought 



back from the sword," and numbers of the Jews are to return, 
having been gathered out of the nations, and settle in agricultural 
colonies, dwelling in unwalled villages, dwelling safely, without 
bars or gates, possessing much wealth in cattle and goods, under 
the protection of a foreign power easily recognized as the British 
power. That the Ottoman or Turkish power must pass away. 
That it will be accomplished or brought about by Russia, in 
conjunction with other powers. That she will be led on with a 
view to take great spoils from the Jews. That she will plant her 
standards at Constantinople and take Egypt. That she will be 
opposed in her onward march by the British lions, who will say 
to her: "Hast thou come to take a spoil?" That it will result in all 
the nations of Europe being gathered together in the great battle 
of Armageddon. That the armies of the nations are overthrown, 
the kingdom of God established upon the mountains of Israel, 
the nations subdued, and a reign of righteousness and peace 
given to the world. 

These are prophecies that relate to our own times. I ask what of 
the outlook? Are they being fulfilled as evidence that God has 
spoken? Most assuredly they are. 

The Jews are slowly but surely turning their wandering feet 
toward Jerusalem. The Anglo-Turkish Convention opened the 
way for their return with a freedom that has never been granted 
before. England has thrown her protecting arm over Asiatic 
Turkey, which makes the British power, in fulfillment of the 
prophecy, the protectorate of the Jews. 

When the protectorate was officially announced the Jewish 
Chronicle wrote thus: "There has dawned in the East~the cradle 
of our race~a light which deepens in effulgence as the day 
advances." 

The Jewish World wrote: "This opens a great future for the Jews 
of the Holy Land." 

R233 : page 5 

The result is, numerous schemes are being put forth to further 
the return of the Jews and establish them in agricultural 
colonies, which is an accurate fulfillment of the prophecy. Of 
these I may mention the great humanitarian scheme of the Sir 
Moses Montefiore Testimonial Fund, the object of which, says 
the Jewish World, is to better the condition of the Jews of 
Palestine by the introduction of industrial and agricultural 
pursuits. But lately, the Testimonial Fund Committee advanced 
L2,600 to a building society in Jerusalem, of which societies 
there are several. I may also refer to Mr. Oliphant's book which 
has just appeared advocating the formation of a Jewish 
settlement in the land of Gilead. 

Of this work, the Jewish Chronicle writes: 



"We are inundated with books and pamphlets on Palestine; the 
air is thick with schemes for colonizing the Holy Land once 
more, but none of the projectors are more enthusiastic, or more 
practical than Mr. Oliphant." 

I ask what is this but the fulfillment of the prophecies before our 
eyes —the prophecies I have just referred to—an evidence that 
God has spoken? 



R233 : page 5 

THE FOOTSTEPS OF JESUS. 

"Christ suffered... leaving you a copy so that you may follow in 
His footsteps." 1 Pet. 2:21, Diag. 

If we follow in the exact footsteps of another we always arrive 
at the same destination. Our text informs us that the steps in 
which Jesus trod, and in which he calls upon us to follow, were 
steps of suffering. But why does he call upon us to endure 
suffering? Because of the great love wherewith he hath loved us, 
and because as he prayed (John 17:22-24), he would have us 
with him that we may behold his glory, and be joint heirs with 
him to all that glory. 

For the joy set before him he endured that suffering, despising 
the shame. What was that joy that nerved to such endurance our 
suffering Lord? Paul says because "He was obedient unto death. 
God also hath HIGHLY EXALTED him and given him a name 
above every name, etc." Phil. 2:9. If he was highly exalted after 
and because of his obedience to death, he had more glory and 
honor then than that which he had with the Father before the 
world was. Was he immortal then? No, for the Scripture saith 
that the King of kings and Lord of lords who, in his times, Jesus 
will show to be the blessed and only Potentate, and to whom he 
will deliver up the kingdom of earth, after that he has subdued 
all things unto him, this one, the Father, Jehovah, is the only one 
who hath immortality: (1 Tim. 6:16)~"life in himself '-- 
independent of any support outside itself, subject to no 
conditions, incorruptible, exhaustless, unlimited, eternal. Now 
when Jesus was highly exalted he became partaker of the same 
Divine, immortal nature, for we read "As the Father hath life in 
himself, 

R234 : page 5 

so hath he given to the Son that he should have life in himself. 
John 5:26. 

This partaking of the Divine nature, becoming the Son of God, 
the "only begotten Son" on this divine plane was a part, but only 
a part of the joy set before our Lord. He was also to redeem 
from death and restore to perfection a glorious race of beings, 



once created in the image of God, so that "every creature which 
is in heaven and on earth will say, blessing, and honor, and 
glory, and power be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and 
unto the Lamb for ever and ever." 

O, what a joy that will be to his glorious benevolent nature. But 
that is not all. Having been found in fashion as a man (a perfect 
man) he loved humanity with all the devotion and tenderness of 
a perfect affection. And as some of the race come to realize and 
appreciate his great love and so much so as to forsake all and 
follow him, he longs to have these with him where he is that 
they may behold and share his glory. This joy was also set 
before him-the joy of bringing many sons (other Sons begotten 
of God) to glory— to the same Divine plane. O, what wonder that 
for such glory, and honor, and blessing, he should bear the cross, 
despising the shame. 

And this same joy— this exceeding and ETERNAL WEIGHT of 
GLORY is set before you who are called to follow in his 
footsteps. Now weigh it if you can; measure it if you can- the 
breadth, the length, the height, the depth. Oh, can you? Eye hath 
not seen nor ear heard it, neither hath entered into the heart of 
(the natural) man, the things which God hath prepared for them 
that love him. But he hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit. 

We are called to be joint heirs with Jesus, heirs of immortality, 
partakers of the divine nature, part of the divine family, far 
above men and angels. We as the bride of the Lamb are to have 
a name that is above every name, since we are the people for his 
name. The Bride shall bear her husband's name, and she shall be 
like unto his glorious body. 

Wherefore holy brethren (reckoned holy since purchased from 
sin and death), partakers of the heavenly calling, consider Jesus. 
"He was rich," (a glorious spiritual being before the world was) 
yet for our sakes he became poor (transferred his life from a 
spiritual to a human form, then sacrificed that) that we, through 
his poverty, might be made rich (partakers of his high 
exaltation). 

Let us look for his footprints. We find that his first step was 
consecration. "A body hast thou prepared me (not prepared until 
it had reached its maturity-thirty years, according to Jewish 
law). Then said I, Lo, I come to do Thy will, O God." Heb. 
10:5,7. "Not my (human) will but thine be done." He then 
symbolized by his burial in, and resurrection from, the water, his 
entire consecration, his willingness to be immersed- swallowed 
up in death-and his faith in God's power to raise him to a new 
life. Have you followed him here? Immediately after, he was led 
into the wilderness, away from human sympathy, human 
society, and human pursuits. Are you there, or are you clinging 
to a worldly church for sympathy, society, and worldly 
ambition? There he was tempted and tried in all points; so must 



you be. He was armed with the sword of the Spirit, which is the 
Word of God, wherewith he was able to quench all the fiery 
darts of the enemy. Are you thus armed? 

His entire consecration separated him from all human sympathy 
and friendship. He was a man, with the same natural desires and 
necessities as other men; consequently, when these were all laid 
on the altar of sacrifice: "He was a man of sorrows and 
acquainted with grief. " The purity of his life and teaching 
condemned the teaching of the Scribes and Pharisees, (and 
brought upon him the anathema of the church of his day.) He 
was counted a fanatic, an impostor, a teacher of false doctrine, 
as one possessed of a devil. The religious teachers to whom the 
people looked for guidance denounced him and finally stirred up 
the people to have him crucified. It separated him from his 
earthly relatives, "for neither did his brethren believe on him. " 
(They were doubtless ashamed of the stigma which his peculiar 
and unpopular course brought upon them as a family.) It would 
seem that he was an outcast from his mother's home, for he said: 
"The foxes have holes and the birds of the air have nests, but the 
Son of Man hath not where to lay his head." As a citizen he was 
despised by his fellow citizens, counted an enemy of Caesar's, 
and one who sought to usurp kingly authority. His conversation 
was in heaven, and earth understood it not. 

Has your consecration so sanctified —set you apart from the 
world, the nominal church, your former worldly friendships, 
etc.? Have you followed Jesus here? Has your name been so cast 
out as evil? It will be if you follow Jesus closely. If they hated 
me, said Jesus, they will hate you also, and whatsoever they 
have done unto me, they will do unto you also. But if they do so 
cast you out, Jesus will hear of it, as he did of the blind man 
whose eyes he had opened, and as then, he will find you and 
show himself to you, and talk with you and open the eyes of 
your understanding, causing your heart to burn within you while 
he opens up the Scriptures. Blessed communion: What a friend 
we find in Jesus ! 

This was the victory whereby he overcame—even his faith in 
God, for he looked not at the things which are seen, but at the 
things which are unseen-eternal. Are you so doing? When he 
was led as a lamb to the slaughter, he opened not his mouth. Do 
you seek to imitate that uncomplaining, patient meekness in the 
everyday trials of your wilderness life, and will you by his grace 
do so until he says it is enough? Step cautiously, plant your feet 
just in his prints, and you cannot mistake the way. Don't think to 
reach the same end by avoiding some of the most difficult steps. 
You cannot do it; you will lose your footing and fall. Neither 
should you hesitate when you find the steps leading through a 
thorny and difficult way. O no: the time is too short. RUN with 
patience. 



Ah, dear brother, sister, it is no easy road; but do you think the 
end justifies the means? Now look again at the prize; keep your 
eye of faith fixed on that. Give up your human will, your human 
ambition, etc., as Jesus did, and commit your new spiritual life 
to him who is able to keep it. If you let Him, God will work in 
you to will and to do of his good pleasure, and Jesus says: "Fear 
not, little flock; it is the Father's good pleasure to give you the 
kingdom. " 



R234 : page 5 

THE TIMES WE LIVE IN. 

The present is a momentous crisis. All sects are shaking. The 
religious world is convulsed. Atheism has opened her batteries, 
and unsheathed her sword. Skepticism is big with hopes. 
Catholic and Protestant Popery are plodding and plotting for the 
supremacy. The little and the great Popes are on tiptoe. Saints 
are praying for the millennium; myriads are laboring for its 
introduction. The Bible and the creeds are at war. There is no 
truce. Such is the present. -Christian Baptist. 



R234 : page 5 

"ART THOU HE THAT 
TROUBLETH ISRAEL?" 

These were the words of Ahab, king of Israel, to Elijah. Ahab, it 
will be remembered, was the husband of Jezebel, the wicked 
woman, who persecuted Elijah, and from whom he fled into the 
wilderness for three and a half years. (See 1 Kings 18:17.) 

We have heretofore seen that all three of these Jewish characters 
were types or figures of classes in the Gospel age, and that their 
actions were such as to illustrate the actions of those classes 
which they represented: Elijah represented the church-the true 
and earnest teachers of God's Word; Jezebel is used to represent 
the false church, Papacy, and which came into power by 
marriage with the Roman Empire, which is represented by 
Ahab. 

As Papacy used the Roman army and power to persecute the 
true teachers of the Lord (and slew many) for three and a half 
symbolic years, or twelve hundred and sixty symbolic days; so 
Jezebel used Ahab's power to persecute Elijah and slay the 
Lord's prophets for three and a half literal years. During those 
years there was great drouth in the land; so, too, during the 1260 
years of Papal persecution, ending in 1798, there was a great 
spiritual drouth and "a famine, not of bread nor a thirst for 
water, but of hearing the words of the Lord." Amos 8:11. Then 



the false teachers of Baal (Papacy), being refuted, an abundant 
shower has come; Jehovah is again recognized. But Jezebel and 
her daughters still hate the Elijah class and seek their 
destruction. 

It is about this time that Ahab said to Elijah: "Art thou he that 
troubleth Israel?" Elijah troubled them because he was a true 
prophet and opposed their sins; so too with those now who 
remain true to God, who will not bow to the forms and customs 
of this perverse age, but rather reprove them. Sorely vexed by 
these reproofs, those at ease in Zion use almost the words of 
Ahab to Elijah: "Art thou he that troubleth Israel?" 

Yes, we would trouble Israel. God has said: "He that hath my 
word let him speak my word." "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy 
voice like a trumpet and show my people their 
transgressions... yet they seek me daily and delight to know my 
ways 

R235 : page 5 

as a nation that did righteousness and forsook not the ordinances 
of their God." This was applicable to fleshly Israel (the 
"shadow") and to the nominal Gospel church as well. There 
never was a time in which the Jewish laws and ordinances were 
more faithfully observed than during the seven years of their 
"harvest." Every form and ceremony and tithe was scrupulously 
remembered. The Temple just finished by Herod was the 
grandest in which they had ever worshiped. Their religious 
system was gaining a worldwide reputation. Missionary 
enterprises were on foot for Judaising the world, and so zealous 
were they that Jesus said of them, "Ye compass sea and land to 
make one proselyte." Yet of all this grand display-zeal, pomp, 
and seeming success—it was said, "This people draweth nigh 
unto me with their mouth and honoreth me with their lips, but 
their heart is far from me. Matt. 15:8. Of their religious 
observances Jesus said: "Ye make clean the outside-like whited 
walls and sepulchers clean and beautiful outside, but full of 
decay and corruption within. 

R235 : page 6 

That church, that age and that "harvest" were but the shadows 
of this age, church, and harvest. As then so now, prosperity and 
seemingly great success attends both at home and abroad the 
church's efforts. Magnificent temples of worship, grand music 
and costly apparel, seem to stamp the present time as one of 
unparalleled success; yet now as then, it is mostly on the outside 
that the beauty is seen, for inwardly the church seems daily to 
become more corrupt and worldly. "Lovers of pleasures more 
than lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the 
power thereof; from such turn away." 2 Tim. 3:1-5. 



Jesus said the converts to Judaism were really injured by being 
brought into that corrupted church, and we believe that the same 
thing is true here since the degeneracy of the Gospel church. 
The man of the world is injured more than benefited. While of 
the world he was open to conviction of sin, but the church has 
said to him: You are a moral man, and hence not a sinner; if you 
have any secret vices let them go, and come join our church, 
then you will be one of us in "good and regular standing." The 
man is surprised at the liberality of the view, always thought he 
was as good as the majority of the church members and better 
than some, and is pleased to know that the church recognized his 
worth; pleased, too, perhaps, to enter into organized respectable 
society. He joins the church, and is now a church member in 
name. He is benefited by being kept from some outward and 
shameful sins, but he is injured in as much, as he is now 
persuaded by the church that he is a Christian while in reality he 
has neither part nor lot in the matter. 

He is injured by getting the form without the power of 
Christianity. He now falls fast asleep—at ease in Zion; he awakes 
only when a criticism of the church is made; he then feels 
himself a "defender of the faith." 

And not only is the man injured, but the church is injured yet 
more, for who can estimate the weight and effect of every such 
"tare," every such sham Christian, every such self-deceived 
deceiver? But the Lord's wheat field (Matt. 12.) is overrun with 
such tares, which choke the wheat and almost hide it from view. 
Now that we are in the "harvest" and the sickle of truth is doing 
its work, what wonder if there be some commotion? 

Zion is at ease and self-satisfied, and when we cry aloud and 
spare not, but show God's people their sins and their forms of 
godliness without the power thereof, they become enraged and 
complain that we are troubling Israel. When this same charge 
was made against Jesus, our head-that he was opposing and 
hindering the God-appointed leaders and teachers, the Chief 
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, he said: "Think not that I am 
come to send peace on the earth: I came not to send peace, but a 
sword [Truth is a sword]. For I came to set... at variance... and a 
man's foes shall be they of his own household... and he that doth 
not take his cross and follow after me is not worthy of me. " 
(Matt. 10:34.) 

TRUTH NEVER HAS LED 

the majority, during this time when evil is permitted to reign, 
and hence always has had as a large part of its work to reprove 
darkness. Reproof is never pleasant, but is especially unpleasant 
to those who most need it. [Of the saints it is written: "Great 
peace have they that love thy law, and nothing shall offend 
them."] It was because he thus reproved sin and error that Elijah 
was hated and called Israel's troubler; for the same reason Jesus 



was denounced, and for the same reason all who will live Godly 
are similarly offensive. 

But if any man will reprove, let him speak as an oracle of God, 
and let nothing be done or said, through bitterness, strife, or vain 
glory; but let him by a meek and quiet spirit show forth in love 
the power, as well as the form of Godliness to the praise of Him 
who hath called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 

Jesus in his day called the attention of the Jews to the judgments 
of God about to come upon them, saying: "These be days of 
vengeance that all things written should be fulfilled." (Luke 
21:22.) Elijah gave warning of the death of Jezebel and Ahab, 
that dogs should lick his blood and eat her flesh. So here it 
becomes our place to speak the word of God as declared by him, 
that Ahab and his successors (the Roman and succeeding 
empires) shall be slain— i.e. destroyed. (Dan. 2:44.) Also, that 
Jezebel shall be "eaten by dogs" (the degraded), i.e. Papacy, and 
in fact the nominal church, as it represents the same church and 
world-united system, shall be cast down and consumed. 

Elijah further represents the "little flock" of despised ones, by 
being highly exalted, caught up in a whirlwind. Oh, that we may 
be among the little company now separating, who shall soon be 
changed in a moment into the perfect likeness of our Lord and 
head! 



R235 : page 6 

PRUDENT OR IMPRUDENT, WHICH? 

Wisdom and prudence are good things in their place, and when 
not overdone or abused; but there is such a thing as being over- 
wise, or "wise above that which is written," and there is, we 
think, such a thing as being prudent above that which is written. 

We have been somewhat exercised upon this thought by the 
expressions and looks of some of our friends, when their 
attention has been called to the subject of Restitution. 

The thought that men are to be restored to natural life again, to 
live again in the flesh as men, that they are in fact to be restored 
to all they lost through Adam, or because of the sin of Adam, 
seems to many to be the height of presumption, but they would 
not apply the same rule of reasoning to other matters, we think. 
Take Rom. 5:18-19: "As by the offense of one, judgment came 
upon all men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of 
one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. For 
as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners, so by 
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous." Now if 
these words were used in the same way regarding anything other 
than the relation between God and man, who would think of 



making the second part of each statement mean less than the 
first? 

Now without asserting positively that man will live again in the 
flesh, restored to Adamic perfection, let us consider our attitude 
in connection with the fact, (if it be a fact) and who would be 
likely to know it. 

First, then, those would be most likely to know it who are in a 
condition to receive the truth whatever it be. Not that the truth 
can be anything but the truth, but it may be very different from 
what we had supposed it to be, owing to previous education and 
training; but if we are willing to receive it because it is truth, it is 
presumptive evidence that we shall be likely to recognize it 
when brought to view. 

Again, having recognized the truth, and having become 
acquainted with it, we should be likely to love it, and of course 
to receive it; for we cannot suppose one would reject a thing 
they loved (unless indeed they love something else more, and 
that something antagonize this). Then having recognized, loved 
and received this truth, what more natural than that they should 
proclaim it? 

It is hardly supposable that one could become acquainted with a 
truth of such a deep interest to mankind as this is, and yet say 
nothing about it. 

The subject is one so full of comfort, and one, too, which 
appeals to our sense of God's wisdom, justice, and love; and one 
which, from every stand-point, except of settled prejudice, gives 
us a view of God's attributes shining forth gloriously, which so 
entrances us as we gaze that we are constrained to cry out with 
the Psalmist (107-8): "O that men would praise the Lord for his 
goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men. " 

But if the doctrine of restitution be true (don't forget that there is 
a "much more" salvation), how nicely it would match with and 
explain this Scripture which has so long puzzled us: Ezekiel 
16:53. In this chapter, God, through the prophet, is "causing 
Jerusalem to know her abominations," (2nd verse) and after 
speaking at some length upon the subject, says: "When I shall 
bring again the captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her 
daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then 
will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of 
them." But says one: "That does not prove restitution; some 
commentators say that God did not intend 

R236 : page 6 

to bring again the captivity of either; he only says, when I do 
one, I will do the other, and he is speaking not of death." 

We are not asserting NOW that it does prove restitution, only 
considering that if the doctrine is true, how easy you would get 



along with some Scriptures, and how you would not have to be 
so very "wise and prudent" with a good many passages of 
Scripture. 

(55th verse): "When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall 
return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall 
return to their former estate, [they were dead and in their graves, 
you know,] then thou and thy daughters shall return to your 
former estate. " 

Opposed to the thought that this was an emphatic way of saying 
that he would do neither is the statement in the 61st verse: "And 
I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy 
covenant~(i.e., the old covenant). 

Again, if it is true, what light would be shed on the words of 
Jesus in Matthew 1 1 :24, where in speaking of the privileges 
which Capernaum had failed to improve, he said: "But I say 
unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in 
the day of Judgment, than for thee. " And this last would 
harmonize with the other quoted from Ezekiel. This view would 
lend some meaning to the words of Jesus in Luke 12:32: 
"Whosoever speaketh against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be 
forgiven him, neither in this world nor in the world to come. " 
With this view we shall not wonder so much that Peter said 
(Acts 3:21) of Jesus: "Whom the heaven must receive until the 
times of restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of his holy prophets which have been since the world 
began. " 

But say some: "Do not tell the people such things; if you do they 
will never repent, but will live right on in sin." My dear sir, who 
told you that? 

If it is true, and God has been speaking of it by the mouth of all 
his holy prophets since the world began, as Peter says, shall we 
be prudent above that which is written? If we should, it would 
be equivalent to saying that God was very unwise to allow the 
prophets to utter such things, even though they were true, and 
that if he had the prudence of some of his creatures, he would 
never have allowed such writings as that in Ezekiel to be put 
before the world, together with many other careless (?) 
statements, lest men might guess that the Psalmist was right, 
when at the end of every verse of the 136th Psalm he says: "The 
mercy of the Lord endureth forever," and if they were to think 
that, just as likely as not the very next thing they would think 
would be that the punishment of the wicked would end some 
time; and if they should get that idea, they might find an 
explanation to some texts that prudence has said taught the 
doctrine of "endless torment;" and if they should become 
convinced that God did not intend to punish the wicked beyond 
the point of reformation, they might conclude that his name 
(Love) was very appropriate, and love him too. 



Now, it is a noticeable fact, that those who do not believe in the 
doctrine of restitution are the ones who think it is imprudent to 
teach it. Query: Are they the ones referred to in Matthew 1 1:25? 
Jesus had been telling, how much more tolerable it would be for 
Sodom in the day of judgement than for Capernaum, and: "At 
that time Jesus answered and said: I thank thee, O Father, Lord 
of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the 
wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes." 

And 1 Cor. 1:19: "I will destroy the wisdom of the wise and 
bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent." Is it not best, 
then, dear brethren, to give our whole attention to the "spirit of 
truth," and like prattlers (babes), tell it just as it is, and thus 
insure further revelations? For: 

Blind unbelief is sure to err, 
And scan His work in vain; 
God is his own interpreter, 
And He will make it plain. 

If our Heavenly Father has not been prudent enough to guard 
his own character, we shall make a poor display of our wisdom 
to undertake to do it for him, and we cannot afford to lose the 
things that would be "hid" from us by so doing. 

"I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou 
hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast 
revealed them unto babes." "Even so, Father, for so it seemed 
good in thy sight." 

J. C. S. 



The desert rose, though never seen by man, 
Is nurtured with a care divinely good. 
The ocean gem, though 'neath the rolling main 
Is ever brilliant in the eyes of God. 

Think not thy work and worth are all unknown, 

Because no partial pens men paint thy praise; 

Man may not see nor mind, but God will own 

Thy worth and work, thy thoughts and words and ways. 

N. B. Cobb. 



R236 : page 7 

THE PRESENCE AND HARVEST. 

(MATT. 24:3.) 

"What shall be the sign of thy presence and of the 
consummation of the age?" (See Emphatic Diaglott.) 



This rendering sheds light on the relation between the presence 
of Christ and the Harvest. The Greek word parousia does not 
mean the act of coming, but the being present. So the Lexicons 
tell us. The word aion does not mean this globe, or this general 
order of things, but an era, or age. 

This passage, it will be seen, gives no countenance to the quite 
popular conception of the relation between the coming of Christ 
and the "wreck of matter and crush of worlds." This false notion 
makes the subject one of dread. 

The word suntelia, translated end, does not mean a point, but a 
period of time. The same word is used in Matt. 13:39: "The 
harvest is the end [suntelia] of the age." In verse 30 Jesus shows 
that the harvesting is a work done. "In the time [period] of the 
harvest." With these few facts before us, reading the text gives 
this as the substance of the question: "What shall be the sign 
[evidence] of thy presence and of the harvest of the age?" 

The sign of the presence is the sign of the time of harvest-one 
sign (evidence in the aggregate) for two things. The worker and 
the work are related to each other. Whoever believes, on the 
strength of what he considers good evidence, that the harvest is 
come, ought to believe in the presence of Christ, as Lord of the 
Angel reapers. The presence and the harvest are related not only 
in the text, but in reason. Some who once consistently accepted 
both, because of their relation, now deny the presence, and 
inconsistently hold that He will not come until the end of the 
harvest. They will doubtless soon, in order to regain the balance 
of consistency, discard the harvest also. Matt. 24:3 must suffer 
violence, if it must be maintained that the harvest -the end of 
the age, and its work, -precedes the coming of Christ; and this is 
the position of all who deny the presence of Christ and yet teach 
that we are in the harvest time. 

It would not be so inconsistent with the order of the text should 
it be claimed that the presence of Christ, for some preparatory 
reason, should precede the harvest, as it was at the first advent, 
from His birth to His ministry; but to invert the order and have 
the consummation of the age before His arrival seems absurd. 

We have no desire to make parallels, but when parallels really 
exist between the closing work of the Jewish and Gospel ages, 
we are glad to accept them, and regard them as a strength to the 
argument on the equality of the "Two Dispensations." And it is 
strangely out of harmony with the pattern character of the 
Jewish dispensation to claim, as some do, that though Christ was 
present on the Jewish level to introduce the Jewish harvest, yet 
He will not come to the level of the Gospel church until the 
Gospel harvest is ended. 

There can be no doubt that the cause of this inconsistency, and 
denial of the presence of Christ during the Gospel harvest, is a 
misapprehension of what the level of the perfect Gospel church 



is. Paul gives us the key when he says: "Ye are not in the flesh, 
but in the spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you." 
(Rom. 8:9.) The ideal of the flesh is a perfect flesh man, but the 
ideal of the Spirit is "the spirits of just men made perfect." (Heb. 
12:23.) If a perfect flesh man has a flesh body, a perfect spiritual 
being ought to have a "spiritual body "--and such Paul assures us 
will be the case: "It is sown a natural [psukikon— animal] body; it 
is raised a spiritual [pneumatikon] body." The former, even 
when perfect, is, and must be, according to the law of the flesh; 
and the latter is by the law of the Spirit. So Jesus, knowing both 
laws, says: "That which is born of [produced by] the flesh is 
flesh; and that which is born of [produced by] the Spirit is 
spirit." 

No wonder that those who deny the presence and yet believe the 
harvest is here, are anxious to ignore some of the parallels of the 
Two Dispensations. Losing sight of the parallel causes them to 
ignore also the contract; for the second coming is, 

R237 : page 7 

and should be, in harmony with the spiritual character of the 
Gospel dispensation, even as the first coming was in harmony 
with the fleshly character of the Jewish dispensation. 

That spiritual beings are naturally invisible to mortals, has often 
been proved; and that they have power to appear when it is 
necessary. God is said to be invisible, and of Christ it is said: 
"Who is the image of the invisible God, the first born of every 
creature;" (Col. 1:15) clearly implying that as soon as creatures 
are born of the Spirit they, too, become invisible. Angels are 
naturally invisible to mortals, and yet on special occasions they 
have been seen, and men have the promise of being made like 
unto the angels, and also like unto Christ. 

The invisibility of the new being to mortals is more than implied 
in Paul's teaching in 2 Cor. 4:14-18. 

That the risen body of Christ was invisible to mortals, only 
when for special reasons He appeared, should be admitted by all 
who ever knew that truth, or who have read the account. That, 
though Christians are actually in the flesh until these bodies are 
changed, (Phil. 3:21) God does not count them in the flesh, but 
in the spirit, (Rom. 8:9) and therefore as "risen with Christ" 
(Col. 3:1) "through the faith of the operation of God, who hath 
raised Him from the dead," (Col. 2:12) cannot be ignored with 
impunity. 

As Christ risen is naturally invisible, as we have shown, so when 
we have attained His perfect state, we too will be naturally 
invisible to mortals; i.e., when we have actually attained that in 
which we are now counted, on account of our faith, and the new 
work begun in us by the Spirit. That new nature is spoken of as 
Christ in you; (Rom. 8:10, and Gal. 2:20) Christ formed in you; 



(Gal. 4:19) "the hope of glory;" (Col. 1:27) "the inner man;" 
(Eph. 3:16) and "a new creation," (2 Cor. 5:17). The last 
passage, with its context, shows that this new nature by which 
we are related to the second Adam, and not the old Adam, 
nature, is the basis of our recognition as Christians, and of our 
fellowship. It also shows that the reason we are so counted is 
because we are in Christ, and He is no longer known after the 
flesh. 

In the preceding chapter, before mentioned and to which 
attention is now called, the two natures, or men, are contrasted; - 
the old being the outward, the seen, the temporal, the perishing; 
while the new is the inward, the not seen, renewed day by day, 
the eternal. Those who cannot see that the new creature is 
invisible to mortals, both in the pre-natal and perfect state, it is 
to be hoped, are not willfully blind. 

Failing to apprehend the double relationship of the Christian, in 
all its bearings, has caused some to misapprehend our position 
as to the presence of Christ. As natural or mortal beings we are 
related to the first Adam, but in our new nature we are related to 
the second Adam. Now we are as new beings in an "earthly 
house," and so our bodies are said to be the "temple of the Holy 
Spirit." We do not, however, wish to be unclothed, but clothed 
upon with the heavenly house, or house from heaven. 2 Cor. 
5:1-8. 

There are two phases of service appropriately related to these 
two phases of life~an external service and an internal service. 
The "court" and the "holy place" of the tabernacle seem to 
represent these two phases of service. The court was open and 
visible, but all beyond the first vail was covered with dyed rams' 
skins, "and a covering of badgers' skins above that." Ex. 36:19. 
No eye could penetrate it. The only light there was from the 
lamps. The court (sometime also called the "holy place," (Lev. 
14:13 and Ex. 29:1 1,31) was the place of sacrifice and of 
washing, and seems to represent our more earthly phase of life, 
and the disposition to be made of the flesh, by the indwelling 
Spirit. (Rom. 8:13.) But the "holy" or second apartment seems to 
represent our hidden life— in which "we walk by faith, not by 
sight." In this department and by faith, we eat of the hidden 
bread, walk in the light the world cannot see, and serve at an 
unseen altar. When we ascend to the perfection of spiritual 
beings we will see Him with eyes immortal; but while we walk 
by faith, we must receive His presence by faith, under the 
leadings of the Spirit. Nickname our view as men may please, to 
us it appears in harmony with the Law and the Prophets. 

The philosophy of the plan, as well as the general statements of 
the New Testament, teaches the higher and spiritual and 
invisible character of the coming of Christ to receive His saints 
to Himself. To ignore that philosophy and those teachings is to 
ignore the relation of the natural and the spiritual as seen in the 



two Adams, the two Dispensations, the two Jerusalems, the two 
bodies and the two- "First the natural, afterward the spiritual," 
in almost every element of the plan. 

The fact that a sign of His presence was needed and given is 
evidence that the presence was to be invisible to the natural eye. 
The sign— (all the evidences)— is for the church. This is proved 
by the general plan. "Light is sown for the righteous." The world 
is to learn by judgments, which will doubtless be the appearing 
of the sign to them. There is doubtless import in the fact that the 
disciples came to Him privately, saying: "Tell us when shall 
these things be, " &c. 

The condition of the world-their excuse and ignorance-during 
the first part at least of the parousia— presence -of Christ-is 
stated by Himself. (See Matt. 24:37-39.) The word coming in 
this passage is not Erkomia, but Parousia. The Savior compares 
the period of His presence to "the days of Noah"- not to the 
flood, as some suppose, but to the "days which were before the 
flood," while the ark was preparing." (See verse 38 and compare 
1 Pet. 3:20.) 

In Luke 17:26, instead of "coming," we have a "phrase "in the 
days of the Son of man," which agrees with the idea of Presence. 
That this presence, in his days precedes, for a time, the rapture 
or taking away of the saints, is proved by the light given for 
them by the Savior; and by the fact that the day does not come 
unawares on the watchers, because they walk in the light. (Luke 
21:34-36 and 1 Thess. 5:1-5. Another evidence that He will be 
present for a time and that presence proclaimed, before the wise 
are gone, may be drawn from the contrast between the work of 
the "Faithful and wise servant" and the "Evil servant." (Matt. 
24:45-51.) The evil servant says: "My Lord delays," and smites 
his fellow servant, who must be proclaiming the opposite, which 
is, "My Lord no longer tarries." Until he has come of course he 
delays. It is not so much the honest doubt that is to be 
condemned as the persecuting spirit. 

This Suntelia— the end of the age, the harvest— agrees with 
Peter's "Last of the days," in which he says: "Scoffers will come 
with scoffing," and saying, 'Where is the promise of His 
presence?'" The scoffer's point is that nothing in the 
circumstances appeals to the natural eyes "All things continue in 
this way from the beginning." 2 Pet. 3:3-4. (Diaglott) "If your 
Christ has been present these seven years, He has done 
nothing "-an expression some use (and we give it free from its 
severity) sounds a little like the plea Peter mentions. If the 
harvest work has been in process, He has not been idle, for even 
though the Reapers are the Angels, He is Lord of the Angels as 
well as men. He is therefore the chief Reaper— the Lord of the 
Harvest. If there is no evidence of the presence, there is none of 
the Harvest, -the sign of the one is the sign of the other. To use 
the amount of evidence is great-coming by a combination of the 



prophetic periods, the parallels and the "signs of the times." 
There are doubtless unseen facts which, when knowledge is 
perfected, will be found in harmony with what we have seen. 
But there is so much evidence which appeals to faith, 

R237 : page 8 

that we are encouraged to hold fast. We think if Jesus were 
present in the flesh, as when he came to the Jews, He would say 
now as then: "Ye can discern the face of the earth and of the 
sky; how is it that ye cannot discern this time?" The clearer the 
understanding, the deeper will be the impression of the facts, 
and the sanctifying effect will be the greater. 

J. H. P. 



R237 : page 8 

THE LORD'S AND OUR NEW NAME. 

"Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my 
God, and he shall go no more out; and I will write upon him the 
name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is 
New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my 
God: and I will write upon him my new name." Rev. 3:12. 

By the above it would seem that Jesus is to be known by a new 
name and a title different from that which He now bears; and not 
only will this be true of Him, but also of us; for if overcomers 
we shall bear His name, being his bride. We think a new name 
suggests the idea of a change in Christ's official position toward 
restored Israel and other of earth's nations in the coming age; 
therefore he should assume that position in the end of this age, 
for then Israel is to return to a position of favor; as: "Simeon 
hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take 
out of them a people for His name [His bride] and to this 
agree... the prophets; as it is written, after this [after He selects 
His bride] : I will overturn and build again the tabernacle of 
David... and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it 
up." Acts 15:14-16. In harmony with this we quote from the 
prophet, saying: "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I 
will 

R238 : page 8 

raise unto David a righteous branch, and a king shall reign and 
prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In 
His day Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell safely; and 
this is His name whereby He shall be called: THE LORD, OUR 
RIGHTEOUSNESS !" It is evident that the above scene is laid at 
the time of favor to Israel, when God shall comfort them; for 
their double chastisement will then be complete, (Isa. 40:1-2) 
and the Lord shall be known by them in that day [now entered 



upon] as: "THE LORD, OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS." This is His 
new name, and He shall be so recognized during his reign over 
the nations. Melchisedec, being a type of Christ, was: "First, 
being by interpretation, King of Righteousness, and after that 
also King of Salem, which is King of Peace;" (Heb. 7:2) and to 
this end (to be a king and reign in righteousness) was Jesus born. 
John 18:37. During the presence of Jesus Acts 15:16 will have a 
fulfillment, and also Acts 3:19,23: "Moses truly said unto the 
fathers: A prophet shall the Lord, your God, raise up unto you of 
your brethren, like unto me; Him shall ye hear in all things 
whatsoever He shall say unto you." The change to Israel is 
gradual, and during that time the espoused of Christ is exalted 
(married) and receives His name; and so our text reads: "I will 
write upon Him (that overcometh) my new name." The city 
mentioned is the new Jerusalem, and this was shown John in 
vision as being a picture of the glorified church-the bride- Rev. 
21:2,9-11. We shall show you that the new Jerusalem is called 
by the same name in that day as our Lord, for says the prophet: 
"In those days, and at that time, will I cause the Branch of 
righteousness to grow up unto David; and He shall execute 
judgment and righteousness in the land. In those days shall 
Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely: and this is the 
name wherewith SHE shall be called, THE LORD OUR 
RIGHTEOUSNESS." Jer. 33:15,16. How beautiful is this and 
how harmonious with all light we have had on this point. All 
who are acquainted with our position, know that we have 
claimed the church as now espoused to Jesus in order that we 
may be united as one; and as God called the first pair-after 
marriage- Adam (Gen. 5:2) so the second Adam includes His 
bride, and they united constitute the new Jerusalem, which will 
be the righteousness of the nations. This will be called: "The city 
of righteousness, the faithful city;" (Isa. 1:26) and those who 
constitute it will be known as: "Trees of righteousness, the 
planting of the Lord, that He might be glorified;" (Isa. 61:3). 
"That in the ages to come He might show the exceeding riches 
of His grace in His kindness toward us through Christ Jesus." 
(Eph. 2:7.) Then will (Isa. 32:1) be fulfilled: "Behold, a king 
shall reign in righteousness, and princes (the saints) shall rule in 
judgment;" "And Saviors (Jesus and his bride) shall come upon 
Mount Zion: and the kingdom shall be the Lord's." (Oba. 21.) 
As we shall then rule Israel for their good we shall be to them: 
"The sun of righteousness," that shall arise with healing in his 
wings and they shall grow up as calves of the stall; (well cared 
for) and: "There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob;" (Rom. 11:26) or as David 
says: "Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion." 
(Psa. 53:6.) Then will be their time to shine; as the prophet says: 
"Arise, shine: for thy light (the bride) is come, and the glory of 
the Lord is risen upon thee." (Isa. 60:1.) Yes friends, the 
marriage of the Lamb is the next great and important event for 
this world; next to the death of Jesus; for not until then will the 



enlightening and blessing of the nations come: (Rev. 21:24) and 
until then: "The earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for 
the manifestation of the sons of God;" (Rom. 8:19) and we will 
not be manifest to the world until we take upon us by 
glorification the name of Jesus. After the marriage of the Lamb 
people shall be judged by righteousness and: "The mountains 
(earth's governments) shall bring peace to the people,... He shall 
judge the poor of the people, He shall save the children of the 
needy:. ..and men shall be blessed in Him." (Psa. 72:3,4,17.) 
Christ (head and body). "With righteousness shall He judge 
(rule) the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the 
earth:... They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; 
for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the 
waters cover the sea:" (Isa. 11:4,9.) "And the work of 
righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness 
quietness and assurance forever;" (Isa. 32:17) for "The Lord is 
exalted: for He dwelleth on high: He hath filled Zion (city of the 
living God, Heb. 12:22) with judgment and righteousness:" 
"Because He hath appointed a day, (1000 years) in the which He 
will judge the world in righteousness by that man (the Christ: 
head and body for we shall judge the world. 1 Cor. 6:2) whom 
He hath ordained." (Acts 17:31.) Though we shall rule the world 
it will be when in glory (Psa. 149) and: "If the ministration of 
condemnation (that under the law) be glory, much more doth the 
ministration of righteousness (that under the new covenant: in 
the next ages) exceed in glory." (2 Cor. 3:9.) The glorified 
Jerusalem being the bride, the Mount Zion, from her shall go 
forth the law; (Isa. 2:3) and by it the world will be blessed, for to 
the world we shall be as: "The Lord our righteousness." 
Beloved, seeing we shall bear such a name, and hold such an 
exalted position; let us be holy, and strive to overcome as Jesus 
overcame, for alone to the overcomers shall the new name be 
given. Strive, therefore: "That no man take thy crown." (Rev. 
3:1 1.) He that hath an ear let him hear what the Spirit saith unto 
the churches: "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the 
hidden manna, and I will give him a white stone, and in the 
stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that 
receiveth it:" (Rev. 2:17) and true it is that no person knows our 
new name except they that receive it: for it is, "The Lord our 
righteousness." 

A. D. J. 



R238 : page 8 

TO THE READERS OF 
THE WATCH TOWER. 

BELOVED: It is fitting that new recruits should cheer, if 
nothing else presents that they can do. It is well that overcomers 



should continue to use the "word of their testimony." In the true 
life of faith there must be habitual obedience to the revealed will 
of God. The just shall live by faith. To the one that lives by 
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God, it should 
not appear strange that God should present objects of faith one 
by one, and not all at once; neither should we stumble if our 
faith meets with higher truths than those first presented. Faith, 
like muscular organs, is strengthened by use-the whole 
gymnasium is open to the athlete; he would spurn the gentle and 
easy exercises of the invalids. But how often we rebel when this 
principle is used in the acts of faith: It is trying to the man who 
has arrived at the justified plane to be told about the entire 
consecration demanded of the "overcomer." For a week I have 
been instructed in the things of the Kingdom especially referring 
to the presence of Christ doing the separating work preparatory 
to the marriage. And most joyfully do I receive these teachings. 

With shame I record that for three days I rejected these truths, 
almost wishing they were not scriptural and the very truth of 
God, instead of joyfully welcoming them with grateful heart. 
Following closely came another trial of faith and measure of my 
obedience and consecration, when I, as one of God's stewards, 
was urged to do the work of a steward and deal out these truths 
exactly in the measure of my ability to proclaim them. This 
meant for me the preaching service; the proclamation of truths 
so unwelcome to many up and down the land everywhere and 
always. 

I ask pardon from the blessed Master -Christ Jesus, that I ever 
hesitated to accept His place in true humility, and the obedience 
of faith. I bring, not a parade of the Christianizing and civilizing 
elements to elevate and liberalize the world, and thus make it fit 
for a coming Messiah; but we proclaim: "The times of 
restitution spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world 
began"— the glorious manifestation of the sons of God, now so 
near. Glorious body of Christ, take courage. "Now I beseech 
you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love 
of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in prayers to God 
for me; that I may be delivered from them that do not believe in 
Judea (the nominal church), and my service that I have for 
Jerusalem the Bride) may be accepted of all the saints." Rom. 
15:30,31. 

Rejoicing in the light shining from the present one. 

J. B. A. 



It gives me pleasure to thus introduce to the readers of the 
WATCH TOWER one whom we have recently come to know as 
a very dear saint- a brother in Christ. We first became 
acquainted about one year ago and his interest has been growing 
in the precious truths advocated in the TOWER. Again visiting 



this city, we have had very pleasant and profitable interchanges 
on the all important themes~the presence, the "high calling" and 
the "narrow way" of entire consecration by which it may be 
reached. 

Our brother has concluded as the above letter indicates to give 
all that he has of time, reputation and ability for the Pearl of 
great price, the "Crown of life, "--immortality and joint-heirship. 
He leaves a profitable and increasing business paying about 
$1,500 

R239 : page 8 

a year as well as other things-this might be considered a great 
deal to give but it is really nothing— nothing compared to the 
privilege of being an Ambassador and mouth-piece of the King 
of kings; nothing compared with the privilege of telling the 
"Glad tidings of great joy which shall be to all people" causing 
men to know and love God and their Redeemer and refreshing 
the hearts of the Saints; nothing compared to the great riches and 
glory and honor promised of God to those who walk in Jesus' 
footsteps. 

Bro. Robert Bailey, of Michigan, has also gone forth a 
proclaimer of the same "Glad tidings" entirely consecrated to the 
Lord and his work. He was with us as well as Bro. Sunderlin, of 
N.Y., (who has been in the work for three months) at the above 
mentioned conference. We trust that the studies of those days 
were profitable to each of us. May the Lord go with, and bless 
these brethren by using them abundantly in his service. 

Some of them may call upon you in the course of their travels; 
we bespeak for them your kindest and warmest reception. In this 
connection it may be of cheer to some of you to know that the 
Lord is stirring up the depths of the hearts of his consecrated 
children and each seems desirous of doing what he can. Brother 
McGrannor, of Pennsylvania, has also gone forth recently to 
give his entire time and labor in the "harvest" field; may his 
labors also be crowned with such success as may seem good to 
the Lord of the harvest and gain finally the "Well done good and 
faithful servant, thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will 
make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joys of the 
Lord." 

Many other evidences less notable but equally acceptable to the 
Lord could be mentioned showing the power of truth to 
consecrate and separate from everything and to use humble 
efforts for the glory of our King, but these will suffice. Now let 
me ask- are there others who as stewards (not bankers to pay 
when demanded but stewards) possessing talents, time, etc., 
consecrated to God, which he entrusts to them to be used in his 
service: are there more such who want to render to the Lord his 
own?-[EDITOR.] 


