VOL. XXVII JUNE 1, 1906 No. 11 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 163 

The Westminster Confession Again 163 

Epworth League Facing a Crisis 164 

Religious Strife in Germany 164 

Berean Bible Study for June 165 

In Due Time 165 

Binding the Strong Man 166 

The Angel of Gethsemane (Poem) 167 

"My Sheep Hear My Voice" 167 

Faith Indispensable to Success 168 

"Be Patient, Brethren" 170 

Good Confessions and Later Trials 171 

"Thou Art the Christ" 172 

"The Gates of Hell Shall Not Prevail" 173 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3782 : page 162 

VOL. III. DAWN IN DANO-NORWEGIAN 



We have just issued the above, in cloth binding only. 
Uniform in style with English edition. Price the same, 25c. 
postpaid. 

page 162 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 

R3782 : page 162 

CLIPPINGS FOR THE EDITOR 



Friends are requested to send us clippings unfavorable to 
the interests of the Truth, as well as special news items, writing 
on same the name of the journal and date of publication. 

page 162 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 



R3782 : page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE WESTMINSTER CONFESSION AGAIN 



NO DOUBT our Presbyterian friends thought they 
had buried the Westminster Confession of 
Faith so deeply under their new statement of 
Presbyterian faith, that they would never have further 
trouble from its bad odor. Rev. Samuel T. Carter, 
D.D., was one of those who warred for its burial at that 
time. Satisfied for the time, apparently, Dr. Carter 
now realizes that the Westminster Confession is still the 
creed of the Presbyterian Church and the newer statement 
a mere blind. His honest soul now charges into 
the battle afresh for its complete repudiation. He recently 
wrote to the Presbyterian General Assembly on 
the subject, and we quote from his letter as follows:— 

"Fathers and Brethren,— Many years ago, when I 
was ordained to the ministry of the gospel, I declared 
in the most solemn manner I believed the Westminster 
Confession to be the truth of God. I now in an equally 
solemn manner declare I don't believe it to be the truth 
of God; that I utterly reject it as a setting forth of the 
character of the heavenly Father. There never was, 
there is not now, and there never will be such a God as 
the God of the Westminster Confession. 

"It is an idol of man's invention, as truly as any 
worshiped in Delhi, Pekin or Africa. I believe the great 
and true God is infinitely and exquisitely good and 
gracious; that the one thing that we can neither fully 
receive nor declare is the boundless love of God; that 
all the noblest exhibitions of human love are but bright 
and beautiful sparks from that intense and divine 
flame— the love that through ages and generations has 
been leading men by the fullest wisdom and most tender 
providence to heights of knowledge, love and 
boundless hope that far transcend all human thought. 
I lift up this overwhelming divine love before my fellow-men, 
believing that this alone will draw all men 
unto Him. 

"I believe that the Westminster Confession darkens 
and denies this great love of God and should not 
be retained as a Confession by any Church today, and 
that our Church is false to its greatest duty of being a 
true witness for God so long as it retains this 
Confession." 



Brother Carter's experiences encourage us to hope 
and wait patiently for further awakenings amongst the 
theological "dry bones." For years and years Dr. Carter 
preached under the Confession which he did not believe. 
For years he lent his name and voice and influence 
for God-dishonoring error until he got strong 
enough and courageous enough to protest and cry for 
liberty from his slavery. The partial liberty granted 
was doubtless appreciated; but now he longs and cries 
for more, more, more liberty to think. He desires to be 



set free. His conscience longs and cries out that it 
can stand the galling errors no longer. 

Poor Brother Carter does not see the inconsistency 
of his position. He should not have entered the Presbyterian 
House of Bondage! He should never have 
confessed the Confession which his head and his heart 
repudiated. Or, if he did believe the errors at the beginning 
of his Christian life and ministry, and learned 
of them later, he should have been prompt to 
obey conscience, and should have stepped out of Presbyterianism 
into the liberty wherewith Christ makes 
free indeed. Presbyterians who honestly and truly 
believe the statements of the Confession have a right 
to hold it and to tell it abroad. It is the others who 
are at fault. If all who disagree with the Westminster 
Confession would promptly and decidedly withdraw 
from the denomination into liberty, explaining their 
reasons for withdrawing, the effect would be a hundred 
times more satisfactory. 

"Actions speak louder than words." Dr. Carter's 
words say that he is an honest, bold, advocate of Truth 
at any cost; but his actions speak the reverse. They 
tell us, "The Westminster Confession has ties and emoluments 
which I love more than I love the Truth and 
the liberty which Christ offers. I prefer the bondage, 
and to be amongst those who misrepresent my God, 
than to forsake all and follow the Redeemer and his 

R3782 : page 164 

'little flock' whom the world counts 'fools' for Christ's 
sake and too conscientious." 

We hope that Brother Carter and many others will 
ultimately grow stronger in the Lord and still more devoted 
to the Truth, so that ultimately they will take 
gladly the spoiling of their goods— worldly prospects, 
etc.— for Christ's sake, the Truth's sake, hoping for 
the "better resurrection" as "more than conquerors." 

EPWORTH LEAGUE FACING A CRISIS 



Throughout the entire Methodist Church, we are 
informed, "mutterings of uncertainty and dissatisfaction" 
are being heard in regard to the future of the 
Epworth League, the young people's organization, 
which has a membership of about 2,000,000. Indeed, 
the crisis has become so serious that The Epworth Herald 
(Chicago), official organ of the League, is publishing 
a series of articles about it from the pen of Dr. 
Wentworth F. Stewart, author of the "Evangelistic 
Awakening." Dr. Stewart says it is his observation 
that "the League in many places is lacking in vigorous, 
self-sustaining life; in others, is a problem in itself; 
and only rarely is it measuring up to reasonable expectation 



in spiritual culture, evangelistic zeal, and missionary 
enterprise;. ..it is not a reviving and recruiting 
force, and is not saving to any reasonable 
degree the young people within its reach." He says:— 

A GENERAL CRITICISM 

"Our whole Church has been for years committed 
to the numerical ideal of quantity instead of quality. 
Anything to secure a crowd, multiply numbers, increase 
the membership roll. Some churches and some leagues 
double their membership while the same pews hold the 
congregation, the same chairs seat the people at the 
mid-week prayer service and the devotional meeting of 
the League, and only the same prayers and testimonies 
are heard because there is not leaven enough to permeate 
their entire following. 

"To gain our membership one by one, seeking 
their conversion first, and relation after, though a slower 
process, is infinitely more valuable than a red-and-blue 
contest with no significance attached; the same 
amount of energy thoroughly spiritualized and spent 
in evangelistic activities would add permanent strength 

R3783 : page 164 

to the League and not give the impression that religion 
is secondary to membership."— Literary Digest. 

RELIGIOUS STRIFE IN GERMANY 



Berlin, May 15.— The question of the divinity of 
Christ now threatens to rend German Protestantism 
into two great parties, the liberal and the orthodox. 

The revolt in liberal churches against the narrow 
limits of orthodoxy has been fanned into a flame by the 
refusal of the State Church Consistory and the Prussian 
Supreme Court to sanction the selection of Rev. Rowen 
as pastor of the Church at Rhemscheid in Westphalia. 

His offense was that he preached sermons in which 
he repudiated the divine parentage of Christ, characterizing 
it as a myth inspired by Graeco-Pagan 
influences. 

FLOCK IS OBDURATE 

The Church at Rhemscheid refused to select another 
pastor, and its pulpit remains unoccupied. 

More than 1,300 mass meetings have been held to 
discuss the religious situation. Taken together they 
form an astonishing revelation of the enormous extent 
of the growth of the so-called higher criticism doctrines. 

The ferment is increasing, daily, hourly. The liberal 
pastors and their congregations threaten secession 



unless the bounds of the creed are widened by the 
elimination of what they call the Supernatural Articles. 

The correspondent, in conversation with a leading 
theologian who occupies a university chair, was advised 
that out of 8,000 German Protestant pastors in active 
service at the present time not over one-quarter are believers 
in the literal text of the Apostles' Creed, and 
only one-tenth hold to the inspiration of the Bible. 

LEADERS OF THE MOVEMENT 

Men like Prof. Harnack and Prof. Delitzsch, author 
of "Babel and Bible," lights of the liberal school of 
theology, propose that the Kaiser, as head of the 
Church, call a general council of the adherents of all 
theological schools to recast the creed and formulate 
some neutral body of doctrine which men of all opinions 
can subscribe to. 

Should the Kaiser do this the cataclysm may be 
prevented. Otherwise it is predicted on all sides the 
Reformed Church of Germany will soon be split into 
warring factions. 



Only those who have some knowledge of the "Divine 
Plan of the Ages" can comprehend such difficulties 
and appreciate the outcome. This is not a strife 
between the true Church and the false one; but between 
two sections of the false or nominal system. 
Money is at the bottom of it. The German Government 
pays the preachers of all denominations; so now when 
one is pushed away from the public teat there is a howl 
of rage, not only from the ousted one, but also from 
others in sympathy with him, who foresee that their 
turn may come next. 

It is not time yet to judge the hearts to determine 
which are honest and which dishonest, but there is no 
mistake about it that if neither honor of men nor financial 
considerations played a part there would be few to 
contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the 
saints. But those few would be the honest and true on 
both sides of the discussions. 

The Lord's people, who have renounced worldly 
and political methods, and who are seeking chiefly, 
solely, the Kingdom of Heaven, will do well to possess 
their souls in peace and go right along proclaiming 
the "good tidings of great joy which shall be unto all 
people." They need not look for worldly help, but, as 
in our Lord's time, should persevere, self-sacrificingly 
preaching without money and without price, seeking 
out the few who "have an ear to hear," even as many 
as the Father shall draw to the Truth. 



R3783 : page 165 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR JUNE. 

--FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES, AND WATCH TOWER MARCH 1, 1905.- 

EVIL SPEAKING AND EVIL SURMISING 

20. Might telling the truth be evil speaking? Z/99-70 
(1st col. par. 3 to 2nd col. par. 2). 

21. Is it always necessary to tell all we know about 
every affair? Z. '00-71 (2nd col. par. 3). 

22. Is an uncomplimentary remark evil speaking? 
Z.'02-188 (2nd col. par. 3); F.406, par. 1. 

23. Would it be evil speaking to criticize doctrines publicly 
uttered? Z/02-219 (2nd col. par. 2). 

24. What is a slanderer? Z. '05-215 (2nd col. par. 1); 
Z/99-70 (2nd col. par. 1 to 3). 

25. What is "false witness," and is it possible to bear 
false witness without uttering a word? Z. '02-219 

(1st col. par. 2, 3). 

26. How should we deal with a brother or sister who 
begins to relate an evil report? Z. '05-215 (1st col. 
par. 4, 5). 

27. How should we deal with persons of the world who 
do evil speaking? Eph. 5:11,12; Z/99-70 (1st 

col. par. 1, 2); Z/02-74 (1st col. par. 1); Z/98-368 (1st 
col. par. 1). 

28. Is evil speaking against a brother in Christ more 
culpable than against one of the world? T.S.62, 

par. 3; Z/03-426 (1st col. par. 1, 2). 

29. In order to avoid gossip, slander and evil speaking, 
what is the only proper and Scriptural way of 

redress for grievances, actual or imaginary? 

Matt. 18:15-17, Z/05-214 (1st col. par. 4) to 215 (1st 

col. par. 3);F.414-417. 

30. How should we deal in a matter of evil speaking 
against an Elder? 1 Tim. 5:19. F.293, 294, 418 

(par. 1, 2). 

31. Why is "a bridled tongue" a chief essential in an 
Elder? Jas. 3:2. Z/99-75 (2nd col. par. 2); Z/97-156 
(2nd col. par. 2); F.249, par. 2. 

32. How may we ask advice and not do evil speaking? 
F.292, top of page. 

33. What is the relation between "busybodying" and 
evil speaking? F.583, par. 1, to 586; F.408, par. 1 to 3. 

34. How should the Golden Rule help us to overcome 
evil speaking and evil surmising? F.407; Z. '02-188 
(2nd col.) to 189 (1st col. par. 2); Z/00-262 

(1st col. par. 1, 2). 

35. What is the sole exception to this rule, "Speak evil 
of no man"? Z/99-71 (2nd col. par. 2). 

36. What inspiration should we receive from Jesus' 
example? 1 Pet. 2:23. Z/01-298 (1st col. par. 1, 

2); Manna, Dec. 7; Z/02-310 (2nd col. par. 1). 



37. How can we overcome evil surmisings and evil 
speaking? 

(a) By purifying the heart. Prov. 4:23. F.409, 
par. 2. 

(b) By prayer. Psa. 141:3. Psa. 19:12-14. Z/98-23 
(2nd col. par. 1). 

(c) By keeping the mind filled with pure and 
holy thoughts. Phil. 4:8. Z. '01-324 (1st 

col). Z/03-8 (2nd col. par. 3) to 9 (1st col. 
par. 3); Z. '05-216 (1st col. par. 3 and 2nd col. 
par. 3); Z/00-72 (1st col. par. 1, 2). 

38. What additional thoughts are found in index of 
Heavenly Manna under "Evil"? 

39. What special experiences and practices have helped 
you to overcome evil surmisings to some extent? 

40. As we realize how insidious this foe of the "new 
creature," what should be our daily prayer? 

Psa. 19:12-14. 



R3783 : page 165 

IN DUE TIME. 

TIME is one of the most important factors in God's 

plan. The days of creation were long periods 

of time; the time of man's experience with evil 

has been six days of a thousand years each; the day of redemption 

and of the development of the Church has been 

nearly two thousand years. Time has been necessary 

for the accomplishment of God's great work; and it 

has also been necessary in proving to man the righteousness 

of God's character. Only time could prove to 

men his invincible justice. Six thousand years ago his 

sentence of death passed upon mankind, and during 

all that time he has permitted generation after generation 

to go down into the grave in the midst of agony, 

blood and tears. And though he loved men so, even 

while they were yet sinners, that he spared not his own 

Son, but freely gave him up for us all, yet he has never 

for a moment relented so as to interpose his power for the 

relief or release of the groaning creation: nor will he do 

so until his "due time"— the time which his wisdom appointed, 

which will be the very best time for the securing 

of the largest possible results to the race, both of 

R3784 : page 165 

knowledge and of advantageous experience, as well as 
for the development of several of the most important 
features of his plan. But as time only can develop 
God's plan, so time only can manifest his love as well 
as his wisdom, his grace, his power and his justice. 

Time will fully manifest the divine wisdom in what 
seems to short-sighted humanity like pitiless delay. 



Already those who are privileged to view by faith the 

divine plan see the necessity of time for its full accomplishment. 

It is in view of such necessity that the 

children of God are frequently exhorted to patience. 

God has kindly brought us to his standpoint of view 

and bidden us look into the glorious future— to the 

outcome of his plan; and in proportion as we are able 

to comprehend and believe it, we may rest and rejoice 

in it. But in the meantime, being thus graciously 

refreshed by the cheering prospect, we must patiently 

wait for the end, however painful the waiting season 

may be. 

Patience is a virtue which our heavenly Father desires 
to cultivate in us; and he manifests in himself 
the grandest example of it. Through all the centuries 
past he has patiently endured the reproaches of those 
who, failing to understand the course of his wisdom in 
executing justice and in working out the deep designs 
of his abounding grace, attributed evil, and only evil, 
to his truly glorious and holy character. He knows 
that "in due time" his character will be fully vindicated, 
and so he patiently waits and works and endures. So 
also our Lord Jesus waits and endures. He endured 
great humiliation in coming to our low estate. Then 

R3784 : page 166 

as a man he patiently endured the contradictions of 
sinners against himself and ungrateful persecution, 
even unto death, from those he came to save. And, 
like his heavenly Father, through it all he was cheered 
in consideration of that "due time," though then in the 
far distant future, when his character, and also the 
Father's character, would be fully vindicated and manifested 
to every creature in heaven and in earth. And 
still our blessed Lord Jesus and our adorable heavenly 
Father await with patience the grand consummation. 
So, in similar attitude of mind, we must wait; for the 
servant is not above his Lord, and our rejoicing in view 
of the future will, if we have the mind of Christ, be not 
only because of our own prospective vindication and 
glory, but also in prospect of the vindication and glory 
of God and of our Lord Jesus, and of the prospective 
everlasting triumph of truth and righteousness. 

The waiting time is by no means a time of rejoicing, 
except in hope. This is a time when truth and 
righteousness are being humbled in the dust, when 
they that live godly must suffer persecution, when our 
eyes must look upon scenes of sorrow and mourning, 
when our ears must hear the wails of distress, and 
when our feeble flesh must experience the pangs of 
death. But, oh, there is a glorious release to come "in 
due time! " Wait for it patiently; "Let patience have 
her perfect work." Submit to the humbling process. 
The Church's pathway of present humiliation leads to 
the future glory. 



"Humble yourselves," says the Apostle, "under the 
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due 
time." Do not make the great mistake of seeking present 
exaltation at the expense of that which is to come 
"in due time" to those who patiently endure to the end. 
It is only in proportion as any turn their eyes away 
from the glory to follow "in due time," and thus lose 
faith in it, that they begin to prize the trifling recompenses 
which the world offers for the sacrifice of their 
birthright. Let us, therefore, dearly beloved, keep the 
eye of faith fixed upon the hope set before us in the 
gospel; and, forgetting those things that are behind- 
all worldly ambitions, etc.— let us press toward the 
mark for the prize of our high calling, which shall indeed 
be realized by the faithful— "in due time;" for 
"Faithful is he that hath called you, who also will do 
it." His purposes cannot fail, nor his word return unto 
him void. 



R3784 : page 166 

BINDING THE STRONG MAN. 

"No man can come into a strong man's house and spoil 
his goods except he will first bind the strong man, and 
then he will spoil his house."— Mark 3:27. 

THESE WORDS were spoken in answer to the 
charge of the Pharisees that Jesus was casting 
out devils by the power of Satan, the prince of 
demons. Our Lord first showed how unreasonable was 
the charge that Satan had taken to opposing himself. 
His argument is that if that be true it would imply that 
Satan's power was tottering to a fall, if it was necessary 
for him to thus work against his own plans and 
arrangements, associates, etc. This does not imply 
that Satan will never be so cornered as to find it necessary 
to do good works in order to deceive if it were 
possible the very elect, but it does imply that when 
that time shall come, and the Adversary shall favor 
good works, the healing of diseases, casting out of 
devils, etc., it will be a sure indication that his kingdom 
is tottering. We believe that this is the case to 
some extent at the present time— that Satan has much 
to do with various faith healings that are done by 
Christian Science, Spiritualism, Hypnotism, etc. 
But our Lord's argument was to the contrary of 
all this— that he was not casting out devils as the minion 
of Satan, but on the contrary that he was opposing 
Satan. Then he used the words of our text, which imply 
that he was already binding Satan, already spoiling 
his goods. Satan's control of mankind was certainly 
interfered with when our Lord cast out the 
demons and gave power and authority to his disciples 



to do the same throughout Palestine. This our Lord 
declared was a sign that a stronger one than Satan 
was at work. Satan was indeed powerful and had taken 
possession of the world and was exercising a great 
influence therein, and the fact that now he was interfered 
with to any extent and demons were cast out 
proved that he had met one more powerful than himself, 
and that the time of the complete overthrow of his 
dominion would come. 

This text then is analogous to and in harmony 
with another which declared, "Now is the prince of 
this world cast out." Our Lord again declared, "I beheld 
Satan as lightning fall from heaven." Our Lord 
had come into the world for the very purpose of mastering 
Satan, and in order to vanquish him he had consecrated 
his life even unto death, that by means of death 
he might destroy death and him that had the power of 
death, that is, the devil. God had accepted the consecration, 
the sacrifice, and had granted our Lord the anointing 
of the Spirit at his baptism, and it was under the 
power and influence of this Spirit that he declared that 
as the Finger of God he cast out demons. However, the 
work of destroying Satan's house was not intended to go 
on to a rapid completion, but rather that merely the power 
of the Anointed One should be demonstrated for our 
comfort and joy and faith, and that he should be permitted 
to control the world for a time further, until the 
full end of this Gospel age, when his binding will be 
gradually accomplished and will be followed by the 
liberating of the whole world from his chains of error 
with which he has deceived all nations. 

In Matthew 24:43 our Lord uses somewhat similar 
language, but applies it not to his own day but to the 
end of the age. He speaks of his second advent as being 
unknown to the world and therefore to them as a 

R3784 : page 167 

thief in the night, unexpected. He intimates that such 

a secrecy respecting the time is essential; that if it 

were generally known to the world the divine plan and 

arrangement in respect to the end of the age would be 

foiled. To the Church it would be given to know the 

times and seasons, through the holy Spirit enlightening 

their understanding respecting the Word of Truth uttered 

through the apostles and prophets of old for our admonition. 

But none of the wicked would understand, 

only the wise, the truly wise with the wisdom that cometh 

from above, the consecrated. So far as the world 

would be concerned, its great ones, its master minds in 

Church and in State, in business, in finances, would all 

be surprised in the end of this age. The Master would 

be present as a thief in the night to take, first of all, 

his "jewels," his Bride, his saints, and then to utterly 

spoil, overthrow, the affairs of this present time, that 

on the ruins thereof he might speedily set up his everlasting 



Kingdom of righteousness. 

"Ye brethren are not in darkness"— that day has 
not overtaken you as a thief, though it will thus overtake 
all the world. (I Thess. 5:3,4.) The thief-like 
work of taking the Church is already in progress; by 
and by it will all be completed, and shortly thereafter 
— 1915— the kingdoms of this world, with all of their associated 
institutions, will go down in a climax of trouble 
such as the world has never known, because after 
gathering his Bride class the Lord will execute judgments 
upon Babylon. 

At that time Satan will be bound that he should deceive 
the nations no more until the thousand years are 
finished.— Rev. 20:3. 



R3785 : page 167 

THE ANGEL OF GETHSEMANE. 

'Twas midnight, and the Man of Sorrows took his chosen three, 

And sought with weary step the shelter of Gethsemane 

To pray, his soul exceeding sorrowful, e'en unto death, 

And heavy laden with the sin and woe of all the world. 

In agony of bloody sweat he fell upon his face, 

And cried, with tears, "My God, my Father, if it be thy will, 

Oh, let this cup of shame and numbering with transgressors 

pass,— 
If it be possible! Yet, not my will, but thine be done!" 
And then his thoughts turned to the sacrifice,— a fear bore down 
With agonizing weight upon his heart, lest to comply 
With every jot and tittle of the Law, he might have failed! 
He saw the priestly type, he knew eternal death awaited, 
Should he seek to pass the second vail unworthily. 
Eternal death! Oh, anguish inexpressible,— to see 
No more his Father's face! He sought his well-beloved three, 
Perchance they might refresh his fainting heart with some sure 

word 
Of prophecy. Alas, their eyes were heavy and they slept. 
Three times he sought them, and three times in vain! Yet he 

was heard 
In that he feared. The Father sent a heavenly comforter 
To touch with tender, strengthening hand that dear, devoted 

head, 
And whisper, "I the Lord in righteousness have called thee, I 
Will hold thine hand and keep thee, neither shalt thou fail 

nor be 
Discouraged.' Lo, thou art 'a priest forever, and a king 
Upon thy throne, like to Melchizidek.' And thou shalt see 
The travail of thy soul, and shalt be satisfied." His heart 
Revived, he knew his Father's faithful word could never fail; 
He knew it would accomplish that whereunto it was sent. 
He rose, and from that hour went forth to trial and to death, 
In peace,— a calmness born of perfect confidence in God. 



How oft, throughout the many-centuried "night" of this dark 

age, 
The Father's "little ones" have knelt in sad Gethsemane 
To pray! E'en now the Garden's shade re-echoes with the cry 
Of God's elect, "How long, oh Lord, how long until we see 
The travail of our soul? How long until thou shalt avenge 
Thine own elect, who cry to thee, with tears, both night and 

day?" 



Dear Lord, oh, use me as the angel in Gethsemane! 
Oh, fill me with thy holy Spirit of divinest love! 
Oh, make me sympathetic, wise, that every anguished heart 
May come, nor seek in vain for consolation from thy Word, 
And strengthened, comforted, go forth to prison and to death, 
To suffer patiently the cruel mockings of the tongue; 
To bear the cross unto the bitter end, then calmly say, 
'"Tis finished," and with faith unwavering pass beneath "the vail!" 
--G. W. Seibert, May 6, 1906. 



R3785 : page 167 

"MY SHEEP HEAR MY VOICE." 

-JOHN 10:27- 

CONSIDERING the mental imperfections, the unbalance 

of mind, prevalent in the world, we 

sometimes wonder that our differences of understanding 

are not greater than they are. The secret 

of the measure of unity amongst mankind on various 

subjects undoubtedly is that the majority are in almost 

total ignorance on such subjects, and hence make no 

claim of intelligent reasoning thereon, but merely follow 

some leader of thought. Just as soon as people begin 

to use their own thinking apparatus they begin to differ, 

and sound minds being in the minority the wonder is 

that more mistakes do not result. In the ordinary affairs 

of the world, in the ordinary affairs of life, there 

is no test as respects the soundness of theorizing, reasoning, 

except such as comes from the pages of history, 

showing the outworking of various theories, or such as 

are demonstrated by the mistakes of those about us. 

On these various subjects of life, each must do the best 

he knows how. 

Only on subjects dealt with in the Scriptures have 
we a positive basis of information and positive lines 
along which to use our reasoning faculties. Hence the 
Apostle declares that those who follow strictly, implicitly, 
the divine instructions possess more than others 
"the spirit of a sound mind." (2 Tim. 1:7.) Yet even 
amongst those who are seeking to follow the guidance 
of the Word there is some room for differences, misunderstandings, 



false reasoning, etc. Hence the Apostle 
Paul urged Timothy, who was an elder in the Church 
and who had been reared under the teachings of the 
holy Scriptures, that he should still continue to search 
and to rightly divide the Word of Truth, that thus he 

R3785 : page 168 

might be a workman in the Lord's cause who would not 
need to be ashamed. (2 Tim. 2:15.) What was true of 
Timothy is true respecting all who endeavor to honor 
the Word of God. It behooves us all to be very careful, 
very circumspect, to look carefully on all sides of every 
important question, to endeavor to get the proper bearings 
and not be led off in any specious or false reasoning 
or sophistry which would entangle ourselves and 
others in error. Even with our best strivings for the 
truth, with our greatest care, there is still danger, especially 
amongst those who are awake and using their 
brains. 

"KNOWLEDGE PUFFETH UP, LOVE BUILDETH UP" 

It is safe to say that no other class of religious people 
in the world do as much thinking, studying and reasoning 
on the Scriptures as do the forty or fifty thousand 
readers of ZION'S WATCH TOWER. Their senses 
have been awakened by reason of use; they are earnestly 
desirous of knowing the truth, the whole truth 
and nothing but the truth; they find the promises of 
the Lord's Word assuring them that he will guide them 
into all truth, and hence they go forward with the 
greater sense of rest and security that they shall know 
the truth and that the truth shall make them free. 

Nevertheless, there is a danger point in connection 
with the study of the Truth. It was along this point 
that the Apostle cautioned some in his day, saying, Be 
not many of you teachers, brethren, knowing that a man 
shall receive the greater testing— the severer trial of his 
faith, etc. The spirit of meekness is very essential to 
all of us. We need to realize that of ourselves we 
know nothing, that our own judgment and reasoning 
are not to be depended upon, that we must be continually 
looking to the Lord for the help which cometh from 
him alone. We have learned not to look to human institutions 
of learning, Doctors of Divinity, etc., but to 
the Word of God. We must learn also that, even with 
the Word of God in our hands, we need the Spirit of 
God to direct us in its use, that we may understand it 
aright. We are to remember, too, that God's people 
have had the Bible in their hands for lo, these many 
years, yet have generally failed to understand it. Let 
the thought, then, make and keep us very humble, very 
dependent upon the great Teacher, the Head of the 
Church— the Church which is his body. 



"ALL TAUGHT OF GOD" 

We remember the story of Philip and the eunuch. The 
eunuch had the Scriptures and was reading them at the 
very time, yet he did not understand them until the Lord 
specially sent Philip to expound them to him. We remember 
Philip's question, "Understandest thou what 
thou readest?" We remember the eunuch's reply, "How 
can I unless it be interpreted to me?" We remember 
that the interpretation was sent by the Lord and accepted 
as from the Lord and that the blessing followed. 
We remember the Apostle's discourse along similar 
lines saying, How shall the heathen hear without a 
preacher? How shall any teach unless he be sent? 
How can any really interpret the Word of God and 
make it plain without divine assistance and guidance? 
This assistance apparently comes in two ways: first, a 
preparation of the heart, as the Lord denominated it, a 
hearing ear; and, second, a message sent of the Lord, 
an exposition of his Word for the hearing ears and for 
them alone. Humility is everywhere necessary, not 
only essential to the hearing ear but also essential to 
the tongue that would be the Lord's representative and 
ambassador and the exponent of his truth. 

We remember the narrative of Peter and Cornelius, 
as illustrating the above. Cornelius was already devout; 
he reverenced God, was benevolent, gave much 
alms, was a good man in general, and he had a hearing 
ear, and yet in the Lord's providence it was necessary 
to send Peter to tell him the words by which himself 
and his house might be saved— might come into harmony 
with the Lord. It was not sufficient merely to 
send Cornelius a copy of the Scriptures; but necessary 
to expound to him the way of the Lord. Let us 
not forget these things: let us not become self-conscious, 
boastful, proud, heady, highminded, for such 
conditions of heart would surely interfere with 
our learning further lessons in the school of Christ; 

R3786 : page 168 

and not only so, but some of the lessons already 
learned would speedily begin to fade away, and if the 
light which is in us become darkness how great will be 
that darkness— it will be greater than it is in those who 
never saw the light of Present Truth.— Matt. 6:23. 

The Apostle tells us that the ox knoweth its owner 
and the ass his master's crib— although brute beasts 
they learn where to go for their nourishment. The 
same is true of barnyard fowls and all domestic animals 
—they not only have an appetite for food but soon 
learn the incidents connected with their feeding. The 
Lord seems to intimate that some of his people are less 
wise in these respects than are the dumb animals— they 
forget how, when and where they got their previous food. 
This is not true, however, of the Lord's flock. The 



true sheep know the green pastures and still waters 
and the Shepherd's voice, and a stranger will they not 
follow because they recognize not the voice of strangers 
—"My sheep hear my voice and they follow me." 



R3786 : page 168 

FAITH INDISPENSABLE TO SUCCESS. 

-MARK 7:24-30.-JUNE 3- 

Golden Text:— "Great is thy faith; be it 
unto thee even as thou wilt."— Matt. 15:28. 

WITH the whole of Galilee awakened, with the people 
discussing the wisdom and propriety of taking him 
by force and making him a king, with Herod's 
boldness manifested in the beheading of John the Baptist, 
and with the realization that his time for death had not yet 
come, our Lord left the parts where he was so well known 
and journeyed about forty-five miles toward the Mediterranean. 
This brought him to what in our lesson is called the 

R3786 : page 169 

"borders of Tyre and Sidon," more properly the provinces 
of Tyre and Sidon— within the boundary of the land called 
Phoenicia, of which the cities of Tyre and Sidon had been the 
centers of wealth, influence and business. We are not informed 
that Jesus went to either of those cities: apparently 
he merely crossed the borders of Galilee, and was thus for a 
time free from the authority of Herod. He would rest a 
little from his labors, and allow the truths which he had 
taught to penetrate into the hearts of his hearers. He would 
let the froth work off and the real essence of the truth abide 
in the hearts which were in condition of righteousness for 
it. He knew well that these would be but few. 

The more his work increased and his fame spread 
abroad the more did the Adversary raise up opponents and 
hindrances. After the feeding of the five thousand and his 
return to Galilee he had discussions with the Pharisees, who, 
jealous of his growing popularity with the people, sought to 
oppose him. They would indeed have been glad to have 
recognized him as a Pharisee and to have had him do his 
mighty works in the name of Pharisaism. But his attitude 
was that of an independent— the Pharisees had sins that 
needed to be rebuked as well as others. Outwardly they 
were professing full consecration to God, but our Lord, who 
was able to read the heart, knew that a great deal of this 
was mere pretense, outward form and ceremony, 
show-religion. 

These Pharisees, posing as the leaders of religious 
thought in that day, were made very angry by our Lord's 
plainness of speech, and the fact that he pointed out to the 



common people the general rules and principles by which a 
tree may be known by its fruits— that the Pharisees were 
not to be esteemed according to their professions, but to be 
measured by their deeds. They prided themselves upon their 
strict observances of the Law, but he showed that many of 
the things which they did were not really the Law of God, 
but the commandments of men, and that the very essence of 
the divine Law, love, justice, they largely ignored, not only 
in their teachings but also in their practices. The Pharisees 
feared, therefore, that the high station which they had previously 
held in the estimation of non-professors was being 
shaken, and their pride antagonized this— hence they hated 
him without a cause. They should have been glad to have 
had their attention called to their errors that they might have 
corrected the same, but this is not the attitude of the unregenerate 
heart: it rejoiceth in iniquity and rejoiceth not in 
the truth; it rejoiceth in whatever upholds its pride and 
gives color to its boastings of success. To them Pharisaism 
meant everything, and the fall of Pharisaism meant the fall 
of all religion. 

It is much the same today. Many highly-esteemed people 
today occupy the position of the Pharisees of that time. 
They make an outward show, they boast of their success, 
they delight in the honor of men, especially in the honor of 
the world; they multiply forms and ceremonies and meetings 
and make a fair show in the flesh. They draw near to 
God with their lips, but give evidence that their heart sentiments 
are not in harmony with their lip professions, because 
when the truth is presented to them they hate it instead of 
loving it, and they hate the light-bearers because the light 
makes manifest their own weaknesses, hypocrisies, dissemblings 
in doctrines and practice. 

The improper spirit exemplified in the priests and 
Pharisees and Scribes in our Lord's day finds a parallel 
today in the anger, malice, hatred, bitter words, which, like 
arrows, are shot forth at those who serve the Truth, who seek 
to lift up the standard to the people, who seek to show up 
the errors of the "dark ages," and through the Truth to 
make known the real character of our heavenly Father and 
the real meaning of his Word. Persecutors always claim that 
they are in support of a principle of righteousness; only in 
this way can they deceive some whom they enlist upon their 
side— some of better heart and conscience than their own. 
As the Israelites considered that anything that would undermine 
them would be to the injury of the Lord's cause, so 
today every section of Babylon, every sect of Christendom, 
seems to be fully persuaded that anything which would undermine 
the errors of their systems would be injurious to the 
cause of the Lord; hence they feel that in supporting sectarianism 
in any of its branches they are fighting for God. 
Theirs is a part of the blindness which comes from the god 
of this world, the prince of this world, Satan, who has all 
the heathen thoroughly under his control, thoroughly blind 
to the goodness of God and his message. 

Our duty, nevertheless, is to be bold and courageous 
for the Truth, not with the hope of convincing all of our 



gainsayers, not with the thought of destroying sectarianism, 
but with the thought of gathering to the Lord his jewels 
from every quarter of Babylon, "Those who have made a 
covenant with me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) This was 
Jesus' work in the end of the Jewish age. He was gathering 
the jewels. His work was a success, although it seemed 
otherwise to his opponents. Similarly our work under God 
will be a success, even though others may see it differently. 
Even our Lord's crucifixion was a part of the success of 
God's plan, favorable not only to the believers but to all the 
families of the earth. 

So with us: "God will turn what seems to harm us 
into everlasting joy;" he will so overrule that all things 
shall work together for good to those who love him, to those 
who are on his side and are faithful in holding up his standard. 
Faith is the lesson here: our Lord had faith in the 
Father's plan and followed it through good report and 
through evil report. The apostles had faith in him, and 
when others said, "It is a hard saying," they said, "Lord, to 
whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life." 
Similarly with us faith is necessary: if we have faith in the 
Lord and in his Word we cannot doubt what the results 
will be, and will be prepared for all the experiences of life 
as they will be permitted to come to us, and will get blessings 
from them all. 

THE SYROPHOENICIAN WOMAN 

The country of Tyre and Sidon was called Phoenicia, 
and its population was made up largely of Carthaginians 
and Syrians. The woman of our lesson was of Syrian ancestors, 
and by education and language was a Greek. In a 
word she represented quite a mixture of nationalities; she 
was therefore a Gentile out and out. She had a little 

R3786 : page 170 

daughter possessed of an evil spirit, and her mother-love 

awakened her sensibilities as well as her faith. Although 

Jesus had entered the village without ostentation, in a semi-private 

manner, some one had known him, and the word 

some way reached the ears of this poor, afflicted woman. 

She hastened to the place where Jesus was, and prostrated 

herself before him. Matthew says that her cry was, "Have 

mercy upon me, O Lord! Lord, help me!" 

The American consul at Jerusalem, Honorable Selah 
Merrill, mentions the importunity of the people of the East, 
saying, "To one who has ever held a prominent or official 
position in the East the persistency of pleading women is a 
fact one will never forget. They will not be driven from 
their purpose by a rough manner. Severe language does 
not deter them. They are not wearied by delays. They 

R3787 : page 170 

will sit and wait hour after hour, and come day by day, ignoring 



all kinds of refusals. They are importunate beyond 
anything that I ever experienced in our western life." 

The case is just such a one as we know the Master 
would have promptly attended to under ordinary circumstances. 
The faith was there, hence the persistency of the request. 
But on this occasion Jesus simply ignored the woman, 
"He answered her not a word." (Matt. 15:23.) It would even 
appear that he left the house, and that the woman importuned 
the disciples that they would intercede for her with 
their Master, for we read that the disciples subsequently 
came to Jesus entreating him to "send her away." Evidently 
they had first tried to discourage the woman themselves, 
and told her that their Master was a Jew and that his mission 
was to Jews; that she could not have much hope for 
favor, and that his refusal was indicated by his silence to 
her first request. But the woman's faith in the Lord and 
love for her child led her to stay to importune. 

Apparently while the disciples were speaking with Jesus 
the woman again approached him, pleading her own 
cause. This time he answered her, but unsatisfactorily. 
He said, "Let the children first be filled: for it is not proper 
to take the children's bread and cast it unto dogs." Had 
there been pride in the heart this response would have been 
sufficient to have put the woman upon her dignity, so that 
she would have ceased her importunity and have openly 
tiraded against the Lord and against all Jews as ecclesiastical 
bigots. But she was humble as well as full of faith, 
and so far from taking offence at being told that she as a 
Gentile was classed with the dogs, she seized upon our 
Lord's own words as a basis for a further plea, that as the 
little house-dogs ate of the fragments from the family table 
thrown them by the children, so she as a Gentile, as one of 
the dogs, might be granted her request for the relief of her 
daughter from the power of the devil without hindering the 
real spirit of the Lord's argument, without saying that she 
was as worthy as a Jew of his mercy and favors. 

Our Lord was astonished as well as pleased by this 
demonstration of the woman's faith. Matthew says he exclaimed, 
"O woman, great is thy faith!" Her request was 
granted, her daughter was healed, and her further faith was 
shown in that she accepted the Master's word and went to 
her house, there to find that indeed the demon was gone out, 
and that in leaving he had thrown the child in a fit upon 
the bed. A prominent writer remarks, "It is impossible for 
us to realize the tone in which Jesus uttered these words or 
the love which beamed in full glory from his eyes. Nothing 
ever drew from our Lord such commendation as the exercise 
of a supreme faith." 

LESSONS IN FAITH-PRAYERS OF FAITH 

It is proper that we should draw analogies from our 
Lord's conduct and that we should suppose that the illustrations 
of Scripture, showing the trials and tests of faith, 
should teach us something respecting the Lord's plan of 
dealing with those who approach him in prayer. During 



this Gospel age the Lord is seeking for those who can and 
will exercise faith. Some undoubtedly are so constituted 
mentally that they cannot do this— not that God created 
us without the ability so to do in him, but that 
the fall has distorted the original creation so that many today 
are unable to exercise faith in a proper and full degree. 
It is not for us to denounce such, but rather to learn from 
God's Word that he has a gracious plan, which is broad 
enough to include this class as well as all others in the 
mercy and forgiveness provided through the redemption at 
Calvary. 

After the present age shall have selected out those who 
can exercise faith, who will exercise faith, and who will become 
faith-full, obedient to faith, then will be ushered in 
the great Millennial age, in which light, knowledge, will be 
granted to the remainder of mankind, to the intent that they 
may cultivate faith as well as all the elements of a proper 
character, and by restitution processes come to the attainment 
of all that was lost in Adam, or, failing to do so, be 
cut off in the Second Death. Let us hope that when the 
Millennial age shall be ushered in many in the world will 
be found ready to accept our Redeemer even without the 
special chastisements and judgments of that time to impress 
upon them the advantages of obedience to the Lord. As 
this Gentile woman could and did exercise faith in the Lord, 
so, doubtless, there are others in the world today who, if 
they knew our Savior as we know him, would be no less 
faithful than ourselves— some amongst the heathen, perhaps, 
would manifest much greater faith than some in Christendom 
today. 

"BE PATIENT, BRETHREN" 

As in dealing with this woman our Lord deferred the 
bestowment of the blessing he desired to give her, so doubtless 
he does with us at times. With us, too, he may see 
that it will be better if he should for a time ignore our petitions 
on some certain subject, that thus we may become more 
earnest, and perhaps increase our faith and our appreciation 
of the blessing we desire, just as this poor woman might 
not have appreciated so highly the Lord's favor if he had 
given it to her at once. With us also the Lord sometimes 
makes a test of humility before he responds to our requests. 
Are we of humble enough mind? Have we faith enough to 
come to the Lord at all? Can we trust him for his grace? 
Are we humble enough to accept his mercies on his conditions, 
on his terms, acknowledging ourselves nothing, that 
we have no merit to plead with him, that by grace we are 
saved and not according to any works that we could accomplish? 
If so we may be sure that the Lord will appreciate 

R3787 :page 171 

our demonstrations of such a faith by our holding on to his 
loving hand, to his gracious promises— by our confessions 
that we are nothing except as he shall give us of his mercy. 



As all the various experiences of the Gentile woman 
worked out for good to her, helping her in the development 
of a proper and acceptable faith and a spirit of humility, so, 
we may be sure, all of the delays to answers of our prayers 
that may come to us as the Lord's people are for our advantage 
if we will be exercised thereby— that we may grow in 
his grace, grow in his wisdom, grow in his love, grow in 
faith, grow in obedience, grow in humility. 

The more we study this subject of faith, the more we 
are convinced that in God's sight faith is not only indispensable 
but "very precious." We cannot come to God 
without faith, we cannot abide in his love without faith, we 
cannot receive day by day his mercies and blessings and 
leadings except by faith in his promises. We cannot realize 
ourselves as his children, begotten of the holy Spirit, and 
heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord, except 
as we exercise faith in his Word of promise to this effect. 
We cannot go on day by day following the Lord except as 
we are willing to walk by faith and not by sight, for this 
is the test which he puts upon all of his followers. We cannot 
see how the oppositions of the world, flesh and devil, 
which seem so baneful to us, are blessings in disguise except 
as we exercise faith in God's promises that it will be 
so. We cannot therefore be prepared for the heavenly Kingdom 
in its glories and blessings and privileges except as we 
now have and exercise the faith which will enable us to 
profit by various lessons given us in the school of Christ. 

"WAIT PATIENTLY FOR HIM" 

An illustration along this line comes to our mind. A 
sister living some distance from Allegheny, deeply interested 
in the Truth herself, informed us that she was earnestly 
praying for her husband that the Lord would graciously 
grant him the opening of the eyes of understanding. Having 
some acquaintance with the husband it was our opinion 
that his was rather a hopeless case. Not that he was a bad 
man, but that he seemed to be thoroughly worldly, his hours 
filled with business or hunting or lodge work, etc. And so 
we said to the sister, by way of preventing her from having 
too keen a disappointment in the matter: "Dear sister, remember 
that the Lord is making his own selection of those 
who will constitute his spiritual Bride of many members. 
It is not for us to dictate to the Lord in prayer or otherwise 
whom he shall select— it is for us to feel thankful and grateful 
that in his providence his Truth has reached our ears 
and brought us the blessing of an invitation to the nuptial 
feast. We advise that you do not set your heart upon your 
husband's acceptance of the Truth, and that you do not particularly 
pray along that line, but rather give thanks to the 
Lord that he is as noble a man as you know him to be, and, 
by your own life, your own conduct, your own example 
everyway of what constitutes righteousness and discipleship 
to Christ, set him as good an example as possible, hoping 
that this may profit him as respects the present life and also 
the future life, even though he should never come to the 



point of making a full consecration of himself to the Lord 
and his service." 

The sister's answer was, "I am trying to do all this, 
Brother Russell, but still I feel that the Lord will not be offended 
if I ask special blessings upon John— if I ask him to 
graciously grant him the opening of the eyes of his understanding. 
I am not so much requesting a miracle upon 
my husband to turn him against his will, but rather requesting 

R3788 :page 171 

that the Lord in his providence will be favorable to him, 

and make the way before him as smooth as possible consistent 

with divine wisdom." We uttered a few deprecatory 

words, thinking to ourself how sadly the poor woman would 

be disappointed as the days and years would go by, yet appreciating 

her wifely devotion and also her faith in the 

Lord's goodness. Judge of our great surprise when, about a 

year later, that husband became interested in the Truth, 

and followed up that interest by a full consecration of his 

heart and life to the Lord and in his service. We got a lesson 

from this similar to the one we get from the lesson today. 

The lesson is that God greatly appreciates faith, trust 

in his goodness, and that barring some interference with his 

plan he does, so far as possible, answer such petitions offered 

in an importunity of faith. Let us each, then, endeavor, 

more and more, to cultivate this important fruit of the Spirit, 

and correspondingly we will abound in the love and joy and 

peace, service and blessings which come from him who says, 

"According to thy faith be it unto thee." 



R3788 :page 171 

GOOD CONFESSIONS AND LATER TRIALS. 

-MATTHEW 16:13-28.-JUNE 10.- 

Golden Text:— "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.' 

IN THE VICINITY of Caesarea Philippi, on our Lord's 
most northerly journey in Palestine, just at the headwaters 
of the river Jordan, where it issues in great 
volume from a cave, our Lord put a question to his disciples 
which was full of meaning to them. This has been a 
weighty one ever since wherever his Word has gone. More 
than this, throughout the coming age, the Millennium, it will 
still be the all-important question. 

"WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST?" 

Our Lord had been teaching the apostles and the public 
for about three years, and although he had frequently 
referred to himself as the "Son of Man," a title recognized 
among the Jews as appropriate to the Messiah, a title applied 



to Messiah by Daniel the Prophet (Dan. 7:13,14), our 
Lord had never positively declared himself to be the Messiah. 
He had allowed his words, "such as never man 
spake," and his works, such as never man performed, to 
testify for him. He merely declared that he had come forth 
from the Father to be the Savior of men, that in due time 
he would ascend up on high where he was before, that 
through faith in him eternal life was obtainable, etc. He 
had talked about his Kingdom, too, and taught the apostles 

R3788 : page 172 

to pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as 
it is done in heaven." Still, as already stated, he had never 
positively declared that he was the Messiah— he had left it 
to inference; if his character and works would not testify 
to the hearts of his disciples any words on the subject would 
be vain, empty, powerless. 

By way of bringing the matter gradually before their 
minds, assisting them to see the general confusion prevailing, 
our Lord first asked the apostles respecting the general 
opinions of the people regarding him— whom they thought 
him to be. The answer was that there was confusion, some 
claiming that he was Elijah, others that he was John the 
Baptist returned with greater power, others that he was one 
of the ancient prophets who had reappeared. With this 
leading of the mind up to the central thought our Lord put 
the important question directly, "Whom say ye that I am?" 
What view of me is entertained by you who are my followers, 
you who know me most intimately, you who have heard 
my teachings and seen my daily life? At once came a noble 
confession from the Apostle Peter, who, while expressing 
his own sentiments, evidently expressed the minds of the 
entire discipleship, for there was no protest on the part of 
any and their silence gave assent. 

"THOU ART THE CHRIST, THE SON OF THE LIVING GOD" 

It should be noticed that the Scriptures are consistent 
with themselves throughout, that nowhere is the Lord Jesus 
spoken of as his own Father, the Almighty, Jehovah, but appropriately 
he is recognized as in his own statements as being 
the Son of God— the offspring of the Almighty, full of 
the Father's spirit, grace and power— God manifest in the 
flesh— the best possible manifestation of the Father amongst 
men, of that heavenly Father of whom it is declared, "Who 
only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man 
can approach unto; whom no man hath seen or can see." 
(1 Tim. 6:16.) The Only Begotten of the Father, full of 
grace and truth, represent him and the glorious qualities of 
his character to humanity. The apostles discerned this, and 
honored the Son accordingly as the Father had already honored 
him. 

Our Lord promptly acknowledged Peter's confession as 
being appropriate, correct, truthful, and he added a blessing, 
saying, "Blessed art thou, Simon, son of Jonas, because flesh 



hath not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in 
heaven." Here again our Lord disclaims being the Father, 
and declares that the Father is in heaven— was not on earth 
except representatively. The same thought our Master gave 
to Mary after his resurrection, saying, "I ascend to my Father 
and to your Father, to my God and to your God." (John 20:17.) 
We honor the Lord most and have clearest views of 
the meaning of his words when we accept them simply and 
truthfully, without attempting to be wise above what is 
written or to add to the divine revelation or the honor of our 
Lord by inconsistent claims contradictory to the revelation 
which has been given us. 

"THOU ART THE CHRIST" 

This was a part of Peter's reply— "Thou art the Messiah. 
We accept you as being the one in whom center 
all the promises— the one who is to redeem and to bless 
the world." How we wish that all of the Lord's professed 
people might clearly discern what is implied by Peter's 
good confession! It implies faith in Jesus, not merely as 
the Savior of the Church which is his body, his Bride, but 
as the Savior of the world— the great Messiah, the seed of 
Abraham, through whom with his elect Bride all the families 
of the earth will be blessed with gracious opportunities 
for escape from the thraldom of sin and death to the liberties 
of the sons of God. 

"What think ye of Christ?" This question, which 
came to Peter and his fellow-apostles, has been rung down 
through the centuries from that time until now, wherever 
the knowledge of the Lord Jesus has gone. It is a question 
which each one must eventually answer for himself. Thank 
God for this: the benighted heathen shall not be left in 
darkness, in ignorance of the only name given under heaven 
and amongst men whereby we must be saved. (Acts 4:12.) 
In due time this true Light shall lighten every man that 
cometh into the world. (John 1:9.) And with the question 
and with the light which makes possible an answer to 
the question comes a responsibility which none may shirk. 
Eventually every son and daughter of Adam must decide respecting 
the great Savior whom God has provided— each 
must accept or reject him as his Redeemer, his Savior, 
his Teacher, Priest and King, if he would enter into life; 
or, rejecting him intelligently and wilfully, must die the 
Second Death— utter destruction. 

The question has come to us who are the Lord's followers, 
and we, like Peter and the apostles and all the faithful 
since, have accepted the Son of God as our Savior, realizing 
that he bought us with his precious blood, and that we have 
peace with God through a realization that the divine sentence 
against us has been met, so that God can now justly 
accept us to himself, forgiving our sins— not imputing them 
to us, but accepting satisfaction through our Surety and his 
precious sacrifice. On the strength of this faith that he was 
the Son of God, that he died for our sins, we have also accepted 
him as the great King of Glory, whose Millennial 



Kingdom is surely to bless the world by establishing the 
reign of righteousness, by binding Satan and all the powers 
of evil, by causing the knowledge of the glory of God to fill 
the whole earth and by instituting a great reign of judgment, 
of justice, in the world, under which every unrighteous 
deed shall receive a just recompense of reward, and every 
good endeavor receive encouragement and blessing, and bring 
a corresponding uplift, mental, moral and physical, to the 
obedient. 

By faith we now believe and accept the message that 
those who hear now in advance of the world have a special 
call to joint-heirship with their Redeemer in his glorious 
Kingdom, and shall share with him in his grand work of 
blessing and restoring the willing and obedient of mankind. 
What joy follows in the wake of this knowledge and its good 
confession only the elect can fully appreciate. And in proportion 
as these confess their faith that same faith grows, 
and the blessings and privileges connected with it grow, and 
gradually their joys become full to the overflowing of their 
earthly vessels in the present life and to their preparing the 
more for the glorious fulness of joy into which they will be 
ushered in their glorious resurrection change, when the Master 
himself shall say to them, "Well done, good and faithful 

R3789 : page 173 

servant; enter thou into the joys of thy Lord."— 
Matt. 25:21. 

WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST? 

This same question confronts others who see with considerable 
clearness the mercy, the grace of God in Christ, 
and the glorious plan which centers in him, but who for the 
present are withholding a confession, who have not thus far 
taken their stand on the side of Christ, to confess him before 
men and to follow him in their daily life. To these we give 
a word of encouragement and a word of warning as well. 
They should be encouraged with the evidences they have of 
the Lord's favor, in that they have been permitted to come 
to their present position of knowledge of Christ and the gracious 
plan of God centering in him. They should realize 
that while they have already appreciated much, still there is 
more to follow of grace and joy and peace and blessing and 
knowledge to those who go on, who take the important step 
of public confession, who enter into a covenant of sacrifice 
to be followers in the footsteps of Jesus. They cannot go on 
to belong to his disciples unless they confess him; they cannot 
hope to share in the glories that belong to the faithful 
who walk in the narrow way unless they take up their cross 
to follow. 

But they should know that while the cross of the Lord 
is not a light one, nevertheless his yoke is easy and his burden 
is light because he yokes himself with us in our trials 
and difficulties of life. With him as our companion and 
burden-bearer the cross is light, the burden is easy and the 



joys and peace resulting to his faithful are indescribable, 
even as eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it 
entered into the heart of man the blessings by and by to be 
conferred on them. (1 Cor. 2:9.) The day of opportunity 
for accepting Christ under present conditions is rapidly 
speeding away. Soon the door of present privilege will 
close; and even though another door of gracious favor will 
open thereafter, its blessings and rewards cannot be considered 
with those which are now before us. Let us lay aside 
every weight and every besetting sin and enter the race and 
run patiently to its end, hoping for a share with our Redeemer 
in his glorious Kingdom work. 

ROCK-FOUNDED LIVING STONES 

Peter, the mouthpiece of the disciples, was especially 
addressed by our Lord, although the blessing spoken to him 
was in a measure shared by the others also. Our Lord here 
gave Simon his surname, Peter, which signifies a stone, declaring 
"Thou art Peter [a stone], and upon this rock [this 
great truth which you have enunciated] I will build my 
Church." Peter subsequently writing refers to the matter 
in this manner, saying of all of the Lord's true followers, 
"Ye, also, as living stones, are built up a spiritual house, an 
holy priesthood, to offer up sacrifices acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ." (1 Pet. 2:5.) Peter and the other apostles 
are presented to us as foundation stones built upon this 
great truth, that Christ is the Redeemer, the Savior, the 
Messiah. Note how our Lord presents this matter in Revelation, 
in the picture of the New Jerusalem, representing its 
walls as having twelve foundations of precious stones, in 
which were written the names of the twelve apostles of the 
Lamb. --Rev. 21:14. 

"What think ye of Christ? is the test 

To try both your state and your scheme; 
You cannot be right in the rest, 

Unless you think rightly of him. 
Some take him a creature to be, 

A man or an angel at most; 
Sure these have not feelings like me, 

Nor know themselves wretched and lost. 



"Some style him the pearl of great price, 
And say he's the fountain of joys, 

Yet feed upon folly and vice, 

And cleave to the world and its toys. 



"If asked what of Jesus I think, 

Though still my best thoughts are but poor, 
I say, He's my meat and my drink, 

My life, and my strength, and my store; 



My Shepherd, my Husband, my Friend, 

My Savior from sin and from thrall, 
My hope from beginning to end, 

My portion, my Lord and my all." 

Of this Church whose foundation was laid by the Redeemer 
himself and which was to be built thereupon our 
Lord declares,— 

"THE GATES OF HELL SHALL NOT PREVAIL" 

This statement seems to some to favor the theory that 
eternal torment is the fate of all except the Church: yet 
such must view the text very superficially indeed, for with 
their view what picture would the words convey? In what 
sense would it be true that the gates of hell shall not prevail 
against the Church? If we suppose a fiery hell such 
as many teach, and a barred gateway leading thereto, and 
the Church on the outside of those gates, we would be 
obliged to imagine the Church trying to break through the 
gates to get into the fire, and that the gates would not be 
strong enough to hinder the rash act. Or, on the other 
hand, we should be obliged to imagine the Church on the 
fiery side of those gates and trying to burst them open and 
succeeding in so doing. Surely neither of these views represents 
properly the condition of the Church as viewed from 
any standpoint. 

But now note the reasonableness and beauty of the 
true interpretation of this language. The word hell here is 
in the Greek, hades, the same word that is elsewhere translated 
grave. For instance, in the Apostle's declaration respecting 
the resurrection and the deliverance of the Church 
from the grave, he exclaims, "O hades, where is thy victory?" 
He pictures thus the Church triumphing over hades, coming 
out of hades, out of the grave, out of the state of death. 
The same thought is connected with our Lord's resurrection: 
he is represented as bursting the bonds of death, bursting 
the restraints of sheol, of hades— by the Father's power. 
The gates of hades, the gates of the tomb, the strength of 
death which restrained him three days, was broken in his 
resurrection. This is the picture which our Lord presents. 
The Church in common with the world would go down into 
death, and this was an assurance to the apostles of the 
abundant deliverance which will be granted to the Church 
in the First Resurrection to glory, honor and immortality, to 
the conditions where the Second Death will have no power. 

R3789 : page 174 

THE KEYS OF THE KINGDOM 

A key implies a lock, and the thought here is that 
God's Kingdom was locked that none could enter it. Our 
Lord alone was able to keep the divine Law and to inherit 
the divine promise. To him alone, therefore, belonged entrance 
to the Kingdom. He was recognized as the Anointed 



from the time he received the holy Spirit at his baptism, 
and in the fullest sense in his resurrection from the dead, a 
spirit being. "With all power in heaven and in earth."— 
Matt. 28:18. 

But neither before his death nor during the forty days 
after his resurrection could our Savior open, unlock the 
Kingdom to his followers, though he promised them ultimately 
a share with him therein. He put his Spirit upon 
them, by which they in his name performed many wonderful 
works, but they could not be recognized by the Father nor 
receive the begetting power of the holy Spirit, the anointing 
of the Father, at that time. They could not then be ushered 
into the Kingdom privileges and relationship until Christ had 
ascended up on high and appeared in the presence of the 
Father on their behalf, presenting the merit of his own sacrifice 
as the condition upon which they might be accepted. 
It was after our Lord had done this that he permitted Peter 
to use the first key— to throw open the door of the Kingdom 
to all of his truly consecrated followers. 

The door thrown open at Pentecost was only to the 
Jews, not to the Gentiles. Peter preached only to the Jews 
and proselytes, inviting them and them only to become 
sharers in the Kingdom of God's dear Son. When, three 
and a half years later, the Lord's due time had come for 
throwing open the other door into the Kingdom— the door 
for the Gentiles— Peter again was given the key, the right, 
the authority, to open that door. He it was who was sent 
to Cornelius, the first Gentile convert, to explain to him the 
conditions of relationship to Christ in the Kingdom and to 
initiate him that he might receive the holy Spirit. The two 
keys having been used there is nothing further to unlock respecting 
the Kingdom, and the Jewish institutions having 
passed away there is now but the one door, and it, we are 
told, will be closed perpetually when all of the wise virgins 
shall have gone in to the wedding.— Matt. 25:1-10. 

The declaration respecting Peter's authority to bind 
and loose was a common form of expression in those days, 
to indicate forbidding and permitting. One writer declares, 
"No other terms were in so constant use in Rabbinic Canon 
Law as those of binding and loosing. They represented 
the legislative and judicial powers of the Rabbinic office." 
This authority was shared by all of the apostles (Matt. 18: 18, 19), 
and it is because of our belief in this that we hold 
to the exact presentations of the apostles as representing 
the divine will, and allow no testimony by subsequent followers 
of the Lord to have the same weight or influence. 
Respecting the apostles alone we have the assurance that 
they were divinely supervised— that whatever they forbade 
or allowed was under heavenly guidance and sanction. 

R3790 : page 174 

"THEY SHOULD TELL NO MAN" 

Our Lord enjoined upon the disciples a measure of 
secrecy respecting his Messiahship because it was not yet 



due time for this to be made generally known. Its publication 

by Jesus and his disciples would have stirred up the 

public mind and have interfered to some extent with the 

divine program respecting his crucifixion— either by hastening 

it or by hindering it. But after our Lord's death and 

resurrection this was the entire theme of all of his representatives, 

his messengers— Jesus the Redeemer of the world, 

the Messiah, whose coming at the end of this Gospel age shall 

bring in times of refreshing and restitution for the uplift of 

the groaning creation. 

Our Lord did not even pointedly draw this to the attention 
of his disciples, as we have seen, until the due time— 
until the approaching end of his career made it necessary for 
them to be forewarned that they might not be deceived, that 
they might know how his death was a part of the divine 
program. It was from this time on that Jesus began to 
explain to his close followers that he was to suffer death at 
Jerusalem at the hands of the religionists of that day, and 
that he would be raised from the dead on the third day 
thereafter. 

BLESSINGS BRING TRIALS 

The noble Peter had scored a great success in faithful 
and prompt acknowledgment of the Master, and he received 
special favors and blessings and promises as a result. Perhaps 
this helped to make him somewhat heady and self-opinionated. 
It is so with many of the Peter class (a noble 
class) from that time until now. Many admitted to the 
Lord's favor and privileged to confess him before men have 
stumbled over their own honor and exaltation. No wonder 
then the Apostle admonished, Be not many of you teachers, 
brethren, knowing that a man who is a teacher has severer 
trials, temptations.— Jas. 3:1. 

Peter, in his love for the Master, and intoxicated somewhat 
by the honors bestowed upon him already, undertook 
to be the teacher— "not holding the Head" in proper reverence. 
Alas, how many treat the Lord's Word in the same 
manner today— ignoring his own statements and distorting 
his words in a manner which they are pleased to consider 
better than his, more honoring to him and to the Father. 
What a great mistake! Let us, dear fellow students, always 
recognize the headship of our Lord, and always remember 
that we are to listen to his Word and not to attempt to correct 
him or to substitute ideas of our own as being either 
better or as good. If we consider him worthy of the 
Father's honor and confidence, let us also consider him 
worthy to be our teacher, and from this standpoint let us 
take his every word seriously, carefully, implicitly. 

Although Peter did not so intend the matter, his efforts 
were in the direction of turning the Lord aside from the fulfilment 
of his covenant. And so we think it is with some 
who, Peter-like, do not give sufficient heed to the Master's 
teaching— their influence at times upon their brethren and 
the Church is to hinder the sacrificing rather than to assist 
the sacrificers in the good way. They are stumbling-blocks 



instead of stepping-stones, and it is the duty of all who 

would be faithful footstep-followers of Jesus to kindly but 

emphatically treat the advice of such as our Master did, 

to ignore it and to press along the line according to our covenant. 

Our Lord declared Peter to be an adversary [Satan] 

a hinderer of the work. 

Thus we see how those who are good and well intentioned 
may unwisely become hinderers of that they desire to 
assist. Let us be on our guard as respects ourselves and 

R3790 : page 175 

our influence upon others. Peter reasoned from the human 
standpoint, not from the divine. Happy would it have been 
for him if he had taken this lesson very thoroughly to heart; 
but through failure so to do he was unprepared for the later 
testing, when he denied his Lord and brought upon himself 
bitter weeping. Our Lord's life was an illustration, and put 
emphasis upon the words which he then addressed to the 
apostles, "If any man will come after me let him deny himself 
and take up his cross and follow me. For whosoever 
will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose his 
life for my sake shall find it." Discipleship meant the very 
reverse of what the apostles had naturally expected. They 
thought of the Kingdom glory and honor, and were desirous 
of attaining those blessings. 

The disciples were now learning that their attainment 
meant severe testings, disciplines, trials, which would demonstrate 
their worthiness or unworthiness of a place in the 
Kingdom. Self love and earthly loves, outweighing devotion 
to the Lord, would mean unfitness for a share with him in 
the Kingdom. On the contrary, such a love for the Lord 
and the truth and the privileges of service as would lead to 
self-denials, earthly sacrifices, etc., even unto death, would 
imply the possession of the character which our Lord sought 
in those whom he would make his joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom. 

GAIN THE WORLD, LOSE HIS BEING 

Our Lord stated a general truth when he declared that 
a selfish love of life under present sinful conditions would 
signify the loss of life eternal— would signify ultimately the 
Second Death. This applies to the Church in the present time. 
We have covenanted with the Lord to leave all and follow 
him; we have exchanged our earthly hopes and aims for 
heavenly ones; and now, if we fail of the heavenly, all will 
be gone. Yes! it is a case of losing our earthly lives and 
gaining the heavenly, and no amount of earthly gain can 
compensate us for the loss of the life eternal hoped for. 

Somewhat similar principles will apply to the world 
during the Millennial age, for they also will be required to 
break away from sin and cultivate righteousness if they 
would attain to life; and those who will not forego the sins 
and not battle against the weaknesses will never attain to 
the restitution perfections and everlasting life. The matter 



then resolves itself into this, for us now and for them by and 
by: Do we prefer everlasting life in harmony with the divine 
Law and righteous requirements, or do we choose the 
contrary, with the penalty, Second Death? 

"THY KINGDOM COME" 

All this, respecting the necessity of suffering and death 
on the part of those who would be sharers with the Lord in 
his Kingdom, was evidently a new thought to the disciples. 
It had been partially stated previously, but in dark sayings 
which they did not comprehend. Evidently even yet they 
did not grasp the situation clearly, but our Lord proceeded 
to clinch the matter in their minds by assuring them that 
they would not get the Kingdom inheritance until some period 
in the future— when the Son of man shall come in the 
glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shall render 
unto every man according to his deeds. To those who 
by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory, honor 
and immortality he will render the reward of eternal life on 
the spirit plane; but chastisements, punishments, corrective 
in their nature, and purgatorial to all others whose evil deeds, 
preferences for sin, unfaithfulness to light and knowledge 
and truth, mark them as out of accord with the great principles 
of righteousness. To these will be given experiences 
in the time of trouble which will mean sorrow, disappointment, 
grief, etc. We are glad to have the assurance from 
other Scriptures that these corrective judgments of the Lord 
as they come upon the world will mean blessings in disguise, 
for, "When the judgments of the Lord are abroad in 
the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 
-Isa. 26:9. 

The statement of verse 28 has been the cause of considerable 
confusion. It reads, "There be some standing 
here who shall not taste of death until they see the Son 
of man coming in his Kingdom." This is what might be 
termed a "dark saying," an obscure statement. The key to 
it is found in the first nine verses of the succeeding chapter. 
The chapter division, which was not of inspiration but was 
made centuries after Matthew was dead, has served to separate 
the Lord's words from the explanation of them. 

Connecting the matter we see that our Lord meant that 
some who were there with him would see a demonstration 
of his statement about his second coming in power and great 
glory in a vision, and that vision was given a little later on 
in the Mount of Transfiguration, when the entire Kingdom 
was represented in tableaux to Peter, James and John, three 
of those who were with him at the time he uttered the words 
of our lesson. In that panoramic vision our Lord was transfigured 
so that the disciples saw him radiant with glory, and 
as nearly identical as would be possible to show them the 
glories of the Kingdom; and with the Lord in the vision 
were seen Moses, a representative of Israel, and Elijah, a 
representative of the Church. St. Peter, one of the three 
who witnessed this exhibit of the Kingdom glory in vision, 
mentions it in his epistle, saying, "For we were eyewitnesses 



of his majesty. ..when we were with him in the 
holy mount."~2 Pet. 1:16-18. 

If that vision was such a testimony to the Apostle Peter 
and his associates, and through them was applied to all of 
the early Church as an assurance of the blessing of the Lord 
which would ultimately come at the second advent of Christ 
in his Kingdom, how much more assurance have we now in 
the fact that we by the grace of God have been enabled to 
see the spiritual glories of the Lord through the opening of 
the divine Word, the breaking of the seals upon the scroll of 
divine revelation! "Wonderful things in the Bible we see." 
Wonderful love and exceeding great and precious promises 
for the Church, wonderful love and an ancient Covenant for 

R3791 :page 175 

Israel, wonderful love and a New Covenant for all the families 

of the earth. Those who see this vision of the Kingdom, 

and who discern its rapid arrangement and the preparation 

for its glorious revelation to the whole world, have the assurance 

that they are not following cunningly devised fables; 

that the Higher Critics are greatly mistaken in their judging 

of the Word of God along the lines of external testimonies 

and evolution theories. We have much advantage everyway 

over the remainder of mankind, and we may well say to ourselves, 

What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy 

conversation, living and godliness!— 2 Pet. 3:11. 



page 177 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 