Appreciating the Precious Gift of Life
LIFE​—what a precious possession! Without it we can do nothing. Once it is lost, it cannot be restored by any human means. If our life is in danger, we do everything within reason to preserve it. Why, some will even call for superhuman aid when in distress!
We are reminded of the Bible account of a ship that was caught up in a powerful storm at sea. When it was about to be wrecked, “the mariners began to fear and to call for aid, each one to his god.” Later, they one and all called out to the true God: “Ah, now, O Jehovah, may we, please, not perish.” The Bible account also says: “They kept hurling out the articles that were in the ship to the sea, in order to lighten it of them.”​—Jonah 1:4-6, 14; compare Acts 27:18, 19.
Those sailors were even ready to sacrifice cherished material possessions in an effort to preserve their lives. We can replace material possessions​—but not life. And because we instinctively cherish our lives, we recoil from danger. We feed, clothe, and nourish our bodies. We seek medical treatment when we are sick.
Nevertheless, the Giver of life requires more of us than simply following our self-protective instincts. After all, life is a priceless gift, and it comes from the most important Personage in the entire universe. Out of sincere appreciation for both the Giver and the gift, should we not cherish life? And would that not include having a regard for the lives of others?
It should not surprise us, then, that the Law Jehovah God gave the nation of Israel included commandments designed to protect the lives and health of others. (Exodus 21:29; Deuteronomy 22:8) Christians today should likewise be safety conscious. For example, if you have youngsters in your home, do you carelessly leave within reach such things as beads, pins, or sharp objects that could cause severe harm to a child innocently playing with or swallowing them? Are dangerous chemicals and medicines stored out of the reach of children? If water is spilled on the floor, are you quick to clean it up so as to prevent an accident? Do you see to the immediate repair of faulty appliances? Does your vehicle receive regular maintenance? Are you a safe driver? If you really appreciate the preciousness of life, you will be moved to take reasonable precautions in these and similar areas.
Sad to say, though, some take even their own life for granted. For example, who today does not know that cigarette smoking is unhealthy? Yet, millions are enslaved by the habit, while their health deteriorates each time they inhale the poisonous smoke. Others abuse drugs, and still others alcohol, all to their detriment. AIDS is a killer disease for which there is no known cure. But many could have avoided contracting the disease if they had shunned sexual immorality, certain kinds of drug abuse, and blood transfusions. What a tragic lack of appreciation for life!​—Romans 1:26, 27; 2 Corinthians 7:1.
Change Is Possible!
Those who appreciate their Grand Creator, Jehovah, have a powerful reason to view life as precious. Life is his sacred gift. They are therefore willing to make whatever changes are necessary to treat it as a divine gift. Consider the experience of Kwaku, a teacher in Ghana. A reckless alcoholic, he was throwing his life away.
Kwaku recalls: “I tried to force my wife to respect me, which often led to heated arguments and fights, particularly when I was drunk. Because of overindulgence in alcohol, I was often broke, and I frequently defaulted in providing money for the support of the family. Understandably, this irritated my wife very much. Whenever I ran out of funds (and this happened very often), I did anything I could to support my habit. Once I went so far as to make personal use of moneys I had collected from my pupils for the purpose of registering them for a public exam. I went on a drinking spree and also bought drinks for my drinking companions. The day of reckoning soon caught up with me. Had it not been for the timely intervention of my headmaster, I would have lost my job.
“My life was a mess. I was embarrassed, but I soon got over it. Then I started developing suicidal thoughts because I felt I was a failure in life. Still, I could not break free from alcohol addiction. But when one day in a bar I got involved in a drunken brawl and was stabbed, it painfully dawned on me that my love for alcohol would some day cost me my life.
“All along, Jehovah’s Witnesses had periodically been visiting our house, trying to interest us in the Bible. My wife and I always dodged them because we thought they were a nuisance. On one occasion, though, I decided to listen to them out of sympathy. A study of the Bible soon opened my eyes to the wonderful prospect of living forever in God’s new system. The more I studied the Bible with the help of Jehovah’s Witnesses, the deeper my appreciation grew for Jehovah as our Life-Giver and for his gift of life, and the more impressed I became with the practicality of the Bible’s counsel. This further encouraged me to clean up my life. This was not easy, as I continually had to resist the tot [liquor] as well as my old companions. Jehovah, the Hearer of prayer, saw the determination of my heart and heard me.a
“My wife, although not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, now holds me and my religion in high esteem because of the great transformation that she observes in my life and in our marital relationship. Our neighbors no longer need to intervene in fights between my wife and me. I cherish the peace of mind I now enjoy. Surely, appreciating Jehovah God as our Life-Giver, adopting his viewpoint on the preciousness of life, and obeying his instructions on how to live is the only worthwhile way of life.”
God’s Offer of Eternal Life
Thousands, like Kwaku, have been helped by Jehovah’s Witnesses to “put on the new personality which was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.” (Ephesians 4:24) They have come to appreciate not only their present life but also the hope of life eternal in an earthly paradise. The Bible promises that in that Paradise of God’s making, no inhabitant of the earth will again experience the gnawing pangs of hunger, for “Jehovah of armies will certainly make for all the peoples . . . a banquet of well-oiled dishes.”​—Isaiah 25:6.
At present, life, although a wonderful gift, is only temporary. Everyone faces death, and what a traumatic blow death is! To watch someone you love disappear from among the living into the stillness of the grave is very distressing, to say the least. But under God’s Kingdom, ruled by Christ, Jehovah’s promise will be fulfilled: “Death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Revelation 21:4.
At that time the gift of life will be extended in marvelous fashion. Survivors of the final tribulation on this earth will have the opportunity to enter into the fullness of life. And then, by means of the resurrection, a bringing back to life, Jehovah God will restore his priceless gift to those asleep in death. (John 5:24, 28, 29) This will mean the return of dead loved ones and God-fearing men of old!
Is all of this too good to be true? No, for “with God no declaration will be an impossibility.”​—Luke 1:37; compare Job 42:2.
Furthermore, Jehovah God himself has furnished mankind a guarantee that all of this will take place. How? By sacrificing the one dearest to his heart, his dear Son, Jesus Christ, to ransom us from sin and death. Romans 8:32 assures us: “He [Jehovah God] who did not even spare his own Son but delivered him up for us all, why will he not also with him kindly give us all other things?” The Bible tells us that this will include cleansing mankind of moral decadence and eliminating all forms of injustice, crime, and violence. (Isaiah 11:9) Never again will life be viewed as cheap.
Even now, under imperfect conditions, life can be very enjoyable. Who does not delight in the tantalizing aroma of food, the feel of a gentle breeze on a warm day, the sight of a majestic mountain, a gorgeous sunset, a serenely flowing stream, breathtakingly colorful flowers, the sound of sweet music, or the song of birds? Pause for a moment. Think, what would it be like to enjoy such things for an eternity?
Does it make any sense, then, to throw away the precious privilege of living forever because of any temporary pleasure that a senseless, self-indulgent course of life may offer? (Compare Hebrews 11:25.) Wisely, the Bible exhorts us ‘to live the remainder of our lives, no more for the desires of men, but for God’s will.’ (1 Peter 4:2) We heartily encourage you, yes, urge you, to do so by studying God’s Word, the Bible, and putting into practice the things you learn. (John 13:17) You will thus come into a good relationship with Jehovah, the God overflowing with goodness and mercy, who can reward you with eternal life!
[Footnotes]
Recovery from alcoholism is a formidable task, often requiring professional help. See our companion magazine, Awake! of May 22, 1992, for helpful information on this subject.
[Picture on page 5]
Does your life-style reflect an appreciation for life?
[Picture on page 7]
God’s new world will allow us to enjoy the pleasures of life eternally!

