Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Letting Their Light Shine in India
THE good news of the Kingdom is being preached in India by 11,524 joyful Witnesses. (Matthew 24:14) The 1,066 baptized during the 1991 service year are Kingdom proclaimers, letting their light shine to others. How happy all were to see 28,866 attend the Memorial celebration of Christ’s death!
□ Many first learn of the Kingdom hope through informal witnessing. For example, a Witness spoke about the Kingdom to his workmates, who are also carpenters. One workmate responded and began to let his light shine to his family and friends. These joyfully passed on this wonderful Kingdom message to others. According to reports, in just a few years, ‘more than 30 persons had accepted the truth.’ Jehovah blessed him and his new spiritual brothers for letting their light shine.
□ A young brother in another congregation let his light shine by witnessing informally to fellow students in school. Some of them were interested in the Kingdom hope, and he often explained the Bible to them until after midnight. One, a Catholic, took a firm stand for the truth despite being warned by the priest of severe consequences if he continued associating with the Witness. The student, however, was convinced that he was learning Bible truth from the Witnesses, and he continued taking in knowledge. In due time he was baptized and now serves as a ministerial servant in the congregation. He rejoices in the hope that comes through the wonderful light of truth!​—Romans 12:12.
□ Another who listened to this young Witness was a well-known student, an atheist, who used to mock those who professed to believe in God, but one day he joined in the discussion and asked many questions. He was surprised when he got logical answers to all his questions and came to the conclusion that the Bible is God’s Word. He progressed in Bible knowledge and finally got baptized. His Hindu father opposed him to the point of putting him out of his house. However, this young man’s firm stand for the truth was rewarded when two of his fleshly brothers and two of his friends accepted the truth and were baptized. One of his brothers now serves at the branch office in India.
□ A student organizer also joined in the discussions with the young Witness. He was a chain smoker and a heavy drinker. At one time, he had wanted to beat up two fellow students who had learned the truth from the Witness. Because of accepting the truth, they had refused to join a college strike and also would not donate blood during a blood-collection campaign spearheaded by the student organizer. This young man is now happy to be a light-bearing Witness of Jehovah.
□ In all, the student who first let his light shine has been instrumental in helping 15 of his peers to dedication and baptism by witnessing to them informally.
It is a joy to see many in that vast land accepting the Bible’s hope of God’s new world and joining the worldwide brotherhood that Jehovah God is gathering to live forever under his Kingdom.

