R1239 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1890. NO. 10. 



page 1 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

We have reduced the price of the Missionary 
Envelopes, so as to induce as large 
a use of them as possible. We will deliver 
them to you at 25 cents a hundred, or 
$2.00 a thousand. By this very low price, 
which is less than cost, it is hoped to 
stimulate the spread of truth in this form. 



R1239 : page 1 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 

This is the title of our new book. It 
is a volume of 494 pages, neatly bound, 
with red edges, in embossed cloth cover. 

It contains 151 choice religious Poems 
and 333 select Hymns, many of which are 
from the well known pens of Whittier, Doudney, 
Titbury, Browning, Mackay, Bryant, 
Havergal, Reed, Janvier, Bonar, Guinness, 
Wince, Smith, Heber, Brown, Upham, 
Watts, Newton, Cowper, Bottome, Doddridge, 
Kelly, Pierpont, Taylor, Bliss, Oberlin, 
Toplady, Gates, Crosby, Wittenmeyer, 
Hastings, Grant, Palmer, Guyon, Phelps, 
Stennett, Brewer, Bowring and many others, 
including some by Sister Russell. 

For a helping hand to lead our hearts 
very close to the Lord, in quiet, solitary 
meditations, and in songs of praise and 
worship, alone or in little assemblages of 
believers, we know of none so helpful as 
this volume of Poems and Hymns of Dawn. 

The retail price through bookstores and 
news-agents is the same as the volumes of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN in cloth binding, 
namely: One dollar a copy. The wholesale 
rate is fifty cents a copy.— ALL WATCH 
TOWER subscribers are supplied at the 
wholesale rate, for any desired quantity, 
without extra charge for postage. 

The price is made thus low because we 
desire that all of the saints may have the 
assistance of this helping hand in their 



communion and devotion. It is good to 
know the truth; it is blessed to obey it; 
and it is then sweet to feed upon it in 
communion and worship. In order that 
the poor of the flock may enjoy the same 
opportunities for communion and growth 
in grace, we renew our offer to supply a 
copy to any who have been on our TOWER 
list for the past year as the Lord's poor, 
if they will write for it, saying that they 
are too poor to afford to purchase the 
volume. 

Let us here remark, what some do not 
appear to understand, that we are now 
supplying Millennial Dawn in cloth binding 
to TOWER subscribers at half the retail 
price— fifty cents per copy— with no 
extra charge for postage. Order as many 
copies as you desire for your own use and 
for loaning to friends and neighbors. 



R1238 : page 1 

EXCEPT A CORN OF WHEAT DIE. 

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a kernel 
of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth 
alone, but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit."— 
John 12:24. 

It has been urged by some that this 
statement proves that the Lord's work for 
mankind was not that of a substitute. We 
hold the very contrary to be the fact: that 
it does teach substitution exactly. 

The words were used a few days before 
our Lord's crucifixion, about the time 
that he began to show the disciples ( Matt. 16:21-23 ) 
how he must suffer many things 
and be killed and be raised again the third 
day, when Peter rebuked him and said, 
"Be it far from thee, Lord," this shall 
not be unto thee, and was in turn rebuked. 
The Lord, in furnishing a reason for his 
death, drew an illustration from nature, 
likening himself to the seed grain whose 
death becomes a source of life to many 
grains of like kind. 

It was the man Christ Jesus who gave 
himself into death, as the necessary means 
under God's plan of bringing other men 
into being. It is too well known to be 
disputed, that if a grain of wheat is 
planted and dies, it brings forth other grains 



like itself, and never produces grains of 
another kind or sort. Then so surely as 
it was the man Jesus who died, it will 
be a race of men like he was when he 
died that in due time will be developed as 
the result of his death. 

The grain of wheat which dies never 
revives, never rises; it is gone forever, it 
has ceased to be; its life is given as a substitute 
for the lives of the grains which receive 
its life and nature instead of it. The 
seed grain gives up its existence as a grain 
that the others may become living grains. 
It goes into nonentity as the others were, 
that they may exist. The Lord's illustration 
is a perfect one, and in full harmony 
with his repeated statement that he would 
lay down his life for the life of the world— 
that he would give his life a ransom (a 
corresponding price) for all. 

Our Lord teaches that having left the 
higher nature and become a man, a 
"kernel of wheat," it was not his purpose 
to abide or continue to live as a 
man. Had he chosen to do so he might 
indeed have preserved his life; he needed 
not to die. But then the very object of 
his taking the human nature (that he 
might become the life-giver to all of 
Adam's death-sentenced race who would 
desire it upon God's conditions) would 
fail of accomplishment. He as the "kernel 
of wheat" might indeed preserve himself, 
as his life was not forfeited, and no cause 
of death was found in him, but thus 
he alone would have life and the race 
of Adam would continue dead or dying, 
under sentence of death without one hope 
of life. Only in one way could the 
many be brought to life— by the death 
of the one in whom was the germ of life. 
And our Lord Jesus himself was that one, 
the only kernel which had a germ of life, 
the only man who had a right to life since 
Adam lost his right by disobedience. 

We have already shown at length that 
to secure for mankind forever the rights 
and privileges of restitution to perfect 
manhood, our Lord's laying down of 
manhood and its rights and privileges was 
forever; that he did not take them back in 
his resurrection; that on the contrary he 
was "put to death in flesh, but made alive 
in spirit," a new creature, of the divine 
nature, spirit and not flesh, heavenly and 
not earthly. (See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 



Vol. I., page 175, and Vol. II., page 107.) 
This illustration of the kernel of wheat 
shows only the death of the man Christ 
Jesus as our ransom price; it does not 
show his previous condition as a spirit being, 
before he became a man; nor does 
it show his subsequent exaltation far 
above manhood and far above angels and 
principalities and powers, to be a sharer 
of the highest of all natures— the divine 
nature. But it shows well what the 
Master used it to illustrate, viz.: his death 
as a man to give life to many men. 

As the grains which spring up as a result 
of his death receive from him only 
that which he surrenders for them, so all 
the blessings which result directly from 
our Lord's death are human and earthly 
rights, privileges and blessings— those 
lost in Adam are the ones redeemed for 
all by Christ. And it is those very blessings 
that he will restore to all the worthy in 
the "times of restitution of all things." 

How, then, is it that the Church, called 
and drawn during the Gospel age by the 
Father, is offered and is to receive spiritual 
and heavenly blessings through Christ, and 
not a restitution of the earthly favors lost 
in Adam? 

We answer, that is an additional favor 
granted now, or as the Apostle puts it, 
"favor upon favor;" a special call which 
ends with the close of the present age. 
But all thus called to the additional favor 
must first share in the favor of restitution, 
which Christ purchased for all. Justification 
in the present age is the equivalent 
of restitution in the next age, only that it is 
a restitution received by faith instead of an 
actual restitution. Restitution will be the 
making of men actually right or perfect 
as men, the actual restoring to them of all 
that was lost in and by reason of sin. 
Justification is the reckoning of men as 
right or as though perfectly restored to all 
the grand qualities and privileges lost by 
reason of sin. 

As the restored race, in the end of the 
Millennium, will be fully back to harmony 
with God, as though there never had been 
any fall or condemnation, so those now 
justified (or reckoned restored, right and 
perfect) are treated as though there had never 
been a fall or condemnation. They are 
justified freely from all things— justified 
by his blood who redeemed them. They are 



thus restored to the human rights in advance 
of the world in general, though 
only by faith. 

God's object in justifying us, through 
faith in the ransom, is to make us ready 
or fit to have offered to us the additional 
favor referred to above. That additional 
favor is the offer that the justified may, 
during the Gospel age, follow the example 
of their Lord Jesus and offer up (sacrifice) 
their justified selves— their justified manhood, 
after the example of the man Christ 
Jesus, with the promise to such as do so 
that they shall be counted in with their 
Master in the sacrifice (though his sacrifice, 
not ours, possesses the merit or value 
which pays for the sins of the whole 
world), and that as he was raised up from 
death, no more a man, but highly exalted 
to the divine nature, so they shall also be 
made sharers of the same high honor and 
glory with him, and under him as their 
Lord. 

Now (says the Apostle, referring to 
the Gospel age) is the day of this great 
offer of this great salvation: "Now is the 
acceptable time"— the time when God 
agreed to accept such sacrifices— justified 
through faith in Jesus' blood and presented 
in his name and merit. 

Brethren, I beseech all who have presented 
themselves thus and who have been 
received as holy and acceptable in Christ, 
that ye make good your covenant of sacrifice 
—even unto death, and that you let 
no man beguile you of this reward which 
God hath promised, by turning aside your 
pure minds from the simplicity of these 
good tidings, to human philosophizing and 
theorizing. For other hopes are merely the 
earthly, the human, though the promises 
made to the heavenly class be misapplied 
to them. 



R1239 :page 1 

THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD. 



In our present trial-state, while we walk 
by faith and not by sight, the question as 
to the leadings of divine providence is 
often a perplexing one to many. In many 
instances the discerning and experienced 
children of God can see very serious errors 



in the course of some who suppose 
they are following the leadings of divine 
providence, but who in fact are far astray 
from the Lord's expressed will. 

Ah! says one, there was a peculiar coincidence 
in my life, or a peculiar train of 
circumstances which indicated to me my 

R1239 : page 2 

course of action, and I am so persuaded 
that the leading was of the Lord, that 
nothing can move me from my course. 
Who has not met some instances where 
the delusion was so strong that even the 
Word of God had no power to dispel it? 
The subject, therefore, is one worthy of 
very careful consideration; for certain it 
is that God does lead, direct and discipline 
his children not only by his written 
word, but also by making the circumstances 
of life work together for their good. 

But how, then, shall we account for the 
misleadings as well as the true leadings of 
some who, we have abundant reason to 
believe, are God's children. From the 
Scriptures we learn not only that all 
things shall work together for good to 
them that love God, to the called according 
to his purpose, that God's eye is upon 
all their ways, and that not a hair of their 
heads shall fall to the ground without his 
notice, but we also learn that the prince 
of this world has power to deceive and to 
lead astray many, and that if it were possible, 
he would deceive even the very elect. 

The elect, therefore, are the only class 
who cannot be deceived. God is pledged 
to see to it that they shall not be deceived 
either by circumstances, appearances or 
perversions of his Word. Who are these 
favored elect ones who are so guarded and 
protected on every side, that no weapon 
that is formed against them can by any 
means prosper? ( Isa. 54:17 .) We answer, 
they are the called and faithful and 
chosen ones. Many are called, but few 
are faithful to the conditions of the call, 
and few, therefore, are chosen. We are 
told that a thousand of the called ones 
shall fall at our side and ten thousand at 
our right hand, but that that which shall 
cause their fall will not come near the elect. 
They cannot be moved. 

In the fullest sense no one is elected to 
membership in the body of Christ until 



he has finished his course of self-sacrifice, 
even unto death. And yet from the moment 
of consecration we are reckoned as 
of the elect, and treated as such to the 
end, unless at some point in our course 
we prove unworthy of the favor, and as 
unfruitful branches are lopped off from 
our connection with the vine, which is 
Christ. 

Consequently, those assurances of preservation 
in the midst of the pestilences 
and flying arrows of this evil day are only 
to the called and faithful— to those who 
have heeded the heavenly calling, presented 
their bodies living sacrifices, and who, 
true to their covenant, are keeping the 
sacrifice on the altar. These cannot fall; 
it is impossible to deceive them; and no 
weapon that is formed against them can 
prosper. So in this day when the pestilence 
of infidelity is raging, and the sanitary 
condition of the public mind forebodes 
a wide prevalence of the disease, 
and when the disease is taking on its most 
insidious and destructive forms, every 
consecrated child of God needs to look 
well to the spiritual condition of his system 
in general, to see that self-will is indeed 
dead, and that in simplicity of heart 
he is walking in the Master's footprints. 

We need to bear in mind that the glorified 
church is to be but a little flock, 
possibly only a literal hundred and forty-four 
thousand ( Rev. 7:4 ); that in all 
probability the majority of that number 
long ago finished their course and fell 
asleep in hope of the first resurrection, 
and that only a very small and very 
choice company is now desired to complete 
the church. The heavenly Bridegroom 
desires for his bride only those 
proved faithful under all the tests applied. 
But those rejected from that position are 
not cut off from all favor; they are simply 
not wanted in that near relationship. 
Consequently their deception is permitted 
for a time; and, like unfaithful Israel, for 
a time they stumble and fall; but if not 
persistently wilful they will yet be recovered 
out of the snare of the Adversary, 
though probably not until their opportunity 
to be of the bride of Christ is past. 

Just as God permitted Satan to deceive 
Eve as to the result of her disobedience 
when she really desired to disobey God; 
as he permitted circumstances and surroundings 



to deceive unworthy Israel, who 

were too proud to receive the humble Nazarene 

as the promised Messiah and King, 

and to blind them to the spiritual blessings 

of the Gospel Age, reserved for the 

meek and faithful few; as he has for centuries 

permitted the delusions and deceptive 

appearances of Antichrist to flourish 

and deceive all who loved the world 

and desired the mere outward forms of 

godliness, so that the faithful few only 

would follow Christ through privations and 

persecutions; and as in the end of the 

Millennial Age he will again permit all 

those unworthy of life, because at heart 

disloyal to God, to be deceived with the 

delusive hope of life, regardless of that 

merit which alone can secure it; so we 

must not be surprised to find some now 

fully persuaded to a course contrary to the 

expressed will of God, on account of certain 

deceptions and delusions which have 

power over them because of some unfaithfulness 

on their part toward God and the 

covenant of consecration they had made 

with him. 

While, therefore, the saints may and do 
rejoice in the manifest leadings of divine 
providence in the shaping of their course 
and their guidance in it toward the prize 
of their high calling, according to the 
precious promises above referred to, if 
they would not be deceived by a permitted 
counterfeit leading of the adversary, 
which will seem to be in the right direction, 
but which will actually be misleading, 
they must look well to it that they 
are carefully fulfilling the conditions under 
which alone such promises of safe 
leading can be claimed. They must see 
to it that they are still abiding in Christ, 
that they are faithful to their covenant of 
self-sacrifice, and hence still of the elect 
body of Christ, to whom the safe and sure 
leading is promised by him who will never 
leave us nor forsake us, so long as we 
humbly and faithfully abide in him. 
"There is a way which seemeth right unto 
a man, but the end thereof are the 
ways of death" ( Prov. 16:25 )— if pursued 
to the end. But we may hope that 
many, who through some unfaithfulness 
are for a time beguiled into error of doctrine 
or of practice, may yet be recovered 
from the snare of the adversary. 

And if one so ensnared should, on examination 



of his own heart, discover his 

deflection from the straight course and 

quickly repent of it, and again, from the 

standpoint of a thorough determination 

to greater faithfulness, view his course, 

God will indeed "show unto him the 

path of life" and give him grace to walk 

in it. For it is written, "If any man sin, 

we have an Advocate with the Father." 

( 1 John 2:1 .) Consequently, while there 

is need for great watchfulness and carefulness, 

there is no cause for discouragement 

on the part of any who are faithful, or 

who in view of past unfaithfulness are sincerely 

repentant and very diligent in efforts 

to overcome weaknesses and 

hindrances. 

The faithful, consecrated ones, therefore, 
may recognize the circumstances of their 
daily life, from the time of their consecration, 

R1240 : page 2 

as shaped by the Lord. If they have severe 
trials and testings of faith, of patience 
or of endurance; or if they have 
great obstacles and difficulties to surmount 
in accomplishing their fervent desire to 
do the Lord's will and the Lord's work; 
these should all be regarded as so many 
favors of God which thus afford them opportunities 
of overcoming and of proving 
their faithfulness. Or if in the faithful pursuance 
of their course an unseen hand gently 
smooths the way at times, and grants 
a sweet refreshment whereby new strength 
may be gathered for future trials, this too 
may be gratefully recognized as the same 
divine providence. 

"If [for a time] on a quiet sea 

To our haven we calmly sail, 
With grateful hearts, O God, to thee, 

We'll own the favoring gale. 

"But should the surges rise 

And rest delay to come, 
Blest be the sorrow, kind the storm, 

That drives us nearer home." 

But if because of a decline of zeal for 
God, or a waning spirituality, we find ourselves 
smoothly drifting along with little 
to disturb or oppose us, there is indeed 
great room for fear. And though God 
may permit such for a long time to thus 



drift away, and even effectually separate 
themselves from the body of Christ, as 
surely as he loves them the surges of trouble 
will by and by rise about them for their 
discipline and correction. 

Thus it will be seen that from the 
standpoint of faithfulness or unfaithfulness 
our experiences may be very differently 
regarded. Therefore, if any of the 
consecrated have been unfaithful to their 
privileges, let them beware of the leadings 
of circumstances, etc. But the faithful 
may rejoice in all things and in every 
thing give thanks; for "all things [whether 
seemingly favorable or unfavorable] 
shall work together for good to them." 
MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1240 : page 2 

THE FALL AND THE RESTITUTION. 

The fall and the restitution of all things 
are more intimately associated than some 
seem to realize. 

Some claim to believe in the "times 
of restitution" mentioned by the Apostle 
in Acts 3:17-19 , who think of it as relating 
to the physical earth. They get 
the wrong idea from the Lord's words to 
Adam when he cast him out of Eden, 
"Cursed is the ground for thy sake." 
They somehow infer that the entire earth 
was like the Garden of Eden up to that 
time, and that there God caused a blight 
to come upon it because of sin. This is 
all wrong. It represents God as doing a 
great and useless work, as if he had not 
foreseen the fall of man and had been 
surprised by that sudden turn of events. 
It was because the entire earth was in a 
very imperfect [condemnable or cursed] 
state that God specially prepared or 
planted a garden or perfect spot eastward 
in Eden,* as a suitable place for the trial 
of the perfect man he was about to create, 
and as an illustration of what the whole earth 
shall be at the close of the Millennium, 
when the worthy of mankind shall have 
been tested and brought back to perfection. 
Thus seen, the earth, at the time 
God created Adam, lacked 7000 years of 
preparation, to make it all ready for man. 

God's foreknowledge of Adam's course, 



while it was not allowed to influence 
Adam, did influence God's own conduct 
with reference to Adam. Seeing how man, 
inexperienced in the use of his great liberty, 
would soon disobey his law and 
come under its penalty, death, God arranged 
the entire plan of redemption and 
salvation with respect to this foreknowledge. 
He therefore introduced man upon 
the earth 7000 years before the earth 
would be properly ready for him, gave him 
a fair trial in the prepared "garden," and 
since, has let him have his experiences 
with sin and death in connection with the 
earth, and as a convict, to labor upon what 
God designs shall be the everlasting home 
of the obedient. 

So then, a restitution of the earth 
would be far from a blessing— it would 
mean its return to a state of chaos. 

Others who advocate an evolution doctrine 
use the word restitution with reference 
to man, and seem not to observe the 
inconsistency of such language in connection 
with other features of their theory. 
They believe that Adam was called man, 
not because he was really a man, but because 
he was the start or beginning of what 
would become a man. This evolution 
theory declares by one of its advocates 
that "If Adam fell at all, he fell upward." 

For those who hold and teach such 
views to say that they believe in restitution 
is truly ludicrous. If Adam was not 
a perfect man, if he fell upward, and if 
his race to-day is more nearly perfect 
than he was, then the last thing to be 
hoped for, and the very thing above all to 
be if possible avoided, would be a time of 
restitution. 

But how simple, consistent and plain 
all is when God's Word is the guide and 
the sophistries of error are discarded. 

The fall from divine favor by the wilful 
sin of disobedience, the sentence of 
death, the ransom once for all, the only 
hope of salvation, the 6000 years of groaning 
and dying and hoping and longing 
on the part of mankind, the coming 
of the one who redeemed all with his 
own precious blood [life] to restore all 
things which God hath promised by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began— this is the Bible testimony. 
Do you believe it? Do you believe the 
testimony of the prophets, of the Lord, 



and of the apostles? Search and see; for 
this is the story of paradise lost, redeemed 
and restored, which they all declare. 



*The word Eden signifies delight —God planted 
the garden eastward in the most delightful portion 
of the earth as to climate, etc. 



R1200 : page 2 

FROM RUSSIA TO PALESTINE. 



In consequence of the enforcing of an 
edict unfavorable to the Jews by the government 
of Russia, vast numbers of that 
people are emigrating to Brazil and to 
Palestine. The matter has attracted world-wide 
attention through the secular press, 
so that it is only needful to make mention 
of it in a general way as another step in 
the direction that all events are pointing— 
to the fulfilment of God's prophecy concerning 
the events of the Day of the Lord 
in which we are living. 



R1241 : page 2 

A NEW REQUIREMENT FOR CATHOLICS. 

Under this heading, the Chicago Herald 
of Sept. 1st says: 

"With the re-opening of the parochial schools to-day 
a new policy is to be inaugurated by the clergy 
of the archdiocese in relation to children attending 
the public schools. Hitherto there has been 
comparative liberality extended in the admission of 
children attending public schools to the sacraments 
of confirmation and communion. A few months' 
attendance at the parochial school was all that was 
thought necessary to insure a child's being instructed 
in religion sufficiently to be admitted to the 
sacraments. And, in some cases, even attendance 
at Sunday-school was considered adequate. But 
from to-day all this is to be changed. 

"Children will not be allowed to receive the sacraments 
without previously attending for at least 
twelve months a parochial school." 

Can this be the fulfilment of prophecy 
of Rev. 16:4-7 , when the third angel 
poured his vial into the rivers (universities 



and colleges of learning), and into 
the fountains (the common schools and 
lesser institutions of learning, and perhaps 
including the books and newspapers) of 
water (knowledge, pure water, the truth, 
or knowledge of the truly muddy water, 
the truth or knowledge of it obscured by 
traditions of men), and they became blood 
(symbolic of strife and perhaps actual 
war)? W. M. WRIGHT. 



R1240 : page 3 

A SAINT IN THE SHADOW. 



I walk through darkened paths, yet know 

My Father marks the way I go. 

I cannot see his tender smile, 

But feel his clasping hand the while; 

And since he heeds the sparrow's fall, 

I trust his love, in spite of all. 

Borne through the dark by loving arms, 
I sometimes shrink with vague alarms, 
Yet closer cling that I may hear 
The voice that whispers in mine ear. 
"O trembling soul," it says to me, 
"Rest in the love that clings to thee!" 

I cannot tell if long the way 
By which I go, through night to day; 
But, soon or late, I know my feet 
Will walk in sunshine, broad and sweet; 
And, soon or late, before mine eyes 
The radiant hills of peace uprise. 
— Selected. 



R1237 : page 3 

THE TABERNACLE'S 
TEACHINGS. 



(CONTINUED FROM THE AUGUST TOWER.) 



ANOTHER TYPE 

OF THE DAY OF ATONEMENT SACRIFICES. 

LEVITICUS 9 . 

This chapter seems to give a more condensed 



picture of the work and sacrifices 
of the Day of Atonement than the one 
already examined ( 16 .), and in addition, 
it furnishes certain features which, after 
the consideration of the sixteenth, will be 
of interest to us. It is another picture of 
the Atonement. 

"And Moses saith, This is the thing 
which the Lord commanded that ye 
should do: and the glory of the Lord 
shall appear unto you. And Moses said 
unto Aaron, Go unto the Altar and offer 
thy sin-offering and thy burnt-offering 
and make an atonement for thyself [the 
members of his body required it] and for 
the people" [the world]. 

This shows how Jesus [the bullock sacrifice 
for sins] was sufficient to redeem 
both his body, the "little flock," and 
also the whole world of mankind. Our 
share in the sin-offering could have been 
dispensed with entirely; we might have 
been saved from death and restored to 
perfection of human nature, just as all 
mankind will be. But it pleased Jehovah 
not only to choose Jesus to this great 
work of sacrifice, but also to make him 
the Captain or Head of his "Church, 
which is his Body," who, as well as their 
Captain, should be made perfect as SPIRITUAL 
beings, by suffering as sin-offerings, 
in the flesh. 

Paul, referring to our intimate relationship 
to our Head, says: "Blessed be the 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings 
in heavenly places [the "Holy" 
and the "Most Holy"] in Christ; according 
as he hath CHOSEN US in him before the 
foundation of the world— to the praise of 
the glory of his grace, wherein he hath 
[justified or] made us accepted in the 
beloved." ( Eph. 1:4,6 .) God "called 
you by our gospel to the obtaining of the 
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ" ( 2 Thes. 2:14 ), 
so that "if we suffer with him, we 
shall also reign with him."— 2 Tim. 2:12 . 

To continue— After offering his own 
sacrifice once for all, he was to "offer 
the offering of the people [the goat], and 
make an atonement for them [all Israel] 
as Jehovah commanded." (This arrangement 
for our having part in the sacrifice 
of atonement was a part of our Father's 
original plan, as Paul also attests.) 

"Aaron therefore went unto the altar 



and slew the calf [Heb., young bullock] 
of the sin-offering which was for [instead 
of, a substitute for] himself. And the sons 
of Aaron brought the blood unto him, and 
he dipped his finger in the blood and put it 
on the horns of the altar; but the fat, [etc.] 
the flesh and the hide he burned with fire 
without the camp. And he slew the 
burnt-offering [a ram], and Aaron's sons 
presented unto him the blood, which he 
sprinkled round about upon the altar. 
And they presented the burnt-offering 
unto him; and he did wash the inwards 
and the legs, and burnt them upon the 
burnt-offering on the altar, with the pieces 
thereof and the head." (Much the same 
account as in the 16th chapter , and having 
the same significance. See August TOWER.) 

Thus the burnt-offering of Jesus has 
been burning all through the Gospel Age, 
giving evidence to all in the "Court" of 
God's acceptance of him and the acceptance 
of all the members of the body- 
laid to the head, on the altar. 

"And he brought the people's offering, 
and took the goat which was the sin-offering 
for the people [not for the Priests and 
Levites] and slew it and offered it for sin 
as the first," i.e., treated it exactly as he 
treated the bullock. This goat is the same 
as the "Lord's goat" in the other picture, 
the scape-goat and the other features 
being omitted in this more general view. 
It is, however, confirmatory of the teaching, 
that only those who follow the Lord's 
footsteps are participants in the sin-offering. 

"And he brought the burnt-offering 
and offered it according to the [usual] 
manner. And he brought the meat-offering, 
and took a handful of it and offered 
it upon the altar beside the burnt-sacrifice 
of the morning." 

"He slew also the bullock and the 
ram for a sacrifice of peace-offerings which 
was for the people." The peace-offering, 
as already described, represents a vow or 
covenant. By this peace-offering, made 
in connection with the sin-offering of the 
High Priest, is signified the covenants 
and promises based on the sin-offering. 
In the type, the peace was established between 
Jehovah and Israel on this wise: 
The sin-offering having been made, also 
the burnt-offering showing the acceptableness 
of it to God, there was peace between 
Jehovah and Israel because their 



former Adamic sin was typically removed; 
and they were obligated to now live obedient 
to a covenant based on their forgiveness 
— i.e. they were to keep the Law— that 
he that doeth those things should live by 
(or as a reward for keeping) them. But 
as our sin-sacrifices are better than the 
typical ones, so with the peace-offering or 
covenant established by those sacrifices: 
it is a better covenant. Thus in this sacrifice 
of peace, or covenant-offering, the 
Priest is seen to serve unto the example 
and shadow of spiritual things— the mediator 
of a better covenant ( Heb. 8:6-13 ), 
under which all people shall be blessed 
with RESTITUTION, and thus be enabled to 
obey the perfect law and live forever. 

"And Aaron lifted up his hand toward 
the people and blessed them and came 
down from offering of the sin-offering, 
and the burnt-offering and peace-offerings." 
Thus in the type we see illustrated 
the fact that though the blessing is not 
fully due to come upon the people until 
all sacrifices are finished, yet a measure of 
blessing comes upon mankind from the 
members of the Priest, even now during 
the age of sacrifice, before we all go into 
the "Most Holy" or spiritual condition. 

"And Moses and Aaron went into the 
tabernacle of the congregation, and came 
out and blessed the people." 

When this day (age) of sacrifice is over, 
the complete Priest (head and body) will 
appear before God, and give evidence of 
having met all the claims of the law against 
the people (the world). It will be noticed 
that while the Type of Lev. 16 th divides 
the work of the Atonement Day, and 
shows all the particulars of how the Lord's 
sacrifice first makes ours worthy of acceptance, 
etc., this type shows the entire work 
of the Gospel age as successive offerings, 
yet joined really in one— all the sufferings 
of Christ, when ended, followed at once 
by restitution blessings. The going in of 
Moses, also, seems to say, The Law is fully 
satisfied and its righteousness vindicated in 
the sacrifice of Christ. The Law (represented 
in the type by Moses) will testify on 
behalf of the world, that it is justified to 
life through the sacrifices of the Priest 
who "offered up himself." 

When presented, the entire sacrifice was 
"holy, acceptable to God," and Moses 
and Aaron came out, and together they 



blessed the people. So in the incoming 
age, the Christ will bless all the families 
of the earth ( Gal. 3:8,16,29 ; Gen. 12:3 ), 
yet not by setting aside or ignoring 
the Law of God and excusing sin, but by 
restoring men to perfection of humanity, 
in which condition they will be able to 
keep the perfect Law of God, and be 
blessed by it. Blessed by the Priest, made 
perfect and able to keep the Law, its condition 
of "do and live" will be a great 
blessing to all men; for whosoever will 
may then obey and live forever in happiness 
and communion with Jehovah. 

"And the glory of the Lord appeared 
unto all the people." As the blessing 
progresses (restoring and elevating the 
race mentally and physically) the results 
will become manifest. The people— the 
world in general— will recognize God's 
gracious love, more and more each day. 
Thus it will be, that "the glory of the 
Lord will be revealed, and all flesh shall 
see it together." ( Isa. 40:5 .) They will 
come to see, gradually, the length and 
breadth and height and depth of the love of 
God, which surpasseth all understanding. 

It is worthy of note that the blessing 
here mentioned was not a blessing to the 
under-priests. No; they were represented 
in the blesser— in Aaron. The blessing 
came on all the people of Israel, who, in 
type, represented the world. It is this 
blessing of the world by the "SEED"— 
the entire Christ, after all the afflictions 
are filled up by the Body ( Col. 1:24 ) 
—that Paul refers to, saying, "The 
whole creation [humanity] groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together.. .waiting 
for the manifestation of the sons of God." 
Before they can experience deliverance 
from the bondage of corruption [sin and 
death] and restoration to the liberty of 
sons of God [freedom from condemnation, 
sin and death, etc.], as enjoyed by God's 
first human son, Adam ( Luke 3:38 ), the 
Atonement Day sacrifices must be finished, 
and the priests who sacrificed must be 
clothed with the royal, divine authority 
and power to thus set them free. 

It is doubtless this same blessing of all 
the people— salvation from death and its 
sting, sin— that Paul refers to, saying: 
"UNTO THEM THAT LOOK FOR HIM 
SHALL HE APPEAR THE SECOND TIME WITHOUT 
SIN [without any contamination from 



those sins borne for sinners] unto salvation." 

( Heb. 9:28 .) The world has seen 

the Priest— head and body— suffer as a sin-offering); 

during this age: Jesus was manifested 

to the Jews in the flesh (as a sin-offering); 

and as Paul could say, so can 

all the followers in his footsteps say, 

"Christ is manifest in our mortal flesh." 

( 2 Cor. 4:11 .) As the whole Christ has 

thus been manifest and suffered in the 

flesh, so they shall also be "glorified together" 

before the world; for the glory 

[the blessing and salvation] of the Lord 

shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it 

together." When he shall appear, we also 

shall appear with him in glory. ~ 

Col. 3:4 . 

But this great High Priest of the world 
will be recognized only by "them that 
look for him." If he were to appear in the 
flesh, in the sky, or elsewhere, it would be 
an appearance to all, whether looking for 
him or not; but we have already seen 
that the Scriptures teach that the Head 
has been perfected as a spirit being, and 
that his "little flock" shall be made "like 
him," spirit beings, of the divine nature, 
which no man hath seen nor can see. 
( 1 Tim. 6:16 .) We have seen that the way 
in which the world will see the glorified 
Church will be by mental perception, in 
the same sense that a blind person may 
properly be said to see. In the same 
sense we now see the prize, the "crown 
of life," "while we look not at the things 
which are seen, but at the things which 
are not seen [by physical sight]; for the 
things which are seen are temporal, but 
the things which are not seen are eternal." 
( 2 Cor. 4:18.) It is in this way that the 
entire Church of this age has been "looking 
unto Jesus;" thus "we see Jesus."— 
Heb. 2:9 and 12:2 . 

This is the only way in which the human 
can see or recognize things on the 
spiritual plane. Jesus expressed this same 
idea to the disciples, that they who recognized 
his spirit or mind, and thus knew 
him, would be acquainted with the Father 
also in the same way. "If ye had 
known me, ye should have known my 
Father also; and from henceforth ye 
know him and have seen him." This is 
the only sense in which the world will 
ever see God, for "no man hath seen 
God at any time" ["whom no man hath 



seen, nor can see"]— "the only begotten 

Son, he hath declared him." ( 1 Tim. 6:16 ; 

John 1:18 .) Jesus revealed or 

caused his disciples to see him by making 

known his character— revealing him 

as the God of Love. 

It was in the same way that the Papal 
system was shown by Luther and others, 
and seen by many, as the Antichrist; or as 
Paul had foretold, that wicked system— 
the man of sin, was then revealed. 

Thus it is that Jesus, the head (now 
present to gather the jewels), is being now 
revealed to the living members of the 
"little flock," though others know not of 
his presence.— Luke 17:26-30 . 

Thus also it will be in the Millennial 
day, when the complete Christ— the Priest 
—is revealed; he will be revealed only 
to those that look for him, and only those 
shall see him. They will see him, not by 
physical sight, but as we now see all spiritual 
things— Jesus, the Father, the prize, 
etc.— by the eye of faith. Men will not see 
the Christ by physical sight, for the same 
reason that they will never see Jehovah; 
because on a different plane of being- 
one spirit, the other flesh. But we (the 
little flock) shall see him as he is, for we 
shall be like him.— 1 John 3:2 . 

But, though only those who look shall 
be able to recognize the Christ as the deliverer 
who will save them from the dominion 
of death, yet this will embrace all 
the world, for the manner of revelation 
will be such that ultimately all must see. 
Every eye shall see him; and all in their 
graves, being then awakened, even they 
that pierced him will realize that they 
crucified the Lord of glory. "He shall 
be revealed [In the sky? No!] in flaming 
fire [judgments], taking vengeance on those 
that know not [acknowledge not] God, and 
that obey not the gospel of Christ." It will 
not take long for all mankind to recognize 
him under such circumstances. Now the 

R1237 : page 4 

good suffer; then shall ye discern between 

him that serveth the Lord, and him that 

serveth him not; for in that day the distinction 

will be manifested. ( Mai. 3:15-18 .) 

Then all, seeing clearly, may 

accept of him and have everlasting life; 

for "We trust in the living God, who is 



the Savior of all men, specially of those 
that believe."-- 1 Tim. 4:10 . 

This the types illustrate— "And as it is 
appointed unto men [Aaron and his successors, 
who were only types of the High 
Priest of the new creation] once to die 
[typically, as represented in the animal 
slain], and after this [following as a result 
of those sacrifices] the judgment [of God, 
manifesting approval or disapproval of 
the sacrifice], so Christ [head and body, 
the true, Royal Priesthood] was once 
offered [never will it be repeated] to bear 
the sins of many ["every man"]; and 
unto them that look for him, he shall appear 
the second time, without sin [not 
blemished by the sins borne, nor to repeat 
the sin-offering, but] unto salvation"— 
to give the redeemed life to all who desire 
it upon God's conditions of faith and 
obedience.- Heb. 9:27,28 . 

Every time a Priest went into the Most 
Holy on the Atonement Day he risked 
his life; for if his sacrifice had been imperfect 
he would have died as he passed 
the second Vail. Neither would he have 
been accepted into the Most Holy himself, 
nor would his imperfect sacrifice have been 
acceptable as an atonement for the sins of 
the people. Hence any failure meant his 
death, and the continuance in condemnation 
of all whose sins he attempted to cover 
or propitiate. This was the "judgment." 
Jesus, our Priest, passed this judgment successfully; 
his sacrifice was acceptable, as 
evidenced in his sending the blessing at 
Pentecost, which was a guarantee or assurance 
that ultimately he [and we in him] 
would come forth to bless the people— the 
world, for whose sins he fully and acceptably 
atoned. 

Many have been looking in an indefinite 
way for a good time to come, for the 
removal in some manner of the curse of 
sin and dying and general evil; but they 
have not understood the long delay. They 
do not realize that the sacrifice of the Day 
of Atonement is necessary before the glory 
and blessing can come. "The whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together 
until now, waiting [though in ignorance] 
for the manifestation of the sons of 
God."- Rom. 8:19,22 . 

"And there came a fire out from before 
the Lord, and consumed upon the 
altar the burnt-offering and the fat, which, 



when all the people saw, they shouted and 
fell on their faces"— worshipped. This 
is the same thought expressed in another 
form. The fire symbolizes God's acceptance; 
its recognition by the people shows 
that the world will realize the sacrifice 
and its value in God's estimation as the 
price of their liberty from death and the 
grave; and when they realize it, they will 
worship Jehovah and his representative, 
the Priest. 

How beautifully these types teach a 
restitution, and a full ransom for all the 
people, and a blessing to come upon all. 
Nothing in the types seems to make a distinction 
between the living and the dead, 
and some may be inclined to infer that 
when the sacrifices of the High Priest are 
over, and the blessing commences, only 
those who are then living will be greatly 
benefited. But we answer, Nay, in God's 
estimation the living and the dead are alike; 
he speaks of them all as dead; all died in 
Adam, and all the little spark of life 
which any man possesses is really but one 
stage of dying. It is a dead race because 
of the sin of Adam, and it will be a race 
justified at the close of the Day of Atonement, 
to the same life he enjoyed and 
forfeited; and all who will, may have 
back life, liberty, favor of God and all 
that was lost, whether they have gone all 
the way down into death, or whether they 
still linger on the brink— in "the valley of 
the shadow of death." 

This is the object of the sin-offerings; 
to release mankind from the dominion of 
death and restore them to the perfection 
of being which is essential to perfect 
happiness and at-one-ment with the Creator. 
This is the blessing which comes to 
all the families of the earth through The 
Seed of Abraham. This is the good news 
which was preached to Abraham, as we 
read: "God, foreseeing that he would 
justify the heathen [all mankind— Gentiles] 
through faith, preached before the 
gospel [good tidings] to Abraham, saying, 
In thee, and in thy seed, shall all nations 
be blessed [justified]. ..which Seed is 
Christ [primarily the head, and secondarily 
the body]; and if ye be Christ's [members] 
then are ye Abraham's seed, and 
heirs according to the promise" referred 
to— viz.: that these may bless all the 
families of the earth. ( Gal. 3:16,19 .) 



But the Seed must be complete before the 
blessing comes, as shown in the type just 
considered:— The sin-offering must be 
ended before all the blessings resulting 
can flow out. 

While the sacrifices of the people (Israel 
—the world) belong to the next age, 
and will then be presented to the Priests, 
yet in a certain sense this has a very 
slight beginning now. Thus it is that 
the worldly man possessed of wealth is 
in that sense a steward of God's things, 
and can use that "mammon" and with 
it make for himself friends; that when 
this age of Satan's rule is ended, and the 
reign of Christ commences, in which he 
shall no longer be a steward, then those 
whom he thus favored will bless him. If the 
worldly stewards of wealth (the mammon 
or god of this age) were wise, they would 
use more of their means thus. For whosoever 
shall give even a cup of cold water unto 
one of the least of these (Priests) shall by 
no means lose his reward when the kingdom 
of Christ is organized and its rule 
begins.- Luke 16:1-8 and Matt. 10:42 . 

The restriction that the High Priest alone 
went into the Most Holy once a year to 
make an atonement should not be misunderstood 
to mean that he and the under-priests 
never went in thither during succeeding 
days— after the Atonement Day 
had made full reconciliation for sins. 
On the contrary, the High Priest went 
in there often in after days. It was into 
the Most Holy that the High Priest went 
whenever he would inquire for Israel, using 
the breast-plate of Judgment, the Urim 
and Thummim. Again, whenever they 
broke camp, which was often, the Priests 
went in and took down the Vails and 
wrapped up the Ark, and all the holy vessels, 
before the Levites could carry them. 
-Num. 4:5-16 . 

Again, whenever an Israelite offered a 
sin-offering unto the priests (after the 
"Day of Atonement" sacrifices were 
over), they all ate it in the Most Holy. 
( Num. 18:10 .) So with the antitype, 
after the present "Day of Atonement" 
is over; the "Royal Priesthood" shall be 
in the Most Holy or perfect spiritual condition, 
and there accept (eat) the sacrifices 
for sin, brought by the world for 
their own transgressions— not the Adamic 
sins which were canceled on the Day of 



Atonement. There, in the perfect spiritual 
condition, the priesthood shall instruct 
in every matter, as represented in 
the decisions and answers given to Israel 
by the Urim and Thummim. 

R1237 : page 4 

SACRIFICES, SUBSEQUENT TO THE 
DAY OF ATONEMENT. 

Those sacrifices which do not belong to 
the class we denominate the "Day of 
Atonement sacrifices" illustrate offerings 
and sacrifices which belong to the Millennial 
Age. 

As in the type the Day of Atonement 
sacrifices preceded all others, and were a 
basis of general forgiveness and acceptance 
with God for all Israel, but were 
followed by other sacrifices after that day, 
for individual sins, termed "sin-offerings," 
"trespass-offerings," etc., so it will be in 
the antitype. After the sacrifices of this 
Gospel Age shall have brought the world 
into a justified condition, there will still be 
sins and trespasses committed, which will 
require confession and reconciliation, making 
these after-sacrifices necessary. 

The Atonement Day sacrifices represent 
the cancellation of Adamic sin by the sacrifice 
of the Christ, but during the Millennium, 
while the benefits of that atonement 
are being applied to the world, while they 
are being gradually restored to actual perfection 
and life and harmony with God, 
errors will be committed, for which they 
will be in some measure individually responsible. 
For such they must make 
some amend, accompanied by repentance, 
before they can be again in harmony with 
God through Christ their Mediator. 

Consecration will be also in order in the 
next age, though, owing to the changed 
government of the world, consecration will 
no longer, as now, mean unto death, but 
on the contrary it will be unto life, for 
with the close of Satan's reign comes the 
end of pain, sorrow and death, except upon 
evil-doers. Consecration must always 
be a voluntary presentation of one's powers, 
and hence this is represented in some 
of the sacrifices after the Atonement-Day. 

As the basis of all forgiveness of sins in 
the next age will be the "Day of Atonement 
sacrifices," it would be appropriate 



in the type for the sinner to bring some 
sacrifice which would indicate a recognition 
of those sacrifices, as the ground 
for forgiveness anew. And so we find 
that all offerings of the people after the 
Day of Atonement were of a kind which 
pointed back to, or recognized, the sacrifices 
of that day. These offerings might 
be of cattle, or sheep, or fowl (turtle 
doves or young pigeons), or of fine flour, 
the article offered depending on the ability 
of the offerer. 

During the Millennial Age all men 
"will come to a knowledge of the truth," 
and be saved from the curse of Adamic 
death. ( 1 Tim. 2:4 .) When we remember 
that this death includes all the sickness, 
pain and imperfection to which humanity 
is now subject, we see that God's 
plan includes a full restoration to human 
perfection; but perfection will come gradually, 
and it will require the co-operation 
of the sinner's WILL to ever reach it. He 
must do what he can to climb up again to 
perfection, and will have all the assistance 
necessary. This is shown by these sacrifices 
in general; they were to be according 
to every man's ability. If very much 
degraded by sin and very imperfect, he 
must, when he comes to a knowledge of 
the truth, present himself to God. If thus 
poor and degraded he may bring a dove, 
or pigeon; when less degraded, a goat; 
and when perfect as a man his offering may 
be a bullock. Just as a bullock was used to 
typify the perfect humanity (much fat) 
of Jesus' sacrifice, and as a goat (wayward 
and lean) was used to represent our 
imperfect human nature in the sacrifices 
of this Atonement Day, so those animals 
similarly represent the offerers (Israel- 
typical of the then believing world) in 
their consecrations. But it should be remembered 
that these Burnt offerings and 
Peace offerings of the future represent the 
people as consecrating —giving themselves 
to the Lord. They do not represent atonement 
sacrifices as the sin offerings of 
the Atonement Day do. 

When the whole world has been brought 
to perfection there will be no longer any 
who are poor in this sense— in the sense of 
deficiency of mental, moral or physical 
ability; all will be perfect men and their 
offerings will be their perfect selves, typified 
by bullocks. David, speaking of this, 



says: "Then shalt thou be pleased with the 
sacrifices of righteousness (of right doing), 
with burnt offering and whole burnt offering 
then shall they offer bullocks (perfect 
sacrifices) upon thine altar." ( Psa. 51:19 .) 
Yet that David's language should not be 
understood to teach the restoration of the 
literal, bloody, typical sacrifices is evident, 
for in the same connection he says, 
"Thou desirest not sacrifice" (the typical) 
broken spirit; and a contrite heart, O 
God, thou wilt not despise." All these 
sacrifices must be of the free will and desire 
of the offerer.— Lev. 1:3 . 

The completeness of consecration is 
shown by the death of the animal; that 
is, each member of the race must consecrate 
his will; but it will be followed 
neither by the destruction of the human 
nature (the burning of the flesh outside the 
camp) nor by the taking of the life into a 
new nature— into the Most Holy; only 
the High Priest enters there, as shown in 
the Atonement sacrifices. No; when consecrated, 
they are accepted as human beings, 
their right to life as such having 
been purchased by the High Priest, in the 
members of whose body all the overcoming 
Church is represented. Their consecration 
represents their appreciation of their 
ransom and their acquiescence to the law 
of God as the condition upon which they 
shall continue to live everlastingly in harmony 
and favor with him. 

THEIR BURNT OFFERINGS. 

The burnt offerings of the Priests were 
to be kept up continually on the Altar, 
and the fire never suffered to die out. 
"This is the law of the Burnt Offering; 
it is the Burnt Offering because of the 
burning upon the Altar all night unto the 
morning, and the fire of the Altar shall 
be burning in it. ..It shall not be put 
out, and the Priest shall burn wood on it 
every morning, and lay the burnt offering 
in order upon it... The fire shall ever 
be burning upon the Altar; it shall never 
go out"- Lev. 6:9,12,13 . 

Thus is represented to the mind of each 
offerer the fact that the Altar was already 
sanctified or set apart, and their offerings 
acceptable because of God's acceptance 
of the Atonement Day sacrifices. To this 
Altar the Israelite brought his free will 



offering as narrated in Lev. 1 . It was 
made in the usual way; the animal, cut in 
pieces and washed, was laid, the pieces 
to the head, on the Altar, and wholly 
burnt, a sacrifice of sweet savor unto the 
Lord. This would serve to typify a thankful 
prayer to Jehovah— an acknowledgment 
of his mercy, wisdom and love, as 
manifested in the broken body of the 
Christ— their ransom. 

THEIR TRESPASS OR SIN OFFERINGS. 

"If a soul [being] commit a trespass 
and sin through ignorance in the holy 
things of the Lord;. ..if he sin and 
commit any of these things which are forbidden 

R1237 : page 5 

to be done by the Commandments 
of the Lord, though he wist it not, yet is 
he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity." 
"And he shall bring a ram without blemish 
out of the flock," and money according 
to the Priest's estimation of the trespass, 
with a FIFTH MORE, and this shall be 
their offering. And the priest shall make 
an atonement for him. And if any sin 
knowingly and damage or defraud his 
neighbor, he shall restore it in the principal, 
and shall add the fifth part more 
thereto [twenty per cent, interest] and 
give it to the wronged one. And he shall 
bring a ram for the trespass offering unto 
the Lord.- Lev. 5:15-19 ; and 6:1-7 . 

This teaches that for every wrong, restoration 
must be made with interest, and 
a repentance or asking forgiveness of the 
Lord through the Church (Priesthood); 
their recognition of their own imperfections 
and the value of their ransom being 
shown by the ram presented. 

But notice the difference between the 
treatment of this sin-offering and the sin-offerings 
of the Day of Atonement: The 
latter were offered to God (Justice) in the 
Holy as the ransom or purchase-price of 
sinners; the former were offered to the 
Priests who, during the Atonement Day, 
had purchased the people. The acknowledgement 
of the people will be made to 
their Redeemer. The Priest took a part and 
offered it to the Lord as a memorial, as a 
recognition that the whole plan of redemption 
as executed on the Atonement 



Day (Gospel Age) was his, appropriating 
to himself (eating) the remainder. 

The offerings of the Atonement Day, 
we have seen, were always burned ( Lev. 6:30 ; 

Heb. 13:11 ), but the after sin-offerings 
are not to be burned, but eaten by the 
Priests. "This is the law of the sin-offering 
....The priest that offereth it 
for sin shall eat it.... All the males 
among the priests shall eat thereof."— 

Lev. 6:25-29 . 

The whole world, purchased with the 
precious blood (human life) of Christ, 
will present themselves, for forgiveness of 
trespass, to the Royal Priesthood who 
paid their ransom-price; and their acceptance 
of the gift will be the forgiveness. To 
this agree Jesus' words to his disciples: 
"He breathed on them and saith unto 
them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit. Whosesoever 
sins ye remit, they are remitted 
unto them; and whosesoever sins ye 
retain [to them] they are retained."— 
John 20:23 . 

While this "ministry of reconciliation" 
belongs in its fullest sense in the next age, 
when all the sacrifices of Atonement will 
have been completed, yet even now, any 
member of the "Royal Priesthood" may 
say to those who believe and repent, 
"Thy sins are forgiven thee"— as did our 
Head, by faith looking forward to the 
completion of the sacrifice for sins, which 
sacrifice he had begun. 

THEIR PEACE OFFERINGS. 

This offering must be of the herd or 
flock, and it might be made either in fulfilment 
of a vow (covenant), or as a willing 
"thank-offering." Part of it was to be 
brought to Jehovah by the offerer— "His 
own hands shall bring the offerings of the 
Lord made by fire; the fat with the 
breast; it shall he bring," and the priest 
shall burn the fat on the altar, and wave 
the breast before the Lord. But the 
breast shall be the priest's, also the shoulder. 
The offerer must eat the sacrifice. 
-Lev. 3 and 7:11-18,30-34. 

This seems to show, that if any man 
would come into a condition of full peace 
and harmony (as all are to do or else be 
cut off in the second death), he must eat 
or fulfil a covenant before God, of entire 
consecration to him. If, after being thus 



perfected, he again becomes defiled with 
sin, he must die (the second death), as 
shown by the touching of unclean things. 
-Lev. 7:19-21 . 

With this sacrifice there was presented 
an offering of unleavened cakes mingled 
with oil, and anointed wafers, representing 
the offerer's faith in Christ's character, 
which he will copy; and leavened 
bread indicating his acknowledgment of 
his own present imperfection at the time of 
consecration— leaven being a type of sin. 
-Lev. 7:11-13 . 

THEIR MEAT OFFERINGS. 

These, of fine flour, unleavened cakes, 
with oil, etc., were presented to the Lord 
through the priest. They probably represent 
praises and worship offered to the 
Lord by the world, through his Church. 
"Unto him be glory in the Church by 
Christ Jesus throughout all ages." ( Eph. 3:21 .) 
These were accepted by the priests. 
A sample being offered on the Altar shows 
that it was acceptable to Jehovah. 

R1237 : page 5 

OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES. 

In the preceding description we have 
purposely omitted an explanation of some 
interesting details which can now be better 
understood by those who have, through 
careful study, obtained a clear understanding 
of the general plan of the Tabernacle, 
its services, and their typical signification. 

THE POSTS which stood in the court, 
and held up the white curtains, represent 
justified believers. They are in the 
"Court," the proper place for such, as 
we have already seen. They are of wood, 
a corruptible material. This shows that 
they are not actually perfect as human 
beings; for since human perfection is 
represented by copper, those posts should 
either be made of copper, or covered 
with copper, to represent actually perfect 
human beings. They were made of wood, 
but were set into sockets of copper, which 
teaches us that, though actually imperfect, 
their standing is that of perfect human 
beings. It would be impossible more 
clearly to represent justification by faith. 

THE WHITE CURTAIN, which, held up by 



those posts, formed the Court, well illustrates 
the same justification or purity. Thus 
justified ones should continually hold up 
to the view of the world (the camp) the 
pure linen representing Christ's righteousness, 
as their covering. 

THE SILVER HOOKS, by which the posts 
held up the curtain, are symbolic of truth. 
Silver is a general symbol of truth. They 
can really and truthfully claim that Christ's 
righteousness covers all their imperfections. 
(Lev. 27:11-17 .) And it is only 
by the aid of the truth that they are able 
to hold to their justification. 

THE POSTS at the entrance of the Tabernacle 
—at the "door" of the Holy- 
were covered by the first vail. They were 
totally different from the posts in the 
court, and represent the consecrated 
saints. The difference between these and 
the posts in the "Court" shows the difference 
between the justified and the sanctified 
conditions. The consecration to 
death of a justified man we have seen to 
be the way into the "Holy"— passing 
through the death of the human will, the 
fleshly mind, the first vail. Hence 
these posts should illustrate this change; 
and so they do. They were covered with 
gold, symbol of the divine nature. Being 
set in sockets of copper represents 
how "we have this treasure [divine nature] 
in earthen vessels" ( 2 Cor. 4:7 )— 

i.e., our new nature is still based upon, 
and rests in, our justified humanity. This, 
it will be remembered, corresponds exactly 
with what we found the "Holy" to 
symbolize, viz.: our place or standing as 
new creatures, not yet perfected.— 

Exod. 26:37 . 

THE POSTS in the "Most Holy" 
were just inside the second vail, and represent 
those who pass beyond the flesh 
(vail) entirely, into the perfection of the 
spiritual condition. These posts were so 
constructed as to fully illustrate this— 
covered with gold, representing divine 
nature, but no longer set in sockets of 
copper— no longer dependent on any human 
condition; they were set in sockets 
of silver (reality, truth), which seem to 
say to us: When you come inside this 
vail you will be perfect— really and truly 
new creatures.— Exod. 26:32 . 

THE GOLDEN TABLE bearing the shewbread 
represents the church as a whole, 



including Jesus and the Apostles— all 
"holding forth the word of life." ( Phil. 2:16 .) 
The great work of the true church 
during this age is to feed, strengthen and 
enlighten all who enter the covenanted 
spiritual condition. The bride of Christ 
is to make herself ready. ( Rev. 19:7 .) 
The witnessing to the world during the 
present age is quite secondary and incidental. 
The full blessing of the world 
will follow in God's "due time." 

THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK was all of 
one piece, hammered out; there was one 
central shaft with a lamp on top, and 
three branches on each side of it, each 
bearing a lamp, making seven lamps in 
all— a perfect or complete number. This 
represents the complete Church, from the 
Head, Jesus, to and including the last 
member of the "little flock" that he is taking 
out from among men, to be partakers 
of the divine (gold) nature. Jesus says, 
"The seven candlesticks which thou sawest 
are the seven churches" ( Rev. 1:20 )— 
the one Church whose seven stages or developments 
were symbolized in the seven 
congregations of Asia minor. ( Rev. 1:11 .) 
Yes, that candlestick represents the entire 
Church of the First-born— not the nominal 
but the true church— the Royal Priesthood. 

The form of workmanship was beautiful 
—a fruit and a flower, a fruit and a 
flower following successively, which shows 
us that the true church ("whose names 
are written in heaven") is both beautiful 
and fruitful from first to last. The lamp 
part on top of each branch was shaped 
like an almond, the significance of which 
we shall see when considering Aaron's rod. 

The oil for this lamp was olive oil- 
beaten or refined; and the lamps were 
kept lighted always. Oil is a symbol of 
the Holy Spirit. The light was for the 
benefit of the priests only, and represents 
the spirit or mind of God given to enlighten 
the Church, in the deep things of God, 
which are entirely hidden from the natural 
man ( 1 Cor. 2:14 ), even though he be 
a believer— a justified man (a Levite). 
None but the truly consecrated ones, the 
Royal Priesthood, are even to see into this 
deeper light, hidden in the "Holy." These 
always have access to the "Holy;" it is 
their right and privilege; it was intended 
for them. ( Heb. 9:6 .) The Levite class 
can not see in, because of the vail of 



human-mindedness which comes between 
them and the sacred things; and the only 
way to set it aside is to consecrate and 
sacrifice wholly the human nature. 

The lights were to be trimmed and replenished 
every morning and evening by 
the High Priest— Aaron and his sons who 
succeeded him in office. ( Exod. 27:20-21 ; 
and 30:8 .) So our High Priest is 
daily filling us more and more with the 
mind of Christ, and trimming off the dross 
of the old nature. 

We are sometimes puzzled to know why 
some religious people cannot see any but 
natural things and cannot discern the 
deeper spiritual truths of the Word. They 
can see restitution for natural men, but 
cannot see the divine, heavenly calling. 
These Tabernacle lessons show us why this 
is. They are brethren of the household 
of faith, but not brethren in Christ- 
consecrated sacrificers. They are Levites 
—in the Court: they never consecrated 
as priests, and consequently cannot enter 
the "Holy," nor see the things prepared 
for the priestly class only. The natural 
"eye hath not seen, nor ear heard— 
neither have entered into the heart of 
man the things which God hath prepared 
for them that love him. But God hath revealed 
them unto us [who, through consecration, 
have become "partakers of the 
divine nature,"] by his Spirit [light of the 
lamp], for the Spirit searcheth [revealeth] 
all things— yea, the deep [hidden] things 
of God."- 1 Cor. 2:9 . 

The church nominal has always included 
both the justified and sanctified classes 
—Levites and Priests. In Paul's letters 
certain parts were addressed to the justified 
class (Levites) who had not fully consecrated. 
Thus, after exhorting in Gal. 5 , 
he winds up by assuring them that the 
things he complains of are evidences that 
they do not belong to the Body of Christ, 
the Priesthood: for, he says, "They that 
are Christ's have crucified the flesh with 
the affections and lusts." ( Verse 24 .) In 
the same way he addresses the Romans (Chap. 12:1 .): 
"I beseech you, therefore, 
brethren [believers— justified by faith in 
Christ— Levites], by the mercies of God 
[manifest through Christ in our justification], 
that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice [that you consecrate wholly— 
thus becoming Priests], holy, acceptable 



unto God." Being justified freely by faith 
in Jesus, God reckons you as sinless, or 
holy; and he has agreed to accept every 
such sacrifice— "With such sacrifice he is 
ever well pleased." By so doing, you become 
Priests— members in particular of the 
High Priest's body. 

The succeeding verse tells them what 
will result from consecrating— viz., the 
transformation of their minds. Their wills 
being renewed, they will be priests— new 
creatures possessing the spirit of Christ. 
The fact that at this time they had not 
the spirit of sacrifice is an evidence that 
they were not members of Christ— for 
"if any man have not the spirit of Christ, 
he is none of his." ( Rom. 8:9 .) And 
it seems evident that by far the larger proportion 
of the early churches (much more 
so of the modern worldly mixture, the 
confused "Babylon" of the present day) 
were not consecrated, and consequently 
were not Priests, but merely Levites, doing 
the service of the sanctuary, but not 

sacrificing. 

Looking back at the type in the Law, 
we find that there were 8,580 Levites 
appointed in the typical service, while only 
five Priests were appointed for the typical 

sacrificing. ( Num. 4:36,40,44,48 ; 
Exod. 28: 1 .) It may be that this, as 
much as the other features of that shadow, 
was designed to illustrate the proportion 
of justified believers to self-sacrificing, 
consecrated ones. Though now the nominal 
church numbers millions, yet when an 
allowance is made for hypocrites, and one 
in every seventeen hundred of the remainder 
supposed to be living sacrifices (a correct 
proportion according to the type), it 
seems quite evident that the Lord did not 
make a misstatement when he said that 
those who would receive the kingdom (the 
Royal Priesthood) would be a "little 
flock."- Luke 12:32 . 

R1237 : page 6 

The fact that we see believers who are 
trying to put away their sins is not of itself 
evidence of their being Priests, for 
Levites, as well as Priests, should practice 
"circumcision of the heart"— "putting 
away the filth [sins] of the flesh." Nor 
is a spirit of meekness, gentleness, benevolence 
and morality always a result of 



consecration to God. These qualities belong 
to a perfect natural man (the image 
of God), and occasionally they partially 
survive the wreck of the fall. But such, 
in the nominal church, not infrequently 
pass for proofs of full consecration. 

Even when we see believers practicing 
self-denial in some good work of political 
or moral reform, that is not an evidence 
of consecration to God, though it 
is an evidence of consecration to a work. 
Consecration to God says, Any work, 
anywhere; Lo, "I delight to do thy will, O 
God"— thy will, in thy way, be done. 
Consecration to God, then, will insure a 
searching of his revealed plan in his 
Word, that we may be able to spend and 
be spent, for him and in his service, according 
to his arranged plan. 

Marvel not, then, that so few have ever 
seen the glorious beauties within the Tabernacle; 
only Priests can see them. The 
Levites may know of them only as they 
hear them described. They have never 
seen the hidden light and beauty; never 
eaten of the "bread of presence;" never 
offered the acceptable incense at the 
Golden Altar. No; to enjoy these, they 
must pass the Vail— into entire consecration 
to God in sacrifice, during the 
Atonement Day. 

THE GOLDEN ALTAR seems also to represent 
the entire (consecrated) church in 
the present sacrificing condition. From 
this altar ascends the sweet incense, acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ— the 
willing services of the priests: their praises, 
their willing obedience; all things 
whatsoever they do, to the glory of God. 
Those who thus offer incense acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ ( 1 Pet. 2:5 ) 
come very close to their Father— close up 
to the Vail which separates from the Most 
Holy; and if they have requests to make 
they may be presented with the incense— 
"much incense with the prayers of saints." 
( Rev. 8:3 .) The prayers of such priests 
of God are effectual. Jesus kept the incense 
continually burning, and could say 
"I know that thou hearest me always." 
( John 1 1:42 .) So we will be heard always, 
if we continually offer incense of 
faith, love and obedience to God; and 
none should expect to have requests recognized 
who do not thus keep their covenant 
—"If ye abide in me and my words 



[teachings] abide in you, ye shall ask what 
ye will and it shall be done unto you."* 
-John 15:7 . 

We have learned, through types previously 
considered, something of the glory 
of the "Most Holy" (the perfect, divine 
condition), which no man can approach 
unto ( 1 Tim. 6:16 ), but to which the 
"new creatures in Christ Jesus"— partakers 
of the divine nature— will finally come, 
when the incense-offering on the part of 
the entire Body of Christ, the Royal 
Priesthood, is finished, and the cloud of 
perfume goes before them into Jehovah's 
presence, that they may live beyond the 
Vail, being acceptable to God by Jesus 
Christ their Lord. 

THE ARK. Let us now consider what 
God designed to symbolize by the "Ark 
of the Testimony," the only article of 
furniture in the "Most Holy." (See Heb. 9:2,3 
and Diaglott foot note.) Its name 
suggests that it illustrates the embodiment 
of Jehovah's plan, which he had 
purposed in himself, before even the head 
of the Christ had been created, before the 
beginning of the creation of God, before 
the minutest development of his plan 
had taken place. It represented the purpose 
of God to develop a little flock, to 
be partakers of the divine nature and to 
be imbued with power and great glory— 
the prize of our high-calling; the joy set 
before our Lord, and all the members of 
his body. 

As before stated, it was a rectangular box 
overlaid with gold, which represents the 
divine nature. It contained the two Tables 
of the Law ( Deut. 31:24 ), and 
Aaron's Rod that budded ( Num. 17:8 ), 
and the Golden Pot of Manna ( Exod. 16:32 ). 
The Law showed how the Christ 
should meet in full all the requirements of 
God's perfect Law, and also that legal 
authority should be vested in him as the 
Law-executor. 

The righteousness of the Law was actually 
fulfilled in our Head, and it is also 
fulfilled in all those new creatures who 
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit; 
that is, who walk in obedience to the 
new mind. The infirmities of the old 
nature which we are daily crucifying, once 
settled by our ransom-price, are not 
charged to us as new creatures. 

When it is written that "the righteousness 



of the Law is fulfilled in us"— the end of 
our course (perfection) is reckoned to us, 
because we are walking toward or after 
that spiritual perfection which, when we 
reach the Ark condition in the "Most 
Holy," will be complete. 

AARON'S ROD that budded shows the 
elect character of all the body of Christ, 
as members of the royal priesthood. By 
reading Numbers 17 , the meaning of the 
budded rod will be seen to be Jehovah's 
acceptance of Aaron and his sons— the 
typical priesthood representing Christ and 
the church— as the only ones who might 
perform the priest's office of mediator. 
That rod, therefore, represented the acceptableness 
of the "Royal Priesthood" 
—the Christ, Head and Body. The rod 
budded and brought forth almonds. A 
peculiarity about the almond tree is, that 
the fruit-buds appear before the leaves; so 
with the "royal priesthood:" they sacrifice 
or bring forth fruit, before the leaves 
or professions are seen. 

THE GOLDEN POT OF MANNA represents 
immortality as being one of the possessions 
of the Christ of God. Jesus doubtless 
refers to this, when he says: "To him 
that overcometh will I give to eat of the 
hidden manna." ( Rev. 2:17 .) Manna 
was the bread which came down from 
heaven— a life-sustainer; so God through 
Christ provides life for all Israel (the 
world) that they may live forever— continually 
eating of it; but he offers to those 
who become Christ's joint-heirs, members 
of the Anointed Body, that they shall 
have a peculiar sort of manna, or life principle, 
the "hidden manna." One peculiarity 
of this pot of manna was, that it 
was incorruptible; hence, it well illustrates 
the immortal, incorruptible condition 
promised to all members of the "Seed" 
—which is the Church. The manna fed to 
Israel was not incorruptible and must be 
gathered daily. So all the obedient except 
the "little flock" of priests will be 
provided with life everlasting, but conditional, 
supplied and renewed life; while 
the little flock, who under present unfavorable 
conditions are faithful overcomers, 
will be given an incorruptible portion 
-immortality. (See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. I., page 181.) 

Here, then, in the golden Ark, is represented 
the glory to be revealed in the divine 



Christ; in the budded rod, God's 

chosen priesthood; in the tables of the 

Law, the righteous Judge; in the incorruptible 

manna in the golden bowl, immortality, 

divinity. 

Above this Ark, and constituting a lid, 
or head over it, was the Mercy Seat— a 
slab of solid gold, on the two ends of 
which, and of the same piece of metal, 
were formed two cherubim, with wings uplifted 
as if ready to fly— their faces looking 
inward toward the centre of the plate 
on which they stood. Here, between the 
cherubim on the Mercy Seat, a bright 
light indicated Jehovah's presence. 

To our understanding, as the Ark represents 
the Christ, so the Mercy Seat, 
Glory-light and Cherubim together represent 
Jehovah, God. As with Christ, 
so with Jehovah, he is here represented by 
things which illustrate attributes of his 
character. The light reminds us of Paul's 
words: ( 1 Tim. 6:16 ) God "only hath 
immortality, dwelling in light, which no 
man can approach unto." Humanity cannot 
enter his presence; hence, the priest-hood, 
Head and body, represented by Aaron, 
must become new creatures, "partakers 
of the divine nature" (having crucified 
and buried the human), before they 
can appear before that excellent glory. 

The slab of gold called the Mercy Seat 
(or more properly the Propitiatory, because 
on it the Priest offered the blood 
of the sacrifices which propitiated or satisfied 
God's just demands), represents the 
underlying principle of Jehovah's character 
—JUSTICE. His throne is established 
upon JUSTICE. "Righteousness and justice 
are the foundation of thy throne."— 
Psa. 89:14 ; Rev. 15:3 ; Job 36:17 and 37:23 ; 
Isa. 56:1 . 

The TWO CHERUBIM represent two elements 
of our Father's character as revealed 
in his Word, viz.: Love and Power. 
These attributes, Justice the foundation 
principle and Love and Power of the 
same quality and lifted up out of it, are 
in perfect harmony with each other. 
They are all made of one piece; they are 
thoroughly one. Neither Love nor Power 
can be exercised unless Justice is fully 
satisfied. Then they fly to help, to lift up 
and to bless. They were on the wing, 
ready, but waiting; looking inward toward 
the Mercy Seat, toward Justice, to know 



when to move. 

See the High Priest as he approaches 
with the blood of the Atonement sacrifices. 
Will he put it upon the Cherubim? 
No, neither the Power nor the Love of 
God independently require the sacrifice. 
He need not, therefore, sprinkle the Cherubim. 
It is the Justice of God that will 
by no means clear the guilty. It was Justice 
that said: "The wages of sin is 
death." When, therefore, the High Priest 
would give a ransom for sinners, it is to 
Justice that it must be paid. Hence the 
appropriateness of the ceremony of sprinkling 
the blood upon the Mercy Seat or 
PROPITIATORY. 

Love led to the whole redemptive plan. 
It was because God so loved the world 
that he sent his only begotten Son to redeem 
it by paying to Justice the ransom-price. 
So Love has been active, preparing 
for the redemption ever since sin entered; 
yes, from "before the foundation of the 
world."-- 1 Pet. 1:20 . 

"Love first contrived the way 

To save rebellious man." 

When the Atonement Day sacrifices 
(bullock and goat) are complete, Love 
tarries to see the results of its plan. As 
the blood is sprinkled, Justice cries, It is 
enough; it is finished. Then comes the 
moment when Love and Power may act, 
and swiftly they wing their flight to bless 
the ransomed race. When Justice is satisfied, 
Power starts upon its errand, which 
is co-extensive with that of Love, using 
the same agency— Christ. 

The relationship and oneness of that 
divine family— the Son and his Bride, represented 
by the Ark, in harmony and oneness 
with the Father, represented by the 
Cover— is shown in the fact that the Mercy 
Seat was the lid of the Ark, and hence a 
part— the top or head of it. As the head 
of the Church is Christ Jesus, so the head 
of the entire Christ is God. ( 1 Cor. 11:3 .) 
This is the oneness for which Jesus prayed, 
saying: Father, "I pray not for the world, 
but for those thou hast given me"— "that 
they all may be one; as thou, Father, art 
in me, and I in thee, that they also may 
be one in us, that the world may [then] 
believe."- John 17:9,21 . 

UNBLEMISHED. 



It is significant, also, that any member 
of the priesthood that had a blemish of 
eye, hand, nose, foot, or in any way, 
could not fill the office of Priest [High 
Priest]; neither any man having any superfluity, 
such as an extra finger or toe. 
This seems to teach us of the perfection 
of every member of that body; they are 
all "overcomers." And furthermore, it 
shows that when the body of Christ is 
complete, there will be no additions permitted 
—no superfluity. If, then, we are 
called, if we have heard the invitation to 
become members in particular of his Body, 
and have accepted it, let us seek to make 
our calling and election [as members of 
that "little flock"] sure, by so running 
as to obtain the prize. If we miss the 
prize some one else will win in our place, 
for the body will be complete; not one 
member will be lacking, and not one superfluous. 
Take heed, "let no man take thy 
crown." — Rev. 3:11 . 

It has been a matter of surprise to some 
that the glory and beauty of the Tabernacle 
—its golden walls, its golden and 
beautifully engraved furniture, and vails 
of curious work, were so completely covered 
and hidden from view of the people; 
having no sunlight from without, even, to 
illuminate it. But this is all in keeping 
with the lessons we have received from its 
services. As God covered the type and 
hid its beauty under curtains and rough 
unsightly skins, so the glories and beauties 
of spiritual things are seen only by 
those who enter the consecrated condition 
—the Royal Priesthood. These, too, enter 
a hidden glory which the world and 
all outside fail to appreciate. Their glory 
and also their standing as new creatures 
are hidden from their fellowmen. 

"Ah, these are of a royal line, 

All children of a King, 
Heirs of immortal crowns divine, 

And lo, for joy they sing! 

"Why do they, then, appear so mean? 

And why so much despised? 
Because of their rich robes unseen 

The world is not apprised." 



*The necessity of a clear apprehension of 



Christ's teachings as a guide to our requests and 
expectations, that we may not "ask amiss" and 
out of harmony with God's plan, is clearly shown 
by this Scripture— but seldom noticed. 



R1240 : page 6 
HEART RELIGION. 



A German woman, a Romanist, residing 
in New York, on leaving her native land 
had received from her priest a charm, 
which was to preserve her amid the perils 
of the voyage, and to protect her in a land 
of strangers. Such a charm is generally 
procured by German Catholic immigrants 
before coming to America. Sometimes it 
consists of a small crucifix; sometimes of a 
mere picture of the Saviour on the cross, 
enveloped in a leather case; sometimes of 
an image of the Virgin. In this case it 
was an image of porcelain. Its possessor 

R1240 : page 7 

having reached New York in safety, and 

thus proved the virtue of her crucifix, kept 

it suspended upon the wall of her chamber 

as an aid to devotion, if not itself an object 

of grateful adoration. But one day, 

as she was adjusting the furniture of the 

room, a sudden jar brought down the crucifix 

to the floor, and broke it into fragments. 

Alas! What could she do now? 

For a time she gave herself up to weeping 

and self-reproach. But in her grief, she 

sought counsel of a neighbor in an adjoining 

apartment. "What shall I do?" she 

cried, "for my dear Christ is broken to 

pieces." 

R1241 : page 7 

It happened that this neighbor was one 
who had experienced the grace of Christ 
in her own soul. She said to her distressed 
friend, "Do not grieve, and I will 
tell you how you may make up your loss. 
I keep the Saviour always in my heart." 

She then explained to her the Scriptures 
and invited her to go to preaching on the 
next Sabbath. The invitation was accepted; 
the eyes of the poor disconsolate 
woman were opened, and she too found a 



Christ whom she can keep always in her 
heart, and of whom no casualty can ever 
deprive her. 

Faith in the historic evidences of Christianity 
may be shaken at times by doubts 
and fears, creeds assailed or undermined, 
ecclesiastical systems exploded into fragments, 
but nothing shall ever deprive us 
of Christ, if he be in us "the hope of 
glory."— Selected. 



R1241 : page 7 

THE MEANING OF WORDS. 



"I don't take a dictionary when I 
want to know the meaning of Bible words: 
I take the Bible and look up all the texts 
in which the word of doubtful meaning 
occurs, and judge of its meaning by its 
use in the Scriptures, irrespective of the 
definition given by dictionaries." 

Thus writes one who, we doubt not, 
thinks he has stumbled upon the true 
method of study, and who does not see the 
nonsense of his conclusion. People who 
take such a position have little use for 
dictionaries or helps to accuracy of any 
sort. Ignorance is the strength of their 
position, and they not only do not wish 
to know the accurate meaning of the 
words they use, but they would like to 
keep others in the dark in order that their 
theories may not be endangered. And it 
is evident that any man who is afraid to 
have the true sense of a word understood 
has a theory to support which the true 
meaning of words would contradict and 
overthrow. Alas! that such a spirit of 
dishonesty should be found in any manner 
associated with the name Christian or 
the doctrines of Christ. 

If we read an English translation of the 
Bible and do not fully understand the 
meaning of all English words, or are in 
doubt about any, there is but one proper way 
to do— Go to some one who does know 
their meaning and inquire. This is just 
what sensible people use a dictionary for. 
Thus even if the English were the original 
tongue of the Bible, a dictionary would 
be necessary. 

But the fallacy of rejecting a dictionary 
is the more evident when we remember 



that the Bible was not written in English, 
that the English version is not the original 
Bible, but a translation of it. And the 
translators put the thoughts of the original 
as nearly as they could into the English 
language, using English words with 
their true significance as used by educated 
people and defined in dictionaries. If, 
therefore, a man relies upon the English 
translation, the best he can do is to try to 
get the exact meaning of the English text. 

But while the use of a dictionary is the 
best method of getting at the exact meaning 
of the English translation of the 
Bible, it is not infallible; for the translators, 
we find, did not always select the 
best English words to express the sentiments 
of the original. 

Unless you have a thorough knowledge 
of the original languages of the Scriptures, 
or else some confidence in the statements 
of others, you had best stick to the 
English translation and the interpretation 
of it by Webster's Dictionary. But God 
has provided some very valuable aids to 
the study of his Word in the original languages 
for persons of even ordinary 
common-school education. These are 
found in Young's Greek, Hebrew and 
English Concordance and other similar 
works, of which it is the cheapest and best 
suited to the ordinary student. This book 
is a dictionary as well as a concordance. 
It shows the Greek or Hebrew word and 
gives its meaning in English. And any 
one, therefore, who desires to be more 
accurate than the English translation and 
the English dictionary needs the original 
languages and a dictionary of them. 

To illustrate this subject, take the word 
hell in the New Testament. 

First, follow the plan suggested by the 
one whose method we criticize— look up all 
the occurrences of the word hell in the 
New Testament and see what light you 
would be likely to get. None. 

Second, take Webster's Dictionary and 
look up the meaning of the English word 
hell. There you would get much more information 
than you probably had at first, or 
could get from merely comparing the texts 
in the English Testament. You would 
find that the original meaning of hell was 

"to conceal, to hide." You would find the 
primary meaning of the word given thus: 

"The place of the dead, or of souls 



after death; the lower regions or the 
grave; called in Hebrew sheol and in 
Greek hades." 

True, Webster gives a secondary meaning, 
or another sense in which the word 
hell is used, as "The place or state of 
punishment for the wicked after death; 
the abode of evil spirits." 

The latter, however, the intelligent 
student will see, proceeds largely from the 
modern prevalent theological view and 
not from the true, primary significance of 
the word. We submit that most people 
would reach clearer views of the meaning 
of this by taking Webster's definition than 
by comparing all the texts of the Bible, 
with the ordinary and false meaning of 
the word in mind. 

Third, take Young's Concordance and 
Dictionary (a standard work by an acknowledged 
scholar, an eminent Presbyterian 
in Scotland). It will show you that 
three totally distinct Greek words, with 
totally distinct meanings, are all translated 
hell. It separates the texts and shows 
which are from each of the three Greek 
words, hades, gehenna and tartaroo, and 
gives what he, as a Greek scholar, understands 
those words to signify. He shows 
also the word from which hell in the Old 
Testament is translated— sheol. 

Here, then, after getting the different 
Greek and Hebrew words classified and 
the texts under each, is the time when a 
comparison of the several texts in each 
class will help the intelligent student to 
arrive at the true significance of any word 
by noting the usage by the inspired writers. 
And yet this is only a very limited 
comparison; and such as have the necessary 
education or other books to show the 
matter will find other texts in which the 
same Greek and Hebrew words occur and 
are translated by other words than hell, 
namely, grave and pit. And a comparison 
of the texts thus translated, with 
those translated hell, will increase the light 
many fold. 

In choosing the word hell as an illustration, 
we have taken one of the simplest, 
and not one of the most complex: other 
words in our English translation represent 
many more Greek words; for instance 
our words come and came represent 192 
Greek and Hebrew words with various 
shades of meaning. And on the other 



hand a Greek or Hebrew word is often 
translated by a great variety of English 
words. For instance, the Hebrew word 
nasa is rendered in English by 64 different 
words, and the Greek word ginomai is rendered 
by 47 different English words. 

But what could induce any one to disregard 
the exact meaning of words which 
every one knows is necessary to a correct understanding 
of any subject in any language? 
Ah! It was to support a theory— a theory 
which it was seen would not stand if the 
light were turned on, and the real meaning 
of words accepted; a theory which 
could best succeed if people were ignorant 
of the meaning of the key words, and 
would allow certain teachers to twist words 
so that death would mean life, and second 
death would mean second life. Yes, the 
theory which relies on this advice is the 
no-ransom theory; and the very word its 
teachers would most prefer should be misunderstood 
is the English word ransom 
and its equivalent antilutron and lutron 
anti of the Greek. 



R1242 : page 7 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Minnesota. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: -Opportunity presenting 
I sent the enclosed letter to a 
Brother in Christ, who yet believes in 
eternal torture; have sent him Tract No. 1, 
and if it seems wise will send him some 
of the TOWERS later. I send the letter 
as an evidence that the Lord lets me do a 
little. Christian love to all the 
household. W. E. PAGE. 

[The letter may be of interest to others, 
so we publish it below. Writing letters 
to your friends is an excellent way of 
serving them and the Truth— provided 
you have the talent for this work. Let 
each zealously use the best talents he is 
possessed of.— EDITOR.] 

DEAR BROTHER:-Your kind and highly 
esteemed letter of the 2nd inst. was 
duly received, but press of many important 
matters has prevented earlier reply. 

I have met Mr. , of whom you 



speak; he and I study the Word together 

once a week, and receive much comfort 

together. Treasures new and old are 

abundant in this "Treasure House," and 

the faithful steward must ever have something 

for the "household of faith." lam 

led to realize more and more how small 

this "household" is, and how easy it is to 

"let the things heard slip away." The 

testimony of Isaiah, applied by "our beloved 

Brother Paul" to both the Jewish 

and gospel churches, is that a "remnant 

only" will believe the report, and lay 

hold of the honors offered under each 

dispensation. As I daily learn more and 

more of our heavenly Father's mind, and 

of his purpose to have a "New Heaven 

and a New Earth in which dwell righteousness," 

and, in contrast, appreciate more 

fully present conditions, where evil reigns, 

I cannot express how my desire for the 

full consummation of our Father's plan 
grows. As you say, it seems to me that 
the thoughtful student of the Word must 
see that there are plain and specific promises 
that our Lord and Master will come 
again in person and reign; and also that 
the nations will mourn because of him on 
his arrival; that clouds and thick darkness 
will be round about him; that only "children 
of the day" will first know when he 
has arrived (as only such knew of his resurrection 
and ascension); that with the 
government on his shoulders a reign of 
righteousness will ensue from which will 
come the fulfilment of the prophecies 
that "All shall know the Lord, from the 
least even unto the greatest;" that a 
Highway of Holiness will be opened up in 
which there will be no "lions" or "wild 
beasts" and from which the "stones" 
will be removed. How like our God 
such conditions will be! How much 
higher are his ways than our ways, and his 
thoughts than our thoughts. The more 
I contemplate the ransom given by our 
Lord the more complete and ample it appears. 
He "once suffered for sins, the 
just for the unjust, that he might bring 
us to God." "By his stripes we are 
healed." "The Lord has laid upon him 
the iniquity of us all." He gave "His life 
a ransom for all." "Without shedding 
of blood there is no remission of sins." 

I rejoice not only that our Lord was a 
great example, but more in the knowledge 



that he is a great Redeemer. I realize 
that I am "not my own" but have 
been "bought with a price," even by 
the "precious blood of Christ, as of a 
lamb without blemish." Having received 
this light, I further realize what a fearful 
thing it would be to deny the "blood" 
that "bought me," and account it 
a common or unclean thing. Surely 
should any commit such sin, the "wrath 
of God must abide on him." "God is 
not mocked; that which a man soweth 
he shall also reap. He that soweth to 
the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, 
and he that soweth to the spirit shall of 
the spirit reap life everlasting." How 
fearful a thing it must be to "fall into the 
hands of the living God" unprotected by 
our dear Redeemer's robe of righteousness. 
And yet, how ample that robe is for 
ALL who accept it, though but few have 
any conception now of what our great Redeemer 
is, or what his wondrous work will 
be when he "takes His great power and 
reigns." Through the Word, we know that 
"There is one God, and one mediator between 
God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 
who gave Himself a ransom for all, to be 
testified in due time." "We trust in the 
living God who is the Savior of ALL men, 
especially of those that believe." (Glorious 
special salvation; prospective members of 
the "Little Flock" and inheritors of the 
Divine Nature.) "As in Adam ALL die, 
even so in Christ shall ALL be made 
alive." "As by the offense of one, judgment 
came upon all men unto condemnation, 
even so by the righteousness of one 
the free gift came upon all men unto justification 
of life. For as by one man's disobedience 
many were made sinners, so 
by the obedience of one shall many 
be made righteous." Thus we learn that 
while you and I and every one understanding 
God's present offerings— and 
how few such there are— are now on trial, 
having our probation; yet how glorious to 
see further that our Father's love, wisdom 
and power have made full provision so 
that in His own "due time" every 
creature shall have a full insight into 
Christ's complete work, when, if they 
but accept the ransom, IT will be ample 
enough to cover them; the gift then offered 
—perfect humanity— will be all those 
accepting it will want, and though not as 



glorious as the one now offered— the Divine 
Nature— it will be glorious and satisfactory. 
We thus learn how the logical 
conclusion, that if the ransom is a ransom 
its effects must become co-extensive with 
the effects of the fall, is, in God's providence, 
attained in fact as well as in theory. 
Thus all rejectors of God and his salvation 
will be punished on the ground of 
individual sin, apart from weakness due 
to heredity or surroundings. How we 
can appreciate anew and more fully than 
ever before that "God is love," as well 
as the message that "God is light, and 
in him is no darkness at all." 

I had intended but a line or two, 
but when contemplating these wondrous 
things, and finding myself in communion 
with a brother in Christ, I find it hard to 
leave truths so grand. W. E. PAGE. 

page 7 

London, England. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I saw and 
read the TOWER for the first time sixteen 
month ago, and I thank God that your 
preaching has not been in vain. Since then, 
by joining in with several Brethren here, 
I find from week to week, when we meet 
together to praise God and study his Word, 
we get abundantly blessed and fed. Thank 
God, we are growing in knowledge, and 

page 8 

in love of the truth, by hearing what he 
has to say to us through his Word. 

I enclose four shillings, a small offering 
to the Lord, which please do with as you 
think best. I have read January TOWER 
over again and see clearly the divine plan 
it sets forth, to those who have eyes to see 
and ears to hear, the whole plan of Jehovah 
to the whole race of mankind. We 
each have a few friends (friends of God 
we hope they will be), who, we think, 
if they will read the January TOWER, with 
God's blessing, will see some light, and so 
lay hold on the truth. Please send us 
about twenty copies (if you have so many 
to spare). May God bless you and Sister 
Russell, and all our dear brethren and 
sisters across the waters. 

Yours for Jesus sake, C. SHREEVE. 



Little Meadows. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER:-The July 
and August TOWERS have followed me 
here, also the tracts sent. I disposed of 
one package before I left home, with my 
boy colporteur's help. In July TOWER 
Bro. R.'s answer to the Iowa letter was of 
special interest to me, and still more so 
was the article, "The Undefiled One." 
It brought out to me such a clear view of 
the strong, sweet, spiritual connection between 
the Bridegroom and the glorified 
church, the Bride— besides clearing up some 
scientific points which were not clear before. 
There is not a sentence in the TOWER 
which I do not devour. I am so hungry 
for the truth, and they are feasts indeed. 
Hardly a day passes that I do not have an 
opportunity to present the truth in some 
way to others, by giving out the tracts by 
hand or by mail, and by talking the good 
tidings. 

I was invited to give a missionary talk to 
the Presbyterian M. Society here, and I 
read to them Bro. R.'s article, "I will 
draw all unto me," from July TOWER. 
Also in adult Bible Class, when the lesson 
was on the parable of Lazarus and Dives, 
I gave them our view of the parable and 
some copies of O.T. Tract, No. 1.— 
"The wages of sin," which explains that 
parable. 

Of course all this is more or less of the 
going without the camp to Christ— part 
of my sacrifice— holy and acceptable to 
God. In doing this work I have great 
joy. This scattering of the "hail" is delightful 
work and so convenient; many 
will take a tract when they will not listen 
to a conversation. 

The August TOWER came yesterday, and 
this is the first I have had of the "TABERNACLE 
TEACHINGS." It makes me more 
earnest to have the "goat" killed— willingly 
sacrificing all of the human for love 
of Christ, and the prize offered— 
Immortality. 

When I return home I will want more 
tracts. Enclosed please find two dollars 
for the tracts already received. 
MRS. M. FAIRCHILD. 

R1242 : page 8 

Northern Prison, Michigan City, Ind. 
MR. C. T. RUSSELL.-DEAR SIR:-Itis 



with sincere gratitude that I acknowledge 
the receipt of your very interesting paper, 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER. I have been 
studying MILLENNIAL DAWN together with 
the Bible, and it has thrown a new and 
cheerful light on the subject of religion 
which I have never discovered before. 
You may wonder at convicts being interested 
in such matters, but let me assure 
you that all convicts are not the hardened 
criminals they are supposed to be. The 
present state of society, with all its evil 
influences, is making many so-called criminals; 
for a very large proportion of the 
convicts, here and elsewhere, owe it to the 
saloon, which is upheld by society. I am 
42 years of age, and I had never a trouble 
in life that did not come through the saloon. 
I have spent upwards of $20,000 
in my time, and finally occupy a convict's 
cell; but how mysterious are the ways of 
the Lord. If I had not come here I should 
eventually have filled a drunkard's grave, 
but now the power of Satan is broken, and 
when I leave here next September, it will 
be to use the talent the Master has given 
me for the spread of his Gospel. 
Yours respectfully, . 

page 8 

Ohio. 

DEAR SIR:-- Your wonderful book, the 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN," has been placed 
in my hands by a friend, to read carefully 
and give my opinion of the same. 

I have read the book carefully; I have 
studied it prayerfully, and find that to 
give my opinion and be honest, I would 
have to say that I never understood 
the Bible before. A new light has been 
thrown on its pages that has become to 
me joy unspeakable. 

I have been a leader in one of the 
churches at this place for years, but to 
make public my views as I now see through 
the pages of MILLENNIAL DAWN would 
certainly place me in the attitude of a 
heretic by the church to which I belong. 
[The Lord help you to be faithful to the 
truth, Brother, to let your light shine; and 
give you grace to endure the reproaches 
of Christ] For the last ten years, I have 
given much time to the study of social 
and political economy as a pastime. I 
have certainly found in MILLENNIAL DAWN 



the only rational solution of those much 
vexed problems. 

As far as I can see, your conclusions 
are logically chained to the premises laid 
down in what we all agree to be the 
Word of God. What a revolution in 
thought! and what a dark background the 
general theology furnishes the scene less! 

I must proceed slowly along the golden 
line of truth, which, I pray God, we may 
all find at any cost. I write you this letter 
in hope that I may find out more of 
you and your "strange doctrine." I 
understand you are publishing a paper in 
the interest of the same. Please send me 
a sample copy of your paper. I should like 
also to get your suggestions as to what I 
should read of all your works. May God's 
blessings be added to you and yours, 
your work past, present and future. I am 
yours for truth, J. W. SWINDLER. 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The July 
TOWER came, as always, well filled with 
God's precious hope and promises, and it 
was very helpful in many ways. Days 
after I had read it found me still contemplating 
and feasting on its contents. As 
a result I now understand more clearly several 
of the articles it contains, and to-day I 
consider the one article, "The Undefiled 
One," alone worth more than many years' 
subscriptions. It is to me invaluable. I 
never before understood perfectly why the 
race was lost in Adam, not in Eve. With 
this light it is clear, and I see fully the 
reason why the Redeemer was undefiled 
while being born of a woman. 

Another article inquires, "Do you believe 
in the Ransom?" I answer, yes, fully, 
and may I ever rest securely there. 
Thank you for much of the light that 
has enabled me to be so sure. 

Dear Brother, preach the whole truth 
as you see it, not fearing man. It is light to 
those who are seeking for truth. Brother 
Tavender says he never saw the Ransom 
so clearly before. 

Although I should much like a personal 
letter from you, I do not expect you to 
take the time to answer my letter. The 
TOWER will come as your answer, but I 
could not forego the wish to say these 
things to you, that you may know how 
truly you are doing the good work of 



building up our most holy faith. 

I enclose an order for TOWERS, envelopes, 
tracts, etc. What remains of the 
money I send, please put into the TRACT 
FUND. 

I have some new readers of DAWN who 
are asking for explanations of spirits or 
spiritism, and of the demons our Lord cast 
out. Yours in the Life-Giver, 
MRS. J. H. PATTERSON. 

R1242 : page 8 

Ireland. 

DEAR SIR:— I received your book and 
paper safely and was glad to get them 
much sooner than I expected. I approve 
highly of the book and am very glad I 
came in contact with its pages. When 
I went over to America, about five years 
ago, and stayed in different places, a while 
here and a while there, I got acquainted 
with a man of about seventy years of age, 
whose life was spent in a most careless 
way. All this came up before him, driving 
him to deep despair, thinking he 
would have to give account for a life so 
ill spent. But one day a young man came 
in with a few books which he was selling. 
He asked the young man the name of it. 
He said, Millennial Dawn. He had heard 
before of the Millennium, so he thought he 
would buy one. The young man told him 
if he would read it and believed it, he 
would get a great blessing from it, which 
he has, for he is a different man altogether, 
no longer dreading, but longing for 
the Lord's kingdom. 

I myself was a Roman Catholic at the 
time I went to him, and after reading 
its pages I saw in it the truth; and 
whenever I found a text which looked very 
deep, I went and looked in the Bible, 
which I had never read before, and found 
it to be in harmony. 

I am very glad of the help your work 
has afforded me. I feel sure all Bible students, 
when they read it, will acknowledge 
it to be the most reasonable presentation 
of God's plan ever set forth. I 
am anxious for the third volume: send it 
as soon as ready. 

Your humble servant, ED. WALL. 

Deccan, India. 
MR. C. T. RUSSELL:-Dear Brother, I 



have read the TOWERS and tracts that you 
sent me with much interest, and wish you 
to send me the TOWER for two years, 
The MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vols. I. and II., 
in paper cover, the Emphatic Diaglott 
and Leeser's translation of the Old Testament. 
To pay for the above, I send post-office 
money order. 

I am much interested in the Old Theology, 
and wish to give it an impartial 
examination. I have Young's Analytical 
Concordance, and therefore do not need 
to send for it. I am 30 miles out in the 
jungles, preaching and teaching the word 
of life to those who are now hearing it for 
the first time. 

I am yours in the work, 
E. CHUTE, Missionary. 

[May the Lord bless this dear brother 
and show him more clearly the great 
"harvest" work now in progress.— ED.] 

page 8 

Manitoba, Canada. 

DEAR SISTER RUSSELL:-You will be 
glad to hear that we are still rejoicing in 
the truth. It becomes each day more and 
more dear to us. We are filled with gratitude 
and praise to God for all the countless 
favors we are enjoying, both temporal 
and spiritual. He has done for us exceeding 
abundantly above all that we could ask 
or think. Although we are not at liberty to 
give all our time and strength to the 
truth, the Lord has very graciously opened 
up many channels through which we may 
do a little at the work which lies nearest 
to our hearts. There are not many here 
who see and believe as we do, but then 
that makes us look the closer for the Master's 
footprints to make sure we are in the 
right way. 

Some, we find, will not read anything 
we give them, or listen to anything we 
have to say, but they go and warn others 
to beware of us. Others listen a few times 
and say, "Well, I hope it is true," then 
busy themselves with something else. 
Some who heard gladly at first and rejoiced 
with us for a while seem now to be 
more interested in other things. But, 
thank God, through the all-sufficient and 
precious blood of Jesus we have, so far, 
been able to stand. 



We have had to endure some trials since 
we came home (things don't always run 
smoothly), but the dear Lord has never 
hid his face from us. Our little boys have 
the same keen interest in God's plan that 
they have always had. I can tell them 
everything as far as I know in such a way 
that they can grasp the meaning. They 
would rather hear a Bible story anytime 
than the most thrilling fairy tale. They 
have to spend several hours every day 
herding sheep; that brings them into closer 
sympathy with the Shepherd of the 
Bible. Bro. T. is toiling on, sometimes 
on the mountain-top of joy and sometimes 
in the valley. We expect Bro. Z. 
to-morrow on his way to Ontario to begin 
the colporteur work. 

The delay of Vol. III. is giving us 
time to make our own all of the good 
things contained in Vol. II. We anticipate 
a feast when this month's TOWER comes; 
it brings us joy and comfort every month. 

We send with this our heartfelt love 
and gratitude to yourself and Brother 
Russell, not despising but greatly esteeming 
all the food and training we have received 
through you. And we know that 
God will abundantly bless you and give 
you strength to finish your work. The 
boys send their love. Yours in the glorious 
light, MRS. S. WEBB. 


