VOL. XXXII FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 51 

Danger Point in Germany Near 51 

Presbyterian Ministerial Unbelief 52 

The Mark of This Age 52 

Debts of the Civilized Nations 53 

Zionism in Prophecy 54 

What Christ, as Our Advocate, Imputes 54 

Our Lord's Righteousness as a Man 
and His Right to Human Life in 

Hands of Justice 55 

"Love Not the World" 56 

The Love to Be Desired 57 

Can Evil Befall the New Creature? 58 

A Holy Nation Pictured 59 

General Naaman's Leprosy Cured 60 

Surrounded by Heavenly Hosts 61 

Divine Love's Consummation (Poem) 62 

What "Corrupt Communication" Signifies 62 



Some Interesting Letters 63 

page 50 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 5 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock in 
the Brooklyn Tabernacle. The evening Question Meeting at 
7:30 o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse for the 



Public at 3 p.m. in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette 
Ave. and St. Felix St. 



PLEASE ACCEPT BRO. RUSSELL'S THANKS 

Brother Russell's birthday brought a shower of telegrams 
and loads of letters and cards. He highly appreciates these 
evidences of the love of the dear friends in every quarter. 
He would have delight in answering each personally, but the 
interests of the general work forbid. He requests that the 
dear friends accept THE WATCH TOWER twice a month as his 
answers to their letters. 



"EVERYBODY'S PAPER" 

This title will take the place of PEOPLES PULPIT for use in 
announcing Pilgrim Meetings and for the "Bible Extension 
Course," of which we have advised all INT. BIBLE STUDENTS 
CLASSES. The PEOPLES PULPIT will continue. Reply to Cardinal 
Gibbons will appear in it. 



PEOPLES PULPIT (1911) VOLUNTEER MATTER 

This year's Volunteer Matter, we believe, will be equal to, 
if it does not excel, that of any previous year in its effectiveness 
for the dissemination of Present Truth. We are placing 
printing orders in various parts of the country for the quicker 
and less expensive filling of your orders. 

We trust that the different classes and individuals desirous 
of promoting this service will send us in promptly memorandum 
of the total amount they promise to use prudently, wisely, 
free. 

Give address very explicitly. We will divide the total order 
when large into two or more shipments, and advise you fully. 



R4762 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

DANGER POINT IN GERMANY NEAR 

YEARS ago the German Emperor, although 
ostensibly the Head of a Protestant Church, 
found it necessary to conciliate the representatives 
of the Centrist-Catholic Party, 
which previously had been decreed by his 
Government to be the "powers of darkness." 
By now the Socialists and other 



radical parties in Parliament are numerically 
so strong and so opposed to the Kaiser's 
schemes that his Government policies would 
fail without the Catholic support. 

Socialists in the Reichstag (Parliament) twit the 
Emperor and the Catholics with the suggestion that as 
the Catholics were once officially known as the "powers 
of darkness," and opposed to the Government which 
represents the Divine will, so their coming into power 
with the Government should be understood as a return 
of Divine favor toward them; and that now that Socialists 
are coming into power, this should be regarded by 
the Emperor and all as the latest manifestation of Divine 
will. 

The Emperor is seeking to impress the people with the 
thought that they are his subjects, and that he is responsible 
to God for their government. Thus politics and 
religion are more strongly than ever united. And the 
Pope's wishes become practically the law in Germany. 

Meanwhile the present Pope is asserting himself 
against what he styles modernism— Higher Critical 
Infidelity, etc. He has recently issued an edict that all 
ministers of the Catholic Church shall be examined and 
sworn as respects their loyalty to the Bible and to the 
Church of Rome— the tests extending even to theological 
students, and requiring of them an oath annually. 

The Catholic priests of Germany receive support from 
the German Treasury, as do the Protestant ministers. 
The latter are resenting the Pope's demands, while the 
Emperor inclines to support them. Thus a new cause of 
friction is introduced into German affairs. The Emperor 
must stand by the Catholic party in Parliament, in order 
to have passed his schemes for a great navy and militarism 
in general. 

The Socialists and Liberals in Parliament are demanding 
separation of Church and State, such as we have in 
the United States; such as has recently been established 
in France and Portugal. 

The conflict between Parliament, the law-making body, 
and the Emperor and his Executive Board of Administration 
of Government grows in intensity. The Emperor's 
pronouncement that he reigns not by the will of the German 
people, but by the grace of God, is publicly declared 
in Parliament to be an attack upon the people and their 
Parliament. The theory opposed to the Emperor is that 
he holds his authority in the State of Prussia by the gift 
of the people there, and that his title as Emperor of all 
the Germans came to him from the German Parliament, 
which, having created him an Emperor, is his Superior 
and fully qualified to take from him the Emperorship, and, 
if it choose, to create a Republic. 

Dr. David recently declared in Parliament that the 
Kaiser had written into the "gold book" of the German 
people, as intended for eternity, the message, "by Divine 
right I am King; hence, am responsible to the Lord alone. 
The weighty responsibility, therefore, which the King 



bears for his people gives him the right to expect faithful 
co-operation on the part of his subjects." 

"But," said Dr. David, "we are no subjects. We are 
free citizens of a State. The people gave the Prussian 
King his crown in the battles of liberty, and, as for the 
crown of the Empire, the matter is clear that the Kaiser 
received it from the Reichstag" (Parliament). 

Another representative, Ledebour, said that German 
citizenship is standing face to face with a question of 
destiny. "Perhaps this question is being raised for the 
last time," he continued... ."We could fight our 
battle alone, and the result would be that all the men of 
people's parties who disdain the Divine right of kings, 
etc., would ultimately come on our side. If we (Socialists) 
fight together with you (Liberals) we will still 
maintain our aims. We hold fast to our Republican demands. 
As in other lands, so in Germany. Republicanism 
must be fully developed. The spirit of the times, which 
the Kaiser had declared pernicious, must be victorious. 
...If you will fight with us, we will ultimately win. And 
if the world were full of devils, we would, nevertheless, 
succeed." 

The approaching issue in Germany is equal and unlimited 
franchise to rich and poor alike. The Socialists 
believe that this point gained will mean a peaceable 
revolution in Germany. Others fear that rather than 
permit the Parliament to be thus freed from the imperial 
control, the Emperor, acting upon his claim of Divine 
right to reign, would put the country under imperial law 
without a Parliament, and reign as an autocrat. It is 
further feared that such a move would mean civil strife, 
anarchy, bloodshed. All seem agreed that the issue 
between the Kaiser and the people cannot long be deferred 
of solution. 

R4762 : page 52 

The German Chancellor is quoted as using the following 
language: "The revolutionary character of the Socialist 
Party becomes more pronounced and brutal in its 
character. Dr. Carl Liebknecht, a Social-Democrat of 
the Prussian Diet, in an address delivered in the United 
States recently, said that the conditions in Germany were 
such as might cause the German Crown to be blown 
away in a single night, just as was the case with Portugal. 
Our nation must have a clear answer to expressions of 
such character. The Socialists and all those teaching 
the masses that prosperity can come to them only after 
the overthrow of the present form of government, are 
responsible when the masses draw practical conclusions 
from such teachings. For this reason I hold the Socialists 
responsible for the excesses that were recently committed 
and the strife in Moabit, Berlin, and elsewhere. 
'Whoever sows wind will reap a whirlwind.'" 



CONSCIENCE IN ACCUSATION 

It is a fact that in their offensive tactics many of our 
public men are deficient either in conscience or in manner, 
or in both. They make charges against their opponents 
recklessly. They say things which they cannot 
prove and which it is only charitable to their intellectuals 
to assume they do not believe. 

It seems to be the idea that if you throw enough mud 
some of it will stick, and none of it will spatter yourself; 
that if you throw enough clubs some will land, and none 
return, boomerang fashion, on your own head. 

We say this notion is wrong. We believe that men 
who are careless in their words are equally careless in 
their acts. The man who, without justification, calls 
another a rogue is the man who will bear watching, for 
too often he credits the other man with the same motives 
that control himself, and assumes that the other man has 
done what, with the same opportunities, he would do 
himself. 

Bearing false witness, however, is more than an unfavorable 
symptom. It is itself an offense almost equal- 
in the scales of eternal justice probably held entirely 
equal— to the offense charged. 

The habit is not even good politics. It goes against 
average human nature, which is sportsmanlike and fair; 
and even the brutalized atmosphere of the ringside instinctively 
hisses the foul blow. What does it profit one 
to exhibit himself as a man eager to win, regardless of 
everything else? There is real chivalry in human nature. 
Every manifestation of it has a universal response. Why 
should it be considered bad politics? 

Maybe we are wrong, but our theory is that conscienceless 
accusation derives as much from ignorance as 
from malice. Many public men conduct campaigns on 
personalities because they have not qualified to conduct 
them on issues. It is easier to accuse, to clamor, to rail, 
than it is to get clear to the bottom of a political or 
economic issue, understand it yourself, and then so present 
it that others can understand it. 

The most sobering thing in the world is adequate 
knowledge of a subject, an appraisal of it from all sides. 
Those who achieve this knowledge necessarily speak 
words of truth and soberness. They have neither the inclination 
nor the time to utter anything else.— New York 
Evening Mail. 



The lack of conscientiousness noted by the Mail 
amongst politicians seems equally noticeable amongst 
theologians and others who, in professing the name of 
Christ, imply that they respect the standards of God's 
Word, while their words and conduct give the lie to their 
professions. 



PRESBYTERIAN MINISTERIAL UNBELIEF 

The New York Presbytery not long since licensed 
Rev. N. M. Thomas to preach the Gospel as representative 
of the Presbyterian denomination. The vote granting 
the license was thirty-four against ten who protested 
—and the ten are not active Pastors in charge 
of Churches. The mental attitude of the Presbyterian 
Ministers of the New York Presbytery is, therefore, reflected 
in the faith of Rev. Thomas, which may be judged 
from the following items of protest:— 

"He did not accept the authority of Holy Scripture as 
the only infallible rule of faith and practise as sufficient 
to finally determine his faith. This appeared in his repeated 

R4763 : page 52 

refusals to affirm his faith in the Virgin birth of 

Christ, the raising of Lazarus from the dead and the raising 

of Christ's own body from the grave. 

"Second, in answer to questions, he twice declared his 
readiness to lead a congregation in the repetition of the 
Apostles' Creed, including the phrase 'born of the Virgin 
Mary,' which he had told the Presbytery that he really 
did not believe." 

From this it appears that it is no longer Presbyterian 
doctrines in New York that we have a sinless Savior— 
"holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." (Heb. 7:26.) 
Indeed, it is safe to assume that these ministers 
are Higher Critics who have no use for the Bible, and do 
not believe in Jesus as a Savior, because they have abandoned 
the theory that man fell from God's image and 
likeness and needed to be redeemed. They have probably 
all accepted the Evolution theory that Father Adam 
sprang from a monkey, and that his race has been doing 
nobly since and needs no Redeemer. They would probably 
acknowledge Jesus as a noble sample of manhood for 
his time, but not up to our day and standards, which are 
to be sought rather amongst college professors. 

Is it any wonder that Christian character, unsupported 
by a message recognized as Divine and upheld merely by 
expediency, is crumbling everywhere? What will the end 
be? The majority of Presbyterians will follow their 
leaders and soon Christendom en mass will be without 
God and without hope. Faith in a nature god and in laws 
of nature can have no such influence upon heart and life 
as has faith in a personal God, a personal Redeemer, a 
personal salvation and an inspired Bible. 

Thank God that the terrible confusion and anarchy 
which the Scriptures show to be imminent will be speedily 
followed by the inauguration of the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son, a reign of righteousness backed by power 
Divine, as well as by Love and Justice. In that strenuous 



hour nature as a god will not succor and faith in the God 
of nature will not comfort. But evidently, as the Scriptures 
show, all the "blind eyes" will be opened; all the 
"deaf ears" will be unstopped; and the wisdom of man, 
in contrast with the wisdom of God, will be manifested as 
foolishness. 



THE MARK OF THIS AGE 

Judge Connine says: "The mark of this age is irreverence. 
Reverence and respect for age, for office, for intellectual 
attainments, for uprightness, ability and honor are 
on the wane. Some of the causes can be named; among 
them are encroachments by the executive branch of our 
States and Nation upon the legislative and judicial and the 
belittling, impugning and assailing the acts and motives 
of those in authority, particularly by the press. No 

R4763 : page 53 

motive is now clean, upright and honorable, no act found 
grand or commendable. Traveling with this is a growing 
irreverence for the law, and the end of all this is 
detriment and danger. 



Back of disrespect for human laws and customs lies 
disrespect for the Divine Law. And for this disrespect 
of the Bible, the Christian ministry, colleges, and seminaries 
are chiefly responsible. The colleges have led the 
way in teaching Higher Criticism, Infidelity and Evolution 
theories. They have within the last fifty years gradually 
molded the opinion of the ministry and generally 
educated classes to these anti-Biblical teachings. They 
were led on in this wrong course by the opinion that they 
were taking their stand for Truth as against ignorance 
and superstition. So far as their own minds were concerned 
they repudiated the creeds of the "dark ages," 
which they still laughingly profess to adhere to. And 
as the creeds were repudiated the Bible went with them, 
under the assumption that it was to blame for the absurdities 
of the creeds. All the same they have gradually, 
systematically undermined the Word of God as a Divine 
authority in the judgment of millions. 

A comparatively few ministers have known better 
than this. These have stuck to the Bible as the sheet-anchor 
of their faith. More or less clearly they have 
seen the conflict between the Bible and their creeds. Yet 
they have feared to mention it lest they should be identified 
with the Higher Critics and be considered faith-breakers. 
And some of them, alas, have shunned to declare 
the whole counsel of God, because of fear of losing 
their bread and butter and honorable name and standing. 



Their refraining from telling their people the Truth respecting 
the teachings of the Bible left their flocks in 
ignorance and just ready to fall into Higher Criticism or 
some of the bad religions which wrest the Scriptures, instead 
of interpreting them. 

All the same, the general shaking of the public faith, 
and especially that of the literary "upper-crust," is being 
reflected everywhere in the growingly prevalent spirit of 
irreverence above commented upon. Soon this will lead, 
as the Scriptures point out, toward atheism and toward 
anarchy— the great time of trouble Scripturally foretold 
as near. 

Those of us who realize the true situation should be 
doubly earnest in our outward manifestation of religion 
and upholding of the Bible, as well as in our heart appreciation 
of the Almighty and our worship of him and 
service of his cause. 



DEBTS OF CIVILIZED NATIONS 

The below figures show the public debts and annual 
interest charges of the principal nations of the world. 
These debts represent chiefly monies expended for war, 
war equipments, battleships, etc. The amounts continue 
to pile up year by year. 

The public scarcely understand the situation; they 
wonder to whom the amounts are owing and what can 
be done when pay-day comes. 

The wealthy know that these bonds represent their 
money and they feel satisfied to get even a small interest 
with such good security and no trouble. 

Of late, however, a certain fear is taking hold upon 
the rich— what if Socialism should gain control? And 
what if, by and by, the national treasury should go into 
bankruptcy and repudiate its bonds? 

Evidently the world needs just such a good, strong 
Government and just such wise and just laws as the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son will shortly bring to them. 
How significant is the Scriptural statement respecting 
that— "The desire of all nations shall come." (Hag. 2:7.) 
Following are the figures:— 

Annual Int. 
Public Debt. Charged. 

France $5,898,675,451 $186,802,380 

Russia 4,558,152,565 204,766,421 

German Empire 4,270,488,716 179,778,179 

Austria-Hungary 3,703,235,511 133,925,824 

United Kingdom 3,669,931,350 152,759,411 

Italy 2,602,299,757 96,941,138 

Spain 1,817,674,327 78,709,000 

British India 1,346,999,187 41,681,212 

Japan 1,287,604,261 76,283,536 

Australia 1,184,192,157 46,883,998 



United States 1,023,861,531 21,803,836 

Portugal 864,561,212 29,907,983 

Brazil 657,097,561 32,390,824 

Belgium 663,325,145 27,022,108 

China 601,916,605 92,375,017 

Turkey 527,983,636 36,494,753 

Argentine Republic 545,712,120 29,594,251 

These are all the nations whose public debts exceed 
$500,000,000, but every government on earth has been 
for years, and still is, borrowing to cover the deficits 
that are annually created by spending more money than 
the revenues will justify. They are compelled to issue 
bonds in order to make up the difference. It is a serious 
question how long this extravagance can be continued. 



FINANCIAL PROSPERITY AND RELIGIOUS DECLINE 

Newspaper reports tell us how great is the financial 
prosperity in Germany, as per the following clipping:— 

"Germany today is one of the most prosperous nations 
in the world, and both the farmers and mechanics, 
the land owners and the manufacturers, have shared the 
benefits of a protective tariff. Nowhere have the results 
of the protective policy been so conspicuous as in Germany. 
During the first ten years after it was adopted the 
national income increased 19 per cent.; during the last 
ten years it has increased 56 per cent. The aggregate 
incomes of persons who pay the income tax in Prussia 
increased during the last ten years from $725,000,000 to 
$1,650,000,000." 

But the reports tell us also of great religious decline 
there. Prof. Rudolph Martin, German philosopher and 
political prophet, refers to the decline in religion in Germany 
as remarkable and notes the almost complete disappearance 
of religious influence among the peoples of 
Europe. He considers it a striking symptom of this Age. 
He notes a growing anti-religious feeling and a profound 
indifference, with marks of hostility, toward the clergy. 

The professor asks what will take the place of religion 
in checking the inherent tendencies of mankind, 
when this indifference and opposition shall have gained 
a little further headway. He dreads the removal of such 
a potent safeguard and fears danger to humanity in 
general. 

Pointing to England as once the home of piety he 
declares that it is now drifting toward extreme worldliness. 

R4764 : page 53 

He remarks on the empty churches; declares that 
nine-tenths of the people never enter a house of worship, 
and that Sunday observance has given way to golf, tennis, 
bridge-poker and concerts. He wonders if the same 



is true of America. In Germany he sees that despite 

the Kaiser's pious utterances and his wife's pious utterances, 

the masses of the people are being alienated from 

the old forms of religious belief rapidly. What, he inquires, 

will be the effect? Will mankind sink into depths 

of wickedness? Will there be outbreaks of wrong-doing? 

The Scriptures answer, Yes; "there shall be a time 
of trouble such as never was since there was a nation." 



R4764 : page 54 

ZIONISM IN PROPHECY 

MANY of our readers are aware that on the 
Editor's return from Palestine last June he 
delivered a discourse entitled "Jerusalem." 
Many Jews were attracted by the theme 
and considerable interest amongst them was 
aroused. That sermon and several others 
were published in Jewish papers. Then 
came interviews with editors, etc., and, 
finally, an invitation to address a Jewish 
Mass Meeting at the New York Hippodrome, 
with signatures on three sheets of paper. 

Accordingly on Sunday, October 9, the Editor was 
met by a Committee of five prominent Hebrews, Brother 
Rutherford also accompanying us. The party went in 
automobiles. The meeting was an enthusiastic one. The 
number present was estimated at four thousand, and we 
were told that no finer representative class of Hebrews 
had ever before come together in one assemblage in New 
York. 

The address was well received, but apparently it was 
unfortunate that some of the pamphlets, entitled "Jewish 
Hopes and Prospects," were given away at the conclusion 
of the meeting. Some of the Jews, without recognizing 
that that pamphlet was gotten out for our Christian 
readers, considered that by it we were endeavoring to 
entrap the Jews into Christianity. And Christianity to 
the Jews, especially Catholicism, means many persecutions 
which have come against their people for many centuries. 
Some understood the matter aright. Others felt offended, 
and during the Editor's absence in Europe last fall he 
was attacked as a "missionary"— which, in the Jewish 
mind, means everything mean, underhanded. 

On our return from Europe in November we corrected 
the misunderstanding, so far as possible, through the 
Jewish newspapers. We informed them that we were 
not trying to "mission" the Jews, nor to make them members 
of either Catholic or Protestant Christian bodies. 
We were not even preaching Jesus to them. Our message 
was to the Jews as Jews, from Isaiah 40:1,2— "Comfort 
ye, comfort ye, my people; speak ye comfortably to 
Jerusalem; cry unto her that her appointed time is accomplished; 



that her iniquity is pardoned, for she hath received 
of the Lord's hand double." We declared that it 
was not our expectation that the Jews would return to 
Palestine as Christians. On the contrary, God's call and 
promises as respects Jerusalem are earthly promises to 
natural Israel. 

To a few who asked quite deeply we explained that our 
understanding is that the Messiah of Prophecy is a great 
spirit company composed of many members, including 
English, French, German, Jews, etc.; that God is gathering 
this Messianic company to heavenly glory from every 
nation, people, kindred and tongue, and that only the 
saintly will be in and of it. We explained: We do not 
understand that Christians in general, any more than 
Jews in general, will have part in that Messianic Body 
and that it would be the furthest from our thought to have 
the Jews get as mixed up on different matters as are the 
majority of Christian people. 

Since then several Jewish papers continue to publish 
our writings and we have had two more Jewish Mass 
Meetings. One of these was in Chicago. It was somewhat 
of a disappointment as to numbers, until we noticed 
that the Saturday on which it was held was a particularly 
unfavorable time. Many Jews expressed their disappointment 
in not being able to attend, because it would deprive 
them of their principal business day. Nevertheless the 
audience was estimated at fifteen hundred and we had 
excellent attention. 

Our last meeting with the Jews was held in Philadelphia. 
It was not at all advertised in the secular press. 
In other words, it was a Jewish meeting. Garrick Theatre 
was full to the limit, with about three hundred standing, 
when the police, following the fire ordinance, forbade 
others to enter, and several hundred were turned away 
disappointed. That meeting was the most enthusiastic 
held thus far with the Jewish people. Their confidence 
in the Editor seems to be growing. Zionism from a 
prophetic standpoint seems to stir the Jewish heart as the 
subject never did from a political viewpoint. 



R4764 : page 54 

WHAT CHRIST, AS OUR ADVOCATE, IMPUTES 

IN speaking of our Lord as our great Advocate, 
through whom we have justification, 
and considering what he does for us 
that makes us acceptable to the Father, a 
variety of expressions are sometimes heard. 
One may say that he imputes to us his life-rights. 
Another may say that he imputes 
to us his righteousness. Another may say 
that he imputes to us the merit of his 
sacrifice. Let us try to get this matter 



clearly before our minds. What is the thing that is 
really imputed? 

First of all, we suggest that what Christ imputes to 
us is not the heavenly nature nor the divine life nor the 
right to divine life. None of these things are imputed. 
These things come to us from the Father. To these things 
we are begotten by the holy Spirit. It is as the result of 
our becoming New Creatures that we have a right to 
these things. What our Lord Jesus, as our great Advocate, 
does for us is to make us acceptable sacrifices; because 
it is only upon our becoming acceptable sacrifices 
that we can present our bodies; this being done, the 
Father accepts them. "I beseech you therefore, brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable 
service."— Rom. 12:1. 

We see that our Lord Jesus was the first that responded 
to this call. We see that he was "holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners." We see that there 
was a merit in laying down that life which he had a right 
to retain. We see, on the other hand, that we who will 
to walk in his steps and to accept a share of that same 
call to enter into covenant relation with God by sacrifice, 
are imperfect; therefore, that we have no right to 
life, and having no right to an earthly life, we could not 
offer our earthly life in sacrifice to God. It is then— 
when we realize our condition— that we are drawn by 
Divine grace unto Christ and it is indicated to us that he 
has merit and is willing to appropriate of this to us, so as 
to make our sacrifices acceptable. 

It is not the Divine proposition that our sacrifices shall 
be set aside and counted as nothing. The Divine proposition, 
on the contrary, is: You have something, but it is 
imperfect. Now, if Jesus will appear as your Advocate, 
he has the ability to make your sacrifice acceptable— because 
he has the power of imputing to it of his merit. If 
you have the perfect mind, the perfect will, you have 
then, to begin with, the most important thing in my sight 
in the form of sacrifice. But the whole difficulty lies in 
the fact that you have imperfection inherited from your 
first parents. Christ will do something for you that will 
make your sacrifice acceptable to me. 

R4764 : page 55 

But what will he do for us? What will he give us? 
Will he give us his righteousness? No, if he gave away 
his righteousness he would not be righteous. He maintains 
his own righteousness. What, then, will he give us? 
We answer that he has already made the gift, so far as 
Justice is concerned. Eighteen centuries ago he appeared 
to satisfy the demands of Justice against our race. The 
demands of Justice were "A life for a life"— a ransom-price. 
He laid down his life a corresponding price. He 
did not, however, appropriate the merit of that life to 
the world. It is still his to control and to dispense. He 



did not, when he ascended up on high, appropriate that 
merit to the Church in the sense of giving it up. But he 
did impute, to all of those who willed to come unto the 
Father, a sufficiency of the merit of his sacrifice to make 
them whole and complete. 

How could he do this? Because he had a sufficiency 
of merit to have applied it, had he chosen so to do, for 
the satisfaction of the sins of the whole world. But instead 
of doing so, he has loaned the merit of that 
righteousness, and all the rights that go with it, to all 
those who, during this Age, desire to become his footstep-followers. 
So, when they take this position, he becomes 
their Advocate by virtue of the application of enough 
merit to cover all their defects. His merit appropriated 
to these imperfect sacrifices, makes each one of them 
acceptable to the Father. Thus each one of the Church 
is enabled to suffer with him— sharing of his cup 
and being baptized with him into death. When the 

R4765 : page 55 

Father begets them of the holy Spirit, they need the great 
Advocate to stand as their Advocate, and in every time of 
need he still stands ready. As the Apostle says, "If any 
man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ, the Righteous."— I John 2:1. 

OUR LORD'S RIGHTEOUSNESS AS A MAN AND HIS RIGHT 
TO HUMAN LIFE IN THE HANDS OF JUSTICE 

What, then, was it that he gave? The answer is, that 
when he sacrificed himself he was righteous as a man. It 
was, then, that righteousness and consequently that right 
to human life that he possessed when he consecrated and 
then gave up. It is that which is in the hands of Justice. 
In this is included life-rights for all the world. And the 
basis was his own rights as a man. But he does not give 
those things up to us, but merely imputes to us the benefit 
of them. 

Suppose we had in the bank a thousand dollars, and 
suppose we said to the banker, "I wish to leave this in 
your hands in favor of certain notes which I am going to 
endorse." We then, accordingly, endorse notes for you. 
Now, our thousand dollars that was in the bank is merely 
a security. We are imputing the merit of that thousand 
dollars to you on the notes which we endorse. 

Thus Christ imputes to us his merit; and the great 
One to take note of this and act upon it is the Heavenly 
Father. The Father immediately accepts the sacrifice and 
the person is begotten of the holy Spirit and that person 
is reckoned, so far as his flesh is concerned, dead. This 
means that this merit of Jesus will continue to be imputed 
to such persons until they shall have either been born of 
the Spirit or become subjects of the Second Death. And 
so they must each one die, in one or the other way, that 
every bit of merit that was used in the case of any 



one of them will be released, to be used for the world in a 
different way; namely, to give them, under the terms of 
the New Covenant, the rights which Jesus sacrificed at 
Calvary. 

We have not a sufficiency of merit for the Father to 
accept it as a sacrifice. To illustrate: He that is guilty of 
the violation of one point of the Law, is guilty of the one 
hundred points. Any one with ninety-nine points in his 
favor would fail just as thoroughly as the one who had 
only fifty. 

Now, then, that is just the position of mankind as a 
race. Justice cannot accept anything but a perfect sacrifice. 
We might say that we are in various degrees of 
imperfection, and that we range all the way from twenty-five 
points to seventy-five points. What must be done to 
make us acceptable? The one with twenty-five points 
needs seventy-five points; and the one who has seventy-five 
points would just as much need the Advocate and just 
as much need the imputation of Christ's merit as the one 
with only twenty-five points; but he would not need so 
large an amount. The Lord placed the full amount in the 
hands of the Father, and then made it applicable to all 
such as recognize their need, and it is just as free to the 
one with twenty-five points of character as to the one 
with seventy-five points. 

The Church's sacrifice is not to get the world free, 
but to get herself into a sacrificial condition. In God's 
arrangement, in God's purpose, our sacrifice is not necessary 
for the world. Christ's sacrifice is all that is necessary 
for the satisfaction of Justice for the sins of the 
world. 

All this arrangement is purely for us, in order that 
we may, through it, have an opportunity of entering into 
the "high calling." But actually we are not anything, 
because the whole thing is arranged for us in the Father's 
hands. We add nothing to it. Our sacrificing is that we 
may suffer with the Lord; and, consequently, reign with 
him. "For unto you it is given in behalf of Christ, not 
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake."— 
Phil. 1:29. 

But one asks if in any way, either individually or collectively, 
the Church in any sense of the word purchases 
the heavenly inheritance. 

HOW THE SPIRITUAL NATURE IS OBTAINED 

The glory, honor and immortality which the Lord purposes 
to give to the Church, is not given free. Jesus never 
purchased for the Church the divine nature or any spiritual 
thing whatever. The only things that he did purchase 
were the human rights and the human nature. This which 
we get free, through the imputation of his merit, we may 
use and purchase with it that with which we may obtain 
the spiritual nature. This is the Father's "high calling." 
He invites us to make the exchange, or barter, giving up 
our all. 



In the case of our Lord, the matter is somewhat 
different. He received it as a reward, and besides, held a 
certain merit which he had to give away as he pleased. 
We make consecration, and are acceptable to God by 
means of the imputation of Christ's merit, which covers 
our imperfections, in order that we may share with our 
Lord in his great work of uplifting mankind and with a 
view of sharing with him his Kingdom glory, as members 
of his Body— members of the Royal Priesthood. 

Above we used the expression twenty-five, fifty and 
seventy-five points of character. We did not mean to 
say that principle is to be sacrificed, that good character 
is to be sacrificed. No; we used the word character in 
the sense of proper conditions or elements of character, 
elements of a proper human character. With the thought 
in mind that we have seventy-five elements of character 
and twenty-five that are blemished (and all humanity 
is blemished twenty-five, fifty or seventy-five points, as 
the case may be) we realize our helplessness, our necessity. 
Now this that our Lord imputes to us, is to make 

R4765 : page 56 

good our deficiency; then all that we have would stand 
for or represent a perfect human being— nothing more, 
nothing less. It was an imperfect human being the moment 
before; but the imputation of Christ's merit constituted 
it a perfect man or woman. 

The Divine terms upon which life might be enjoyed 
perpetually were the keeping of the Law; so any one who 
could keep the Law perfectly could have claimed life 
eternal— "The man that doeth those things shall live by 
them." (Rom. 10:5.) God had given this Law to the 
Jewish nation, whose typical sacrifices foreshadowed the 
real sin-offering. 

The middle wall of partition being broken down, there 
was an opportunity for each member of that race to 
present himself in sacrifice; none being totally depraved, 
all had some elements of character and possessed some 
degree of merit, even though not a sufficient degree to 
claim life under the Law. It was to such of these, then, 
as had willing minds and honest hearts, that Christ applied 
of his merit for the very purpose of enabling them 
to be sacrifices. God has no dealings with those who are 
rebellious in their minds; they are out of the list. Christ 
has not appeared for them at all, and has never proposed 
to do so. He is proposing to be the Advocate of those 
only who have first turned away from sin desiring to be 
in harmony with God. It is the man whose mind is fully 
submitted to God, and only such a one, who is being dealt 
with. 



R4765 : page 56 



"LOVE NOT THE WORLD" 

"Know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with 
God? Whosoever, therefore, will be a friend of the world is 
the enemy of God."— James 4:4. 

THIS text brings to mind another one somewhat 

similar— "Love not the world, neither 

the things that are in the world; if any 

man love the world, the love of the Father 

is not in him." (I John 2:5.) From these 

Scriptures we should not get the thought 

that we are to have no worldly people as 

our friends, nor to have them consider us 

as their friends; otherwise it would imply 

that we were their enemies and they our 

enemies. But we are to be the enemies of none, and are, 

therefore, to be the friends of all. 

One can, however, scarcely read the above advice from 
two of the Lord's Apostles without having another Scripture 
suggested to his mind— and this, too, from the lips 
of our dear Lord himself— which at first sight may seem 
contradictory, viz., "God so loved the world that he gave 
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16.) 
The two, however, are not antagonistic, but are in full 
harmony when rightly understood. 

How, then, shall we understand that we are not to 
have friendship with the world, and yet are to love the 
world? The key is found in the word "world." As, for 
instance, if one should go into politics, he would find 
that politics is so interlaced with evil things that it would 
be practically impossible for him to engage in it without 
compromising his relationship with God. In former 
times no one could associate very much with any one in 
the world unless he were, more or less, in politics. Therefore, 
it would mean being in accord with sinful practices 
—not, perhaps, directly, but indirectly. 

Very few people know how political affairs are carried 

R4766 : page 56 

on. A man in politics forgets his conscience; he is 
almost compelled to "give and take" with others. Otherwise, 
the district or ward or state that he represents 
would proportionately lack representation, because he 
would be ignored; and anything that he would be inclined 
to say, would result in driving him out of politics, which 
would cause his ward or district or state to suffer injury. 
So, then, the broad thought connected with this text 
would be that God's people will recognize the things of 
the world in general, as being in opposition to the service 
of God, and that they are not in sympathy with the 
chicanery and methods of the Prince of this world. 

There is a worldly side to every question, every business; 
and for us to conform ourselves to these arrangements 



and to co-operate with them, would be sin on our 
part. Nevertheless, as the Apostle says, we cannot go 
out of the world, and must, more or less, have contact 
with worldly people. The proper course is, therefore, as 
indicated in the Scriptures, that the Lord's people walk 
circumspectly, seeking to keep themselves loyal to God 
and to all of his principles; seeking to separate themselves 
from the world and to be burning and shining 
lights that the world may see their good works and glorify 
their Father in heaven. 

WE ARE TO DO GOOD TO ALL MEN AS WE HAVE 
OPPORTUNITY 

If God so loved the world, even while they were yet 
sinners (Rom. 5:8), as to sacrifice the dearest treasure of 
his heart in order to redeem and save them, then such 
love and such benevolence toward the world on our part 
cannot be out of harmony with his will. Indeed, such is 
the direct teaching of the Word— "As you have therefore 
opportunity, do good to all men; love your enemies, do 
good to them that hate you; pray for them which despite fully 
use you and persecute you, that ye may be the children 
of your Father which is in heaven; for he maketh 
his sun to rise on the evil and on the good and sendeth 
rain on the just and on the unjust."— Gal. 6:10; 
Matt. 5:44-48. 

To love the world as God loves it, is not the sentiment 
against which the Apostles warn the Church. That is a 
grand and ennobling love which, without having the 
least fellowship with the impure, pities the fallen and 
longs for the time when they may be rescued from their 
degradation. The love which is worthy of our emulation 
is that which benevolently ignores personal antagonisms 
and animosities, and overleaping all selfish considerations 
and vengeful feelings, considers only the possibilities and 
the ways and means for peace and reformation and salvation. 

But the love of the world, the friendship of the world 
to which the Apostle refers, is the love of fellowship, 
which implies the partaking of its spirit— its aims, 
ambitions and hopes, and its methods of pursuing them. 
If any man love the world in this sense, surely the love 
of the Father is not in him. 

As children of God we have been called to a position 
of great favor and advantage. Our Heavenly Father has 
revealed to us his plans and purposes and has condescended 
to take us into his fellowship and active co-operation; 
and so grand and glorious and extensive is the outlook 
of the future that we are able to view the things of 
the present life in a vastly different light from that in 
which the world views them. 

So we are not to love the present order or arrangement, 

R4766 : page 57 

nor the things that are part and parcel of it, identified 



with it; but rather we are to love the Kingdom 
of God and its righteousness, for which we pray, "Thy 
Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth." We are to 
love the world only in the sense of having sympathy with 
it, as our Heavenly Father has, while we are unsympathetic 
with its arrangements. 

According to God's arrangement, we must take our 
choice between the Divine friendship and fellowship, and 
worldly friendship and fellowship. The things which the 
Lord loves are distasteful to the world; and the things 
which the worldly love— evil deeds and evil thoughts- 
are an abomination to the Lord, and those who love and 
practice such things must lose the fellowship of the Lord 
and his spirit, must go into the outer darkness of the 
world. 



R4766 : page 57 

THE LOVE TO BE DESIRED 

"Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the Truth through 
the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that 

ye love one another with a pure 

heart fervently."— 1 Peter 1:22. 

THE word "souls" in this text stands, as 
usual, for the being, and not merely for the 
physical being, which is included. The 
purifying, therefore, refers to a thorough 
cleansing of the heart (the mind, the will, 
the actuating intentions, or motives), as the 
effect of such purification will be manifest 
in the outward life and conduct. 

We purify our souls— that is, our souls 
are purified (have been purified if we are 
saints)— by obedience to the Truth through the spirit; 
that is to imply that it is necessary for us to know the 
Truth; not necessarily that we know all truth, but necessary 
for us to know the great truth on this subject— the 
truth that God condemned sin; to know the truth that the 
whole world of mankind came under this condemnation; 
to know the truth that God has provided a way of escape 
from the condemnation that is upon the world; to know 
the truth that there is but one particular way in which 
any can avail themselves of this Divine provision, 
namely, that of being justified by faith in Christ, and 
taking up the cross and following in his footsteps. When 
we presented ourselves in spirit and in truth, through 
faith, our sins were forgiven; we were accepted as New 
Creatures in Christ; our souls were purified; we were 
started in a new career. 

In our text the Apostle proceeds to say that, having 
had this glorious transformation of character, through 
the knowledge of and obedience to the spirit of the Truth, 



we have learned to love the brethren with an "unfeigned 
love," a love that is genuine, without pretence— not merely 
an outward profession, to have a smile upon the face or 
to give a cordial grasp of the hand, but that through this 
spirit we have recognized that all who trust in the 
precious blood and are consecrated to the dear Redeemer, 
and are seeking to follow his leadings, are "brethren," 
regardless of race or color or education or poverty or 
homeliness. We have reached the point where our hearts 
are so full of the Spirit of the Master that we can truthfully 
say we love all the brethren with a love which is 
sincere and not at all feigned. 

Now, having gotten along thus far in the good way, 
the Apostle shows us that there is yet an advance step 
of love, and states what next we must do in order 
to keep our hearts pure: "See that ye love one another 
with a pure heart fervently." We must not only regard 
them as brethren and give them "unfeigned love," but 
should recognize the principle underlying our relationship 
to the Lord and their relationship to the Lord; how 
they, like ourselves, are New Creatures in Christ; and 
this should give us great sympathy and a desire to do 
everything we can to encourage them, to help them. 

DISINTERESTED LOVE-STRONG AND INTENSE 

This love is different from the other love— brotherly 
love. It is disinterested love; so warm, so intense, that 
we should be willing to lay down our lives for the 
brethren. This love is the kind exemplified in our 
Heavenly Father. While we were yet sinners he loved 
us. So the love of Jesus is unselfish, pure, benevolent; a 
love which undertakes to do good for us for our own 
sakes, not from a hope of getting anything from us. 

The Apostle proceeds to say that we should not only 
have this love, but that we should have it with fervency, 
warmth, ardor; not with a semi-indifference, but with a 
real interest in each other's welfare— the rich as well as 
the poor; the educated as well as the ignorant. Our love 
should go out to these as we see any lack in them that 
we could supply— rendering assistance of any kind; using 
always, of course, discretion, for love learns to be wise, 
and to take into consideration our motives while we 
endeavor to do them good. 

The Apostle suggests that we see to it that this is our 
own experience; not merely that it is a principle which 
we recognize, but that we should give heed to ourselves 
that this should be accomplished in us, in our own lives. 
It would not be natural to have that benevolence of mind 
which would practise forgiveness of those who trespass 
against us. But when we think of the fact that the whole 
race is fallen and degraded through heredity, it should 
make us sympathetic; if some are more depraved, we 
should have the more sympathy for them. As we think 
sympathetically along those lines, our sympathetic love 
will increase; as we practise sympathetic love the New 



Creature develops. 

Our Lord Jesus says, "Love one another, as I have 
loved you." Set this standard before you. Our love for 
the brethren might, at first, be merely obedience in following 
this command; but as we follow on, obeying the 
Divine command, our love increases, our sympathy expands. 
The Apostle says we must see to it that we do 
not neglect this. If we fail to heed this admonition we 
are not of the kind that the Father is choosing; for the 
Apostle also tells us that he predestinated that all those 

R4767 : page 57 

who should be members of the Body of Christ should be 
copies of him; copies in having an unfeigned and fervent 
love. 

STRENGTH IN THE LORD PROPORTIONATE TO KNOWLEDGE 
OF HIM 

No one can grow strong in the Lord unless he grows 
also in knowledge. We properly esteem most highly 
those whose love for the Lord and for his Truth are 
evidenced by their zeal in the study of his Word, and 
whose favor with God is manifested by their being guided 
more into the deep things of God. 

Nevertheless, the weaker ones of the household of 
faith are to be cared for and loved and helped that they 
may grow strong in the Lord. And just here the Apostle 
offers another word of counsel, saying, "We, then, that 
are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and 
not to please ourselves." (Rom. 15:1.) This does 

R4767 : page 58 

not imply that we should not expostulate with such a 
one and endeavor to help him get rid of his infirmity. 
This we should do, in the spirit of meekness and kindness, 
while we endure with gentleness the trial of our 
patience, not seeking to please ourselves, but rather to 
help a weaker brother or sister. "Let every one of us," 
as the Apostle enjoins, "please his neighbor [brother] 
for his good, to edification"— i.e., not by simply ignoring 
his fault as though we considered it all right, but, while 
kindly urging him to strive against it, still humbly and 
patiently submitting to the discomfort it brings to us. 

If this spirit prevails among the members of the Lord's 
Body, the members will all have a mutual love and a 
mutual care one for another— a care which seeks to encourage 
and strengthen all that is good and to discourage 
all that is unbecoming, and a love which throws its mantle 
over a deformity and endeavors to conceal a fault, 
rather than to expose the weaker brother to the reproach 
of others. 

For such self-sacrificing love how necessary is the 
spirit of humility and gentleness and patience and faith! 



How forceful are the Master's words, "Except ye be converted 
[from the spirit of the world to the Spirit of 
Christ] and become as little children [in meekness and 
teachableness], ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of 
heaven. "--Matt. 18:1-6. 



R4767 : page 58 

CAN EVIL BEFALL THE NEW CREATURE? 

"There shall no evil befall thee." (Psa. 91:10.) "Pilate took 
Jesus and scourged him. ...They crucified him and two others 
with him; on either side one, and 
Jesus in the midst."— John 19:1,18. 

SUCH combination of Scripture, apparently 

contradictory, is quite a stumbling-block 

to worldly people; and some of those who 

have inclinations toward the Lord, but 

have not much knowledge of his Word and 

Plan, experience all kinds of trouble in a 

vain attempt to reconcile them. To these 

God's Word is apparently proven to be untrue. 

Only from the standpoint of faith 

can it be recognized as always true and 

harmonious. Yet the standpoint of faith may not always 

be exactly the same. We might use the word "thee" in the 

text, as applying to the Lord (the New Creature) and 

the members of the Body (the New Creatures) and consider 

that the flesh is the great enemy, the great opponent, 

to be gotten rid of. Or we might think of the flesh as 

their earthly tabernacle for the time, and take the matter 

in a more figurative way. 

We, however, prefer to consider the New Creature 
entirely apart from the flesh. "No evil shall befall thee." 
Applying this to our Lord, we see that no evil befell him 
as a New Creature. All the things that happened to him 
were necessary. Without these he could not have fulfilled 
the calling that was given him. Similarly we, as New 
Creatures, as his followers, could never have attained to 
this calling except by the crucifixion of the Lord. "Mortify, 
therefore, your members which are upon the earth." 
-Col. 3:5. 

Our Lord's followers have to some extent lost the 
esteem of their friends and neighbors; they have been 
counted as the offscouring of the earth. They have been 
tested in every possible manner. These things were 
necessary for them; therefore, they were not evil. 

"THE CAPTAIN OF THEIR SALVATION MADE PERFECT 
THROUGH SUFFERINGS" 

Our Lord asked, "Ought not Christ to have suffered 
these things and to enter into his glory?" (Luke 24:26.) 



To be fitted for the priestly office to which he was called, 
our Lord must be proved beyond all peradventure. His 
loyalty was put to the extremest test in the Garden of 
Gethsemane. Possibly he himself did not realize the 
strength of his righteous character until brought face to 
face with this last trial. There he was tried and proved to 
the uttermost, and under the trial his character— always 
perfect to the full measure of its testing— gained, by Divine 
grace, its glorious perfection of completeness. 

Thus, through suffering, he learned obedience to the 
perfect will of God, down to the lowest depths of self-abnegation; 
and God permitted it so to be, because such 
proving was necessary, both for the development and the 
manifestation of that perfection of character which would 
be worthy of the high exaltation to which he was called. 

And so we also must suffer if we would be footstep-followers 
of the Lamb. Character cannot be developed 
wholly without trial. It is like a plant; at first it is very 
tender; it needs an abundance of the sunshine of God's 
love; frequent watering with the showers of his grace; 
much cultivating through the applied knowledge of his 
character, as a foundation for faith and an inspiration to 
obedience. Then, when thus developed under these favorable 
conditions, it is ready for the pruning hand of discipline, 
and is also able to endure some hardness. And 
little by little, as strength of character is developed, the 
tests applied to it serve only to develop more strength, 
more beauty, more grace, until it is finally fixed, developed, 
established, perfected through suffering. Thus 
we learn to realize that "All things work together for 
good. ..to the called according to his purpose," to those 
who are to be members of his Body.— Rom. 8:28. 

DELIVERED OVER TO THE ADVERSARY FOR THE 
DESTRUCTION OF THE FLESH 

But some one may ask, "We see how these experiences 
of life are working out good for the New Creature; but 
is there no way in which experiences could work out evil 
things that would be bad for them?" 

We are to recognize that there are two classes of 
spirit-begotten ones, and that our text has reference to 
only one class of these. There is the Body of Christ, 
representing the priestly order, the antitypical Melchisedec 
—Jesus the Head and the Church his Body. They have 
kept nothing back of their love and devotion; things may 
happen disastrous to their fleshly interests; but they remember 
that they are "not in the flesh, but in the spirit," 
and realize that no outside influence can mar their real interest 
as New Creatures, nor hinder them, if faithful, 
from attaining to the glories of the Kingdom with their 
Lord and Head. They have entered into the holiest by 
the blood of Jesus, and do not withdraw; they "abide in 
the secret place of the Most High"; they will continue 
unto the very end. It is to this class, and to all the 
things that may befall them, that the assurance is given 



—"There shall no evil befall thee." 

As for the other of the two classes— the "Great Company" 
—some evils do befall them. They will be put 
into great tribulation. It was an evil on their part that 
they neglected the Lord's Word and the privileges of the 
"high calling." This coolness brought them into a condition 
which must be made right. They loved "father 
or mother or houses or lands," or something else, to such 

R4767 : page 59 

an extent that they failed to keep their covenant of 
sacrifice, and will be accounted unworthy of a share in 
the Kingdom, and will, instead, be subjected to the great 
time of trouble— "the day of wrath." It will be necessary 
that these evils come upon them to bring destruction of 
the flesh. 



R4767 : page 59 

A HOLY NATION PICTURED 

-MARCH 26.- 

"Happy the people that fare thus! Happy the 
people whose God is Jehovah."— Psalm 144:15. 

AT the time God accepted Israel to be his people 

he entered into a Covenant or agreement 

with them. He gave them the Law, represented 

in the Ten Commandments, as the 

basis of the Covenant which Moses mediated. 

Israel agreed to be faithful to God, 

and to keep those commandments perfectly. 

And God agreed that in that event he 

would bless them. They should be his 

people and by doing the things contained in 

the Law should live everlastingly— not die. Not only so, 

but he promised to bless them in all the temporal affairs 

R4768 : page 59 

of life; in their homes, in their families, in their flocks 
and herds and fields they should be prospered. 

Israel failed to get these blessings, for the same reason 
that any other people would have failed; namely, because 
God's Law is perfect, the measure of a perfect 
man's ability: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, mind, being and strength; and thou shalt 
love thy neighbor as thyself." Hence, the Israelites continued 
to die, as their fathers had done, and as all mankind 
die— not being able to keep the Divine Law perfectly. 
For the same reason Israel experienced wars, 
famines, pestilences and drouths, in proportion as they 



were negligent of the terms of their Covenant- 
Lev. 26:14-33. 

HAPPY IS THAT PEOPLE 

In our lesson the Prophet David pictures the holy, 
happy, blessed nation of the Lord. It is a picture of the 
future and not of the past. It is an ideal picture. It 
will be realized when Messiah's Kingdom shall have 
been established amongst men— when Satan's power 
shall be restrained, when he shall be bound, when the 
blessings of Restitution shall have uplifted mankind from 
sin and degradation and shall have brought them back 
to the image and likeness of God lost in Eden, but re-acquired 
for our race through the sacrifice of our Lord on 
Calvary. 

But that happy nation will acquire, additionally, a 
happy home and world-wide Paradise. Even human perfection 
would not bring happiness if cyclones, tornadoes, 
blizzards, tidal waves, earthquakes, famines and pestilences 
continued. Thank God, the Bible's assurances 
are that the blessing of the Lord shall be, not only upon 
mankind, but upon all their earthly home. The earth 
shall yield her increase. The wilderness and the solitary 
place shall be glad and blossom as the rose. The 
Lord will make his footstool glorious.— Acts 3:19-21; 
Isa. 11:9; 65:25; Ezek. 37; Isa. 35:1; 60:13. 

PARTICULARS GIVEN BY THE PROPHET 

Incidental to the blessed condition of the holy nation 
of the future, the Prophet mentions a deliverance from 
strange children: "Rid me and deliver me from the 
hands of strange children, whose mouth speaketh vanity, 
and whose right hand is the right hand of falsehood."— 
Psa. 144:11. 

In the Church of the present Age there are some 
whom the Apostle styles "bastards," or strange children. 
All may make the same profession and confession, but 
"the Lord knoweth them that are his," and in his due 
time shall separate the false or strange children from 
the true and will glorify the saintly ones as members of 
the great Messiah, the Christ. Then will come the time 
for dealing with humanity in general— the time described 
in our text, when humanity in general, under the Messianic 
Kingdom, will be privileged to become the holy 
and happy people of God— when Satan and sin will be 
banished and righteousness and Truth will flourish and 
the knowledge of the glory of the Lord will fill the whole 
earth. 

The great Messiah undertakes to be the world's Life-Giver, 
Father, Regenerator. All mankind will be awakened 
from the tomb and have the opportunity for regeneration 
and full attainment of human perfection and 
God-likeness. However, for quite a time there will be 
strange children amongst men— those who will experience 



the blessings of that glorious time without giving 
proper heart responses. Not until the world shall have 
been rid of these, by their dying the Second Death, will 
the fullness of happiness prevail amongst the children of 
men. With the wrong spirit they utter vanity, foolishness, 
and their right hand, their best powers, prove disloyal 
to the King of kings, of whom King David was 
merely a type. 

"TIMES OF REFRESHING SHALL COME, AND HE SHALL 
SEND JESUS CHRIST" 

"Then your sons will be like plants, grown up in their 
youth; your daughters like corner-pillars sculptured in 
the model of a palace." The grace and beauty of the 
children of Messiah, partakers of human Restitution 
blessings (Acts 3:19-21), will be marvelous. They will 
attain to more than Adamic perfection, for they will 
have an increase of knowledge. 

Then the garners will be full, furnishing all manner 
of provisions. Then your sheep will bring forth thousands 
and tens of thousands in your open pastures. The 
earth shall yield her increase under the blessings of 
Messiah's Kingdom. 

Then the oxen will be strong to labor. Then there 
shall be no breach— no rupture of the happy relationships. 
Even death will be destroyed. 

Then there will be no migration— no further seeking 
for better or more happifying conditions. Then there 
will be no complaining in our streets. Discontent is now 
rapidly increasing with every added blessing of our 
wonderful day. The difficulty lies in the fact that sin 
and selfishness are reigning in the hearts and minds of 
men. Under the wonderfully changed conditions of Messiah's 
Kingdom, peace, happiness, contentment will take 
the place of selfishness and discontent. 

No wonder the Prophet declares that happy will be the 
people who fare thus— happy are the people whose God 
is Jehovah. We need to correct our ideas, our theologies. 
God does not acknowledge himself the God of the 
wicked and he declines to treat evil-doers except as 
rebels, aliens, foreigners, strangers, as respects his promises 
and favors. Our entire race was originally thus 
estranged. But Divine grace provided a "Savior and a 
great One." This Savior is already reconciling a saintly, 

R4768 : page 60 

faithful Church, who will be his associates in the Heavenly 
Kingdom. Shortly he will apply of the merit of his 
sacrifice on behalf of all mankind. 

The Scriptures assure us that this will be fully acceptable 
to the Heavenly Father, who will enter into a New 
Covenant with Israel, of which Messiah will be the 
great Mediator, the antitype of Moses. (Jer. 31:31.) 
Under that New Covenant all mankind will be privileged 



and assisted to come back to Divine favor under the 
processes of Restitution, in connection with the judgments 
and disciplines of that Messianic Kingdom. The 
result of the thousand years of that reign of righteousness 
will be the development of mankind as one holy 
nation or people, whose happiness will be complete and 
everlasting. There shall be no more sighing, no more 
crying, no more dying; for all the former things shall 
have passed away, and he upon the Throne shall have 
made all things new.— Rev. 21:1-5. 



R4768 : page 60 

GENERAL NAAMAN'S LEPROSY CURED 
THE PLAGUE TRANSFERRED TO A HEBREW GRAFTER, GEHAZI 

-2 KINGS 5:1-14.-APRIL 2.- 

"Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth; 
for I am God, and there is none else."— Isaiah 45:22. 

GENERAL NAAMAN, of the army of Syria, 

on the northern border of the land of Israel, 

was a sick man. He had the loathsome infection 

and incurable disease called leprosy. 

Wealth, influence at Court, life's abundance 

and honors could not offset this terrible 

plague upon his life. The study of today 

tells of his miraculous healing by the 

Prophet Elisha. In Naaman's household 

was a young girl who had been captured 

from the Israelites and was a slave, although doubtless 

well treated. The maid remembered the Prophet Elisha 

and how wonderfully Divine power, through him, had 

healed diseases. Instead of rejoicing that her captor and 

master was suffering, she sympathetically inquired why 

he did not go to the Prophet, who, she felt sure, would be 

glad to pray for him and heal him. 

Although it seemed like catching at a straw Naaman 
followed up the suggestion; he got a letter from his King 
to the King of Israel and presented himself to the latter, 
requesting healing by Israel's great Prophet, of whom he 
had heard. The King was astonished. He knew leprosy 
to be incurable. Apparently he knew little about Elisha's 
powers. He surmised that the King of Syria was intent 
upon picking a quarrel as an excuse for sending an invading 
army to pillage his kingdom. Eventually, however, 
Naaman was directed to Elisha's place of residence, 
at a distance from the King's Court. 

Here again there was difficulty. Naaman expected 
great consideration for his rank— that the Prophet would 
make gestures over him and pray; perhaps offer sacrifice 
and incense, and, possibly, after a great ado, he might 



be healed. But instead of this, Elisha, without coming 
to see him at all, merely sent word by his servant that 
the General should go to the river Jordan and there wash 
seven times. 

Naaman was angry. He had come several days' journey 
with servants and costly presents hoping for healing, 
and he was turned away like a dog with a bone. He 
fumed as his chariot drove on: Have we not better rivers 
in Syria than this river Jordan, which is always muddy? 
It is not bathing that I need! 

However, a message of wisdom came to him from his 
servants, who suggested that he try the Prophet's prescription; 
that the fact that it was simple and easy of 
performance should not cause the General to reject the 
proposal. Although fearful that no good would come 
from the washing, and that he would be made the laughing-stock 

R4769 : page 60 

of his own servants, his own people and the 
Israelites, he concluded, nevertheless, to follow the 
Prophet's direction. He bathed seven times in Jordan 
and his leprosy was healed thoroughly. 

LEPROSY A FIGURE OF SIN 

In many respects leprosy corresponds to sin; first, it 
is incurable; secondly, it is loathsome; thirdly, it is contagious; 
fourthly, it is destructive; fifthly, it is painless. 

As only Divine power could heal the leper, only the 
same can heal the sinner. As the maid could call attention 
to the Prophet, and the Prophet prescribe the remedy, 
and the servants exhort compliance, so all those who know 
of a Divine power and arrangement for the healing of 
sinners may tell the good tidings, even to their enemies. 
The ministers or prophets of the Divine Word may direct 
as to the proper way to obtain Divine forgiveness and 
restoration, and others may help to impress the lesson; 
yet no recovery can be made except as the individual himself 
follows the Divine prescription, exercising both faith 
and obedience. 

The number seven in the Bible is used to represent 
completeness; hence the seven washings in Jordan would 
signify a complete cleansing, washing. The poet has 
beautifully referred to this and pictured the cleansing, 
healing Fountain into which by faith sinners may 
plunge:— 

"There is a Fountain filled with blood, 
Drawn from Immanuel's veins, 
And sinners plunged beneath that flood 
Lose all their guilty stains." 

It is by faith that we may now wash ourselves completely 
in the blood of Christ; by faith we may realize 
that the sacrifice of Christ was for the sins of the whole 
world, and may appropriate our share thereof. 



GEHAZI, THE GRAFTER, A LEPER 

Gratitude is one of the most worthy sentiments of 
the human mind. General Naaman's nobility was manifested 
in the fact that, after being healed, he retraced 
his journey nearly forty miles, in order to thank the 
Prophet for his recovery and to bestow upon him gifts 
which he had brought. We may assume that if he had 
not been noble-minded, God would not have provided 
for him this healing. "The generous soul shall be made 
fat." 

To the General's surprise the Prophet declined to take 
anything. The gifts of God's grace are not to be bartered 
for earthly good things. How fortunate it would be, 
and how much to the Lord's glory, if all of God's people 
would emulate Elisha in this respect! But Gehazi, Elisha's 
servant, had a different spirit. As he saw the wealth 
rolling away he thought the Prophet foolish and determined 
to get something by a process of "graft." 

When the chariot was out of sight he hastened and 
hailed it and told the General that although his master 
would take nothing of the things offered for himself, he 
would willingly accept some of the garments for the 
young men of the School of the Prophets. The General 

R4769 : page 61 

very promptly and gladly assented and gave more than 
was requested. But God through the Prophet punished 
the perfidy of Gehazi. He took Naaman's presents; he 
got, also, Naaman's leprosy. 

NAAMAN NOT SAVED--GEHAZI NOT LOST 

Many have erroneously assumed, in connection with 
this lesson, that Naaman was saved to heaven and Gehazi 
lost. Both conclusions are unscriptural. Naaman was 
saved to health and Gehazi lost his health. But the eternal 
interests of neither were settled. 

Not until Cornelius' day, three and a half years after 
the Cross, did any Gentile come into any kind of relationship 
with God. Previous to that, from the time of Moses, 
only the Jewish nation had recognition. "You only have 
I known of all the families of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) 
And God's favor to Israel was merely an earthly and 
preparatory one. No one gained eternal life prior to the 
Redeemer's sacrifice. Thus the Scriptures declare that 
Christ "brought life and immortality to light through the 
Gospel"; again, "So great salvation which began to be 
declared by our Lord." 

Since Jesus' day immortality has been brought to light 
—the offer of "glory, honor and immortality" to the 
saintly followers of Jesus' footsteps who, as the "very 
elect," will be the Royal Priesthood through whom earthly 
Restitution blessings will be opened up to natural Israel 
and, through Israel, to all nations during Messiah's reign 



of glory. 

R4769 : page 61 

SURROUNDED BY HEAVENLY HOSTS 

-2 KINGS 6:8-23.-APRIL 9.- 

"He shall give his angels charge over thee to 
keep thee in all thy ways."— Psalm 91:11. 

WHEN war was declared by Syria against 
Israel the invaders sought to gain an entrance 
into Israel's army in the mountain 
passes, but God through the Prophet Elisha 
forewarned the Israelites. When this had 
happened several times the Syrian king concluded 
that there were traitors amongst his 
counsellors, but was answered, No! the 
Prophet Elisha surely warns Israel's king 
of anything that you plan secretly. 

Learning that the Prophet was living at Dothan, near 
the Syrian border, the king sent a detachment of soldiers 
to capture him. They came by night. Elisha's servant, 
arising early, saw that the little city was surrounded. He 
ran to his master in fear, but the latter, unperturbed, answered, 
Fear not; for they that be with us are more 
than they that be with them. These words sounded 
strangely untrue to the servant, until the Prophet prayed 
for him an opening of eyes, which revealed a vision of 
angels, chariots and horses, with the appearance of fire. 

The lesson to us is that whoever are God's servants, 
and wherever they may be, Divine power, like a mighty 
army, surrounds them. Modern inventions and discoveries 
are more and more revealing to us secrets of nature and 
hinting at far more beyond. Whoever has knowledge of 
wireless telegraphy, X-rays, radium, etc., can readily believe 
that the Almighty God may have thousands of 
agencies and powers invisible to men whereby he can 
work all things according to the counsel of his own will. 

"THE ANGEL OF THE LORD ENCAMPETH ROUND ABOUT 
THEM THAT FEAR HIM AND DELIVERETH THEM" 

Angels are beings of a grade a little higher than man 
—beings with spirit bodies instead of flesh bodies. "Thou 
madest man a little lower than the angels." The Scriptures 
declare that the angels are sent forth to minister to 
or serve all those who are heirs of salvation. They encamp 
around about God's servants in the sense that Divine 
agency and power are everywhere and ready at any instant 
to be exercised as much as need be for the accomplishment 
of God's will. The same God who willed that 
Elijah should flee before Jezebel arranged that Elisha 



should be specially protected. But we are to remember 
that only those who are in covenant relationship with 
God are under this special watch-care and protection. 

We are to remember also that there are fallen angels, 
called "wicked spirits," and that these are on the alert 
to entrap and ensnare humanity through spirit mediums, 
spirit rappings, tippings, clairvoyants, ouija-boards, etc. 
God's people are warned against these, and they in turn 
should warn the world of the great danger resulting from 
any association with these fallen angels, who misrepresent 
themselves to be our dead friends. 

Many are being misled by these evil spirits. They 
have introduced various false doctrines and continually 
seek to entrap the human will and, if possible, to gain 
control over it— through obsession. Curiosity is one of 
the main baits to the hook of spiritism. 

Spiritists, including mediums, are being deceived. 
They think that they converse with the dead. They will 
indeed acknowledge that there are "wicked spirits," "lying 
spirits," as the Bible says; but they do not acknowledge 
that they are all wicked. The fact is that they have only 
partially realized the depth of Satan's power and deceit 
in this direction. The Bible indicates that shortly, in the 
ending of this Age, there will be a great time of trouble, 
which, to a considerable degree, will be brought about by 
these evil spirits. It is the duty of those who know to 
warn those who understand not the situation. 

FROM DOTHAN TO SAMARIA 

When the Syrian army corps drew near to Dothan, 
Elisha with his servant went out to meet them, praying 
that God would blind them. They were not blinded literally, 
but, as it were, hypnotized. Doubtless there is a 
hypnotic power, but as it interferes with the wills of 
others, none of God's people should have anything to do 
with it, unless, as in Elisha's case, specially commissioned 
of God. Elisha met the guard and told them that he knew 
the man they were seeking and that he would lead them 
to him in another city, if they would follow him. He did 
lead them several miles, right into the capital city of 
Samaria. There, surrounded by Israel's men of war, with 
the king at their head, Elisha again prayed and the hypnotic 

R4770 : page 61 

spell dissolved, and they beheld themselves prisoners 
and that the Prophet had fooled them. At Elisha's 
suggestion the King made them a feast and sent them on 
their way back to Syria. The effect of this treatment 
was that for a long time, at least, there were no further 
incursions into Palestine from Syria. 

The King's suggestion was that the King of Syria 
should be killed. But the Prophet in reply said, If you 
had captured them in war at the risk of your life, you 
would not kill them. Now, seeing that God's providence 



has placed them where they are, consider them as your 
guests and treat them kindly. How many enemies could 
be won by kind treatment, who would be made bitter by 
what might even be termed just treatment! After all, 

R4770 : page 62 

love is the great conquering power of the world— love is 
the greatest thing in the world. It is the "love Divine, 
all love excelling," which constrains or draws us to God. 

COMPARATIVELY FEW HAVE YET LEARNED OF GOD'S 
LOVE 

Only God's consecrated people have yet learned of his 
love, and they very imperfectly. The tactics of Satan 
and his demon hosts for centuries has been to blind the 
whole world and, as much as possible, God's people respecting 
his true character. By misrepresentations of the 
Scriptures and some interpolations and some mistranslations 
they have succeeded to a wonderful degree in putting 
light for darkness and darkness for light. This is 
shown in the creeds of all denominations— some in a 
greater and some in a less degree. 

A century or more ago, when the creeds were believed 
more fully than today, the effect was terribly demoralizing. 
Good men and women, under the delusions of those creeds, 
tortured one another, often to death, with thumb-screws, 
racks, burning-irons, the stake, etc. Their hearts were 
not so much worse, perhaps, than ours; but their heads 
were more deluded. Believing thoroughly in the doctrine 
of eternal torment, etc., they sought to copy this misconception 
of the Divine character and dealing. 

More and more let us see, realize, appreciate, the love 
of God which passeth all understanding. More and more 
let us appreciate the length and breadth and height and 
depth of this love of God. Let us get the proper focus 
upon the Divine Word. Let us obtain the reading of the 
most ancient manuscripts. Let us secure the best translations, 
that we may not be deceived, but understandingly 
appreciate the love of God in full co-operation with his 
Justice, Wisdom and Power— all co-operating now for 
the blessing of the saints with heavenly salvation, as it 
will by and by bless all the world of mankind, through 
this Seed of Abraham. -Gal. 3:29. 



R4771 : page 62 

DIVINE LOVE'S CONSUMMATION 

Beholding heaven's starry blue, 
I said, "Dear Lord, I will be true; 
Thy will shall be my chief delight, 
Clothe me in robe of spotless white." 



As I His glorious realm behold, 
He beckons me with crown of gold. 

"Lord, this is all my heart's desire- 
That I may join the heavenly choir 
And sing Thy praises evermore, 
Whom angels worship and adore. 
O guide me to my Father's home, 
To sit with Thee upon Thy throne." 

"My child wouldst thou this honor gain? 
The way is narrow, full of pain, 
For he, who shares the throne with me 
Must pass through dark Gethsemane; 
Must often suffer scorn and loss; 
With patience daily bear his cross." 

"Yea, gladly Lord, yet not alone, 
Since Thou wilt not forsake Thine own 
With open face beholding Thee 
As in a glass, O let me be 
Changed into glory like to Thine 
Until I in Thine imagine shine." 

Transcending joy! He speaks to bless 
In tones of loving tenderness ! 
"As sweet incense thy prayers arise, 
Thy God accepts thy sacrifice, 
Though thou art in the furnace proved, 
I'll ne'er forsake, nor cease to love. 

"Though hard the way and tempest riven, 
Meat in due season will be given; 
Thy faith and courage thus sustained 
Press forward till the goal is gained, 
As temple stones both true and tried, 
Thy Father loves and owns my Bride." 

love divine! Amazing grace! 

1 shall behold Him face to face. 
Lean on thy well beloved's arm, 

My heart, He'll keep thee from all harm, 

Bow down in adoration sweet; 

Be for the heavenly throng made meet. 

"Thy Kingdom come, the earth to bless 
With healing, truth, and righteousness, 
'Till quick and dead sin-cleansed shall be, 
Death swallowed up in victory; 
And joyful anthems rend the skies— 
The earth restored to paradise. 

ETTA C. SCHAFER. 



R4770 : page 62 



WHAT "CORRUPT COMMUNICATION" SIGNIFIES 

"Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth; 
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may 
minister grace unto the hearers."— Eph. 4:29. 

CORRUPT communication is the spreading of 

evil report or message instead of good. 

Our text might be understood to mean 

a corrupting communication according 

to the course of ordinary conversation. 

Our minds might get us into all kinds of 

difficulty with ourselves and with others, if 

we did not keep a rein upon them and hold 

them within certain bounds; but our 

tongues might do even more injury than 

our minds. What we may think injures only ourselves; 

but if our tongues come into the matter, not only are our 

own minds defiled, but there is contagion, there is rancor; 

for the tongue spreads the matter all around. And 

whether the matter be true or false, the influence is corrupting, 

degrading, tending, perhaps, at times even toward 

immorality. 

It would appear that not only amongst the worldly, but 
amongst the Lord's people there is a tendency to relate 
little incidents or make little remarks which, while not 
necessarily sinful, tend to cause sprouts of evil to develop. 
It is along this line that the Apostle says we 
should let no corrupt communication proceed out of our 
mouth. If, by any mischance, any corrupting information 
has come to our attention, we should see to it that it 
goes no further. We have sometimes wondered whether 
it is the quality of the natural mind to use the tongue 
to the disadvantage of others, or whether evil spirits 
have something to do with it. 

Let us, as the Apostle enjoins, drop evil communications; 
shun them, and hold fast only to that which is 
edifying— the word "edifying" having in it the thought 
of an edifice, a building, the up-building of each other. 

BROAD SCOPE FOR CONVERSATION ON RICHES OF GOD'S 
GRACE 

But some, even of those who profess to love the Lord 
and to be trying to walk in his footsteps, will say, "I 
never speak anything but the truth; and I mean no harm 
to anybody; but I must have something to talk about 

R4770 : page 63 

when my neighbors come in, and many of them would 
think me tiresome if I should try to interest them in religious 
matters." But it is evil speaking, slander all the 
same, and the scandal-monger, however refined his 
methods or words, well knows that so far from the 



scandal ministering grace to the hearer, it ministers 
evil; that the hearer, impelled by the forces of his fallen 
human nature, goes out to tell the scandal to others. The 
fallen nature feasts and revels in just such things, deluding 
many that they are thus moralizing, preaching 
against sin, and that in thus discussing and impliedly 
denouncing the transgressions of another, they are mentioning 
matters abhorrent to themselves. Alas! their 
reasoning is seriously defective when the Lord's counsels 
in righteousness are ignored. 

There is surely broad scope for conversation among 
Christian people on the subject of the riches of God's 
grace in Christ Jesus our Lord, expressed in the exceeding 
great and precious promises of the Divine Word. In 
these things we have indeed that which not only ministers 
grace to the hearer, but that which adds also to the grace 
of the speaker. It showers blessing on every hand so 
far as the New Creature is concerned, and assists in 
deadening the old nature with its evil desires, tastes and 
appetites. 

This, evidently, is what the Apostle had in mind when 
he said that the Lord's people should "show forth the 
praises of him who called us out of darkness, into his 
marvelous light." And a heart filled with the spirit of 
love, the spirit of God, the spirit of the Truth, and overflowing 
with the same will be sure to bestow it upon 
others; for, "Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth 
speaketh"; "Blessed are the pure in heart."— I Peter 2:9; 
Matt. 12:34; 5:8. 



R4770 : page 63 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have greatly enjoyed the past two weeks in the blessed 
service. None can know the blessedness of the Harvest 
work but those who are doing their little all in co-laboring 
with the Chief Reaper. 

None can understand your faithful course of self-sacrifice 
but those who, like yourself, are seeking the Lord's sweet 
approval day by day. Even as none but Abraham and Isaac 
could appreciate what the sufferings of Isaac meant, so only 
our Father and "we, brethren, as Isaac was," can appreciate 
what the "sufferings of Christ" are. 

Be assured of my Christian love and prayers for you and 
the work the Chief Reaper has entrusted to your willing 
hands. Many, many friends along the way desire to be 
remembered to you, and send words of confidence in your 
labor of love. 

Brother Rutherford suggested DAWN-STUDIES and Berean 
lessons to take the place of discourses. This surely is a wise 
procedure in many classes, even where they might have talent 
for speaking. 



I would like, however, if more could be done to awaken 
thought in the importance of testimony meetings. Many 
classes have not even talent for leading Berean studies (at 
least they think they have not the talent), and I think where 
only one meeting can be held, the testimony meeting, up-to-date, 
considering the past week's experiences, would be the 
best meeting possible. 

I have been hoping that at some time you would consider 
it profitable to advance this specially in the TOWER and suggest 
a subject for each week's meditation and for testimonies 
(each Wednesday night); or, possibly, that the MANNA 
verse and comment for Wednesday be read in advance at the 
previous testimony meeting and be considered as the subject 
for the following week.* 

The classes which I have visited and which have Wednesday 
evening testimony meetings seem to be more up-to-date in 
both knowledge and spirituality. 

God bless you, my dear Brother. Much love to you. 
BROTHER SAPHORE. 



*Some of the friends follow the plan of using Brother Russell's 
sermon text of the week, which the majority of them get through the 
newspapers. 

R4771 : page 63 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am still rejoicing in the "feast of fat things" which our 
gracious Lord is constantly spreading before us. 

Your recent relation of the various experiences had with 
our Jewish friends and how they are reaching out for more 
and more about the Messiah and his Kingdom, brought me 
back in mind to the days of John the Baptist, when he 
announced the Messiah, etc. 

In connection with this, in looking up what you had written 
about Enoch and Elijah, I read in TOWER No. 9, 1898, 
about Elijah's career, and then in Vol. 2, p. 254, to conclusion 
of chapter. You speak of the Elisha class not expecting to 
be glorified. Could this class be the Jews who are now 
becoming interested? 

A further thought, or rather, finding— 2 Kings 2:9: Elisha 
prays for a double portion. Marginal rendering is, "The 
portion of the first-born." 

My recent experiences and the reading of the above, and 
particularly the chapter on "Elijah shall first come," have 
energized me to renewed zeal and vigor to press on to the 
battle of the Lord. 

Our prayers go up in your behalf, dear Brother, that grace 
and strength and wisdom from on high be your portion sufficient 
for every time of need, until your work is finished and 
you have heard the Master's "Well done." 

Yours in him, E. W. V. KUEHN. 



DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL: 

I feel that I must write you a word of thanks for the 
greatest blessing I have received in my life. I need not go 
into details, for the seventy-third Psalm exactly covers my 
experience; and I feel that in allowing me to read "The 
Divine Plan," God indeed took me into his sanctuary. 

Oh, wonderful patience! When I look back I can hardly 
believe it— he took such infinite pains just to show me his 
love! 

Last year, after many tribulations, stretching over a decade, 
I said to myself, Well, it may be all right; but if I'm not 
to grow utterly bad and bitter I must have a little prosperity. 
I can't bear this incessant going wrong any longer. (My 
principal temptation was that I wanted my children to have 
a good time.) 

Well, the prosperity didn't come— but your book did. It 
took some mental compulsion to read it, too. I couldn't 
really afford the set of STUDIES at the time I ordered them, 
and was cross, though much interested. So I put them on 
the shelf and never looked at them for months, till one day 
I had nothing to do and nothing to read, and took them down. 

I can only say they utterly changed the world for me and 
my family. We were sick of churches— we had been served 
so many mean tricks by "Pillars." 

I have sent out copies of the Plan (five-cent edition) to 
all of my friends and hope they will benefit, as I have done. 
I am longing for the other three STUDIES, and hope to send 
for them next month. We enjoy THE WATCH TOWER so 
much. Always wishing to be up-to-date in my reading I feel 
that I am so more than ever now. 

My husband has told many men about the book. He finds 
the poor love to hear about it, but the rich will have none 
of it. One old man said it was what he had been waiting 
for all his life. He knew his Bible nearly by heart and said 
the "Plan" was just what it seemed to say to him. 

Indeed, I can say your book has answered the "Why?" 
I have been asking ever since I was sixteen years old. When 
I had read it my little daughter (eight years old) asked me 
a question and I sat on the floor beside her and told her all 
about it. 

When I had finished she looked at me with tears in her 
eyes and said, "Oh, mamma, isn't God good! It makes me 
cry to think of it." And yesterday she said, "If there were 
any poor people here I would just take my two dollars and 
give it to them"— all she has— and she's been saving it to 
buy a doll. 

I believe she truly tries to "do as she'd be done by"; so 
isn't it possible that she might be of the Kingdom, notwithstanding 
her youth? She has told all her little friends about 
the Plan. 

With many, many thanks for the help you have given me 
and mine, 

Yours sincerely, ELEANOR I. CHILDE. 



page 66 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 750 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 65 



SEMI-MONTHLY 