A Notable Annual Meeting
AS THE global economic situation worsens, the annual meetings of many business corporations are anything but happy. Regarding the meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank held in Toronto, Maclean’s magazine said: “Hope was the rarest commodity of all at the annual meetings.”
Yet, a different sort of annual meeting recently took place. All its sessions reflected the Christian hope, brought true joy to those attending and built up brotherly love. The fruits of God’s spirit were easily seen at this gathering.​—Galatians 5:22, 23; 1 Corinthians 13:13.
On Saturday, October 2, 1982, for the first time in its 98-year history, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania held its annual corporate meeting outside the United States of America. On that milestone date 119 members of the corporation (the legal agency used by Jehovah’s Witnesses) and more than 2,000 other people met at the Assembly Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses near Toronto, Canada.
It was also noteworthy that most of the members of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses were able to attend. Their presence added to the specialness of the occasion for it opened up a unique opportunity for them and others. In what way?
Well, at the suggestion of the Canada branch, local elders in congregations across the country indicated to the branch those who had been in the field of Kingdom preaching for many years. These were the logical ones to be invited by the Society to attend, as an expression of love toward them as well as some recognition for their years of faithfulness.
Thus, about 1,800 old-timers (many with 40 and more years of service) from every province of Canada were on hand and could get acquainted with one another. Though they had been “God’s fellow workers” together in the field for decades, most had never met one another before.​—1 Corinthians 3:9.
Friday’s Sessions
The greater number of the old-timers had not seen the new branch facilities in Canada, so Friday morning and early afternoon of October 1 were set aside for self-conducted tours. The visitors also enjoyed a noon meal in the dining room. Later, buses took them to the Assembly Hall for their evening meal and the Friday night program. This included a separate annual meeting, that of the International Bible Students Association of Canada, the Canadian corporation used by Jehovah’s Witnesses. After that brief business meeting of the 20 corporation members, the general audience listened to three talks.
The first gave the history of the Canadian IBSA from its incorporation in 1925 and showed that the Kingdom preaching was the purpose for which it was formed. Then, L. K. Greenlees of the Governing Body spoke on Christians’ being no part of the world, which involves our view of how we use the world, its educational system, its wealth and luxuries. Finally, F. W. Franz, as president of the Canadian corporation, presented an encouraging talk on the Greater Cyrus, Jesus Christ, as the Shepherd–Liberator of God’s people. Basing his remarks on Isaiah 44 and 45, Brother Franz encouraged all to keep together as one flock under the one Shepherd over all the world.
Saturday’s Sessions
Saturday’s program began with prayer and timely instruction on a Bible text, followed by some experiences.
Next, the business meeting of the Watch Tower Society got under way. The secretary reported that there are now 464 voting members of the corporation and that 455 members were present in person or by proxy, enough to proceed with voting for the next term of office of two of the Society’s directors. Grant Suiter and J. E. Barr were unanimously reelected.
The secretary also announced that the Canadian Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs had, on July 22, 1982, approved a new Canadian corporation for Jehovah’s Witnesses called the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Canada. This will end some of the confusion created when the IBSA name is used in dealings with the public. The new corporation will have a membership of up to 100, with 7 directors on its board.
Brother Franz then made some appropriate remarks on “organization.” He showed that our being a comparatively small group does not mean that Jehovah would not use such as his organization. One should not ‘despise the day of small things.’ (Zechariah 4:10) Natural Israel started out small, as did spiritual Israel, the latter with only about 120 at first.​—Deuteronomy 7:7; Acts 1:15; 2:1-4.
In the afternoon, with Lloyd Barry acting as chairman, a program of four talks was presented. Karl Klein explained that sowing bountifully so as to reap bountifully applies to all intelligent beings, including Jehovah, and it proves true in all aspects of a Christian’s life. (2 Corinthians 9:6) A. D. Schroeder showed how Jehovah’s organization has been advancing in Bible education while the world suffers fear and hopelessness. L. A. Swingle reviewed the worldwide expansion of Jehovah’s Witnesses, from 3,868 publishers in 1918 to the more than 2,300,000 today. He explained that the potential for growth can be seen in reports, such as that of Ecuador’s 14-percent increase last year and Mexico’s attendance of over 536,000 at the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal. Theodore Jaracz urged his listeners to “concentrate on speeding up the Kingdom work.”​—2 Thessalonians 3:1.
Near the close of the meeting Brother F. W. Franz announced that next year’s annual meeting will be held in England. The applause that followed indicated hearty approval by the attenders of the idea that this annual occasion of joy and Christian fellowship could be shared with brothers in other lands.
Thus ended two glorious days of faith-strengthening fellowship. “To be present when members of the Governing Body speak to us is indeed memorable and spiritually beneficial,” said one longtime Kingdom publisher. Adding to the happy event were the 128 brothers who came from Brooklyn Bethel and the 28 from Watchtower Farms. Twelve North American locations were tied in by wire, one as far away as California. This brought the total attendance to 4,059 people, including 70 French-speaking brothers at the Assembly Hall who enjoyed simultaneous translation of the program.
All attending had to agree with Brother Franz when he said at the close of the first day: “What a refreshing day this has been for all of us​—to have this association!” No less could be said about the second day. Much planning and work had gone into the preparations, but Jehovah had blessed these endeavors.
Those privileged to attend went home greatly encouraged and refreshed by the association they had enjoyed with friends old and new. For many it was their first, but for all it was a most notable annual meeting.
[Picture on page 11]
The Watch Tower Society’s president and secretary share in the voting along with other members

