The Worst of Times, Yet the Best of Times
CHARLES DICKENS opened his historical novel A Tale of Two Cities, about the French Revolution, with the description: “It was the best of times, it was the worst of times.” He thus tried to express the unrest of the period, as well as the optimism that momentous changes in history were occurring.
But in the light of what we noted in the previous article, our times can, in many respects, far more appropriately be called “the worst of times.” However, could a period of grave difficulties at the same time be a cause for joy? Could it truly be “the best of times”? Yes, if we have guaranteed assurance that better days are right ahead.
As we have seen, in many ways the world is now going through harrowing times. But there is every reason to believe that deliverance is near for humanity​—deliverance from crime, war, famine, sickness. The Bible holds out such a hope. To make this hope our own, though, we need to identify the time period in which we are living and learn from the Holy Scriptures what course we should follow.
Our Time​—A Marked Generation
In the first century, Jesus’ apostles at first expected him to seize power in Israel as the promised Messiah. When they saw that Jesus’ departure was imminent, and yet their expectations were unfulfilled, they questioned him about his return: “What will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?” (Matthew 24:3) The prophecy that Jesus gave in reply was not completely fulfilled in the first century. And later inspired writings pointed to a larger fulfillment in later history. (Revelation 6:2-8) Could it be in our time?
Jesus showed that it would take some discernment to recognize the foretold period, for he warned his disciples that the vast majority would not grasp the sense of the momentous events occurring. Using the global Deluge of Noah’s day as a parallel, Jesus stated: “For just as the days of Noah were, so the presence of the Son of man will be. . . . They took no note until the flood came and swept them all away.”​—Matthew 24:37, 39.
By what means would men perceive his “presence” and thus take steps to avoid being swept away to destruction like the majority in Noah’s day? Jesus gave a multiaspect prophetic “sign” that is recorded in the Gospels. Let us see if this “sign” is visible today, and if so, what it forecasts.
INTERNATIONAL WAR​—INCREASE OF LAWLESSNESS: “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.” (Luke 21:10) “The increasing of lawlessness.”​—Matthew 24:12.
Many wars have taken place since 1914, including two on a worldwide scale. Even at present about a million soldiers and guerrillas are active, and over 100 young men are killed daily, according to the New Zealand Herald. Crime too is flourishing, as you may be sadly aware. Journalist Anthony Lewis recently observed: “From countries as disparate as Britain . . . and the Soviet Union there are reports of increasing criminal violence and of official inability to cope with it.”
EARTHQUAKES: “Earthquakes in one place after another.”​—Matthew 24:7.
While there have been major earthquakes on occasion over the centuries, our day is particularly marked in this respect. Earthquakes have been very numerous in the past few decades. From 1970 to 1979, an average of 80,000 people each year lost their lives in earthquakes. This figure does not even include the 1975 disaster in China, where, according to certain estimates, 800,000 people lost their lives!
FAMINES​—DISEASES: “In one place after another pestilences and food shortages.”​—Luke 21:11.
According to UNICEF, 12 million children died of hunger throughout the world during 1979. In Africa about one child in three starves to death. Sickness, too, continues to wreak havoc worldwide. Five hundred thousand children die of measles annually, and one billion people are afflicted with tropical diseases. Nor can those in industrialized countries feel secure, for there cancer, heart ailments and venereal disease strike millions.
A WORLDWIDE WITNESS: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth.”​—Matthew 24:14.
In the 12-month period from September 1981 through August 1982, Jehovah’s Witnesses spent well over 384 million hours spreading the good news and teaching people Bible truths. Over two million ministers preached in 205 countries and islands of the sea.
The Meaning of It All
After foretelling these different events, Christ revealed their meaning:
“Note the fig tree and all the other trees: When they are already in the bud, by observing it you know for yourselves that now the summer is near. In this way you also, when you see these things occurring, know that the kingdom of God is near. Truly I say to you, This generation will by no means pass away until all things occur.”​—Luke 21:29-32.
The fulfillment of all that Jesus had described would make up a composite “sign,” indicating the nearness of the Kingdom of God as infallibly as trees “already in the bud” herald the arrival of summer. But when did these things start to occur?
Commenting on an event that changed the face of the world, French economist Alfred Fabre-Luce stated: “The 1914 war was the initial quake that gave birth to tremors still rocking us today.” Many other historians and statesmen have acknowledged that a dramatically different era began in 1914 when World War I commenced. Interestingly, Pius XI, pope from 1922 to 1939, recognized that events occurring since 1914 were “the signs of the last days, such as were announced by Our Lord.” As we have seen, the different events foretold in this prophecy continue today. We thus have good reason to believe that the generation that witnessed the initial shock in 1914 and is still represented by people alive today must be the one that will witness the final fulfillment of this prophecy.
What, then, should be our attitude as this “generation” advances? We should not give way to discouragement or indifference. Rather, we need to heed the counsel Jesus gave after having listed the various elements of the “sign.” He said: “As these things start to occur, raise yourselves erect and lift your heads up, because your deliverance is getting near.” (Luke 21:28) We can adopt such an attitude when we know what the near future holds for us under God’s Kingdom rule.
God’s Promises
Many feel that their present worries would be lessened if they could work in more pleasant surroundings and with security. The Scriptures do not brush aside such an idea. Prophets such as Isaiah foretold better conditions that will enable man to enjoy life: “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not toil for nothing, nor will they bring to birth for disturbance.”​—Isaiah 65:21, 23.
However, the Scriptures particularly draw attention to the fact that blessings from Jehovah will also include those of a spiritual nature. Humans need more than just material well-being. We need to respect the principles of love and justice and live alongside others who respect those principles. God’s Kingdom will bring about such a favorable environment on earth, enabling honest-hearted ones to blossom out to the full. The aforementioned prophet adds: “When there are judgments from you for the earth, righteousness is what the inhabitants of the productive land will certainly learn.”​—Isaiah 26:7-9.
God’s Kingdom will accomplish something no other government can, namely, delivering mankind from sin and its consequences: woes, sickness and death. When God accomplishes this through Jesus Christ, all those who love and practice righteousness will obtain eternal life.​—John 3:16.
Benefits Even Now
We should not overlook the fact that a large measure of happiness is available right now by our living in harmony with God’s purposes. The bad things happening on earth are obvious to all and bring no joy in themselves. Still, if we discern their meaning and thus recognize the “sign,” we can understand why our times are in a sense a foretaste of the best of times, for we will witness God’s intervention, bringing a permanent solution to man’s problems.
Although living in the midst of this troubled world, Jehovah’s Witnesses are able to reap benefits that are available to you also. Their knowledge of God’s laws offers moral protection and enables them to live balanced lives. They have available the peace of mind that comes from a hope based on divine promises, along with godly conduct. (Psalm 119:165; 1 Timothy 4:8) In addition, there will be a deliverance when Christ destroys God’s enemies in the near future and opens the opportunity to receive God’s permanent blessings.​—Zephaniah 2:2, 3; Psalm 29:11.
[Picture on page 6]
As to our times, Jesus said that we can learn from the fig tree

