You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—But How?
‘LIVING forever on earth is just an impossible dream. There is no way anybody can do it.’
You may have heard people say that. Yet you may know that in the beginning it was God’s purpose for obedient humans to live forever in an earthly Paradise. And God never fails to accomplish what he purposes! (Genesis 1:28; Isaiah 55:11) His Word plainly promises: “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”​—Psalm 37:29.
That is the thrilling message that Jehovah’s Witnesses bring to people when they call at their homes. The Kingdom, with Jesus Christ as Ruler, will see to it that God’s original purpose is accomplished. Under the Kingdom’s righteous administration this earth will be cultivated to become a beautiful Paradise. However, not everyone will be permitted to live in the Paradise earth. Requirements must be met. That is reasonable.​—Matthew 6:10.
Consider: If you were the owner of a beautiful home surrounded by well-kept gardens, would you allow just anyone to live there? No, he would have to meet with your approval, meeting your requirements. What does God require of those who will reside forever upon his Paradise earth? Let us examine four basic requirements.
Four Requirements
Jesus Christ identified a first requirement when he said in prayer to his Father: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) Knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ includes knowledge of God’s purposes regarding the earth and of Christ’s role as earth’s new King. Will you take in such knowledge by studying the Bible?
Many have found the second requirement more difficult. It is to obey God’s laws, yes, to conform one’s life to the moral requirements set out in the Bible. This includes refraining from a debauched, immoral way of life.​—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10; 1 Peter 4:3, 4.
A third requirement is that we be associated with God’s channel, his organization. God has always used an organization. For example, only those in the ark in Noah’s day survived the Flood, and only those associated with the Christian congregation in the first century had God’s favor. (Acts 4:12) Similarly, Jehovah is using only one organization today to accomplish his will. To receive everlasting life in the earthly Paradise we must identify that organization and serve God as part of it.
The fourth requirement is connected with loyalty. God requires that prospective subjects of his Kingdom support his government by loyally advocating his Kingdom rule to others. Jesus Christ explained: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth.” (Matthew 24:14) Will you meet this requirement by telling others about God’s Kingdom?
Perhaps you are well acquainted with these requirements. Yet many persons are ignorant of God’s purposes and of what he requires. Now we have a marvelous instrument to help such ones. It is the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. Have you used it to help others learn what God requires of them?
An Effective Teaching Aid
The new Live Forever book contains knowledge that leads to everlasting life. It discusses important Bible truths that people need to understand in order to dedicate their lives to Jehovah God and to serve him acceptably. In expressing appreciation for this new Bible study aid, a Witness from Ohio, U.S.A., wrote:
“In June I had no Bible studies. As of this day, I have three Bible studies and a fourth one ready to start. All three studies are in this new publication. All three are regular and exciting. The book answers the student’s questions in a precise and understandable way. . . . I cannot say ‘Thank you’ enough for making Bible studies easy to conduct, as well as covering every essential aspect needed by the student for gaining a lasting and heartfelt appreciation for Jehovah and his organization.”
Also pointing to the book’s effectiveness is the following letter: “I have been able to start three Bible studies in this book and what I have found is that the book is very good for any age group. I have a study with a woman who is 83 years old, also with two girls who are 11 years old and another one with a woman who is 50. It is a great privilege to be associated with an organization that knows exactly what is needed to help the most people learn of Jehovah and his purposes for the earth and all of mankind.”
Motivates to Obey the Truth
Besides taking in life-giving knowledge, a person must conform his life to God’s moral requirements if he is to live forever in Paradise on earth. The Live Forever book is helping people do this. Not only is direct counsel provided regarding wrongs to avoid and how to avoid them but encouragement is also given to do what is right. In a fine way this book exposes the subtle designs of Satan. It also spells out clearly the fight that the Christian must put up to do what is right.
For example, a missionary of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Panama writes about a young man who had been studying the Bible: “By the last week of July he got the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. His mother had obtained it for him at the ‘Kingdom Truth’ District Convention in Hawaii. At the Service Meeting on Thursday, July 29, he told me that he had quit smoking because of what he saw in the book.
“On Friday at his home Bible study I asked him to show me what impressed him so much. The picture on page 131, which shows the activities condemned by God that must be avoided by subjects of God’s government, was pointed out. ‘Look,’ he said, ‘two whole frames to a cigarette!’ Then the picture on page 227 and the material on page 226 about praying for help when tempted to smoke was called to my attention. ‘That did it! I told Sunshine [his little girl] to get rid of the cigarettes right then and there!’ Thus ended 17 years of smoking! Needless to say, that night we started studying the book with him. Any book that powerful should not go to waste sitting around on the shelf.”
In another letter of appreciation one person wrote: “I just wanted to thank you for the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. Reading that publication prevented me from making a big mistake.
“One of my workmates approached me and asked me to come over to socialize. I knew exactly what the person had in mind but between being partly shocked and feeling tempted, I didn’t answer. So the person left it up to me and said, ‘Meet me here at 4 p.m. if you want to go.’
“By 3 p.m. I still did not know what I was going to do. I knew what this would do to my relationship with Jehovah, but something kept telling me that nothing would happen. I knew that by thinking about it instead of dismissing it from my mind I had weakened myself to the point of wanting to give in​—but not totally.
“Just the night before, I was reading the Live Forever book and was very much impressed with the chapter ‘The Fight to Do What Is Right’ and the chapter on ‘Prayer.’ Well, in the book it said that the time to pray to Jehovah for strength is not after you have done something wrong, but at the exact moment you feel tempted. Knowing that I had absolutely no strength to resist meeting this person at 4 p.m., I appealed to Jehovah for strength to resist. I told him exactly how I felt. My earnest prayer in itself gave me strength. . . . When I eventually met this workmate again I was strong enough to take a proper Christian stand and even give a witness. Thanks again for that very clear-cut counsel.”
Directs New Ones to Organization
Yet another vital area covered by the book is the need to identify and associate with God’s visible organization. A traveling minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses commented on this, saying: “For more than 25 years we’ve been instructed to teach our Bible students about the organization, taking time each study to acquaint them with some feature of it. I’m so glad we have such a feature incorporated right into the study aid; publishers and students alike can’t miss it now!”
Yes, chapter 23, “God’s Visible Organization,” has a fine presentation showing how Jehovah down through the ages has always dealt through an organization. And the Live Forever book describes the function of God’s modern-day visible organization, directing new ones to that place of safety. Not only are each of the five weekly meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses briefly discussed but Bible students are made acquainted with the organization’s arrangements for circuit assemblies and large conventions.
Emphasizes Kingdom Preaching
A person can know the truth that leads to an earthly Paradise; he can be living a morally upright life; he can be associating with God’s organization; yet he may not be in line to receive life as a citizen of God’s righteous new system. What is missing? The person must also be an advocate of the truth. He must be a Kingdom preacher! The Live Forever book works this fact in along the way in a very logical, helpful way. For example, as early as the 15th chapter, under the subheading “Loyalty to God’s Government,” it says:
“That Jehovah God would require his subjects loyally to support his Kingdom government should not be surprising. Governments of men require the same thing from their citizens. But in what special way does God expect loyal support to be given? By his subjects taking up weapons to fight for his Kingdom? No. Rather, like Jesus Christ and his early followers, they must be loyal spokesmen or proclaimers of God’s kingdom. (Matthew 4:17; 10:5-7; 24:14) It is Jehovah’s will that everyone may know what his kingdom is and how it will solve mankind’s problems. Have you shared things that you have learned from God’s Word with relatives, friends and others? It is God’s will that you do.”
Use It to Help Others
Like other Watch Tower publications that have preceded it, this book provides Bible truths that lead to an earthly Paradise. You are encouraged to read and study it carefully. Then use it to help others to meet the requirements to live forever in Paradise on earth.
Why not offer the book to those you meet in your daily activity, such as tradesmen or neighbors that call at your home? At the conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses this past summer, maids in motel rooms, as well as other people, saw the book and asked Witnesses how they could obtain a copy. Yes, people see the quality binding and the clear title You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth and they want the book. So keep a supply at hand to place with persons as opportunity affords. Do not forget your relatives. Why not see to it that they all receive a copy?
During January and February Jehovah’s Witnesses are offering the Live Forever book in their field ministry. As part of their weekly Service Meetings at their Kingdom Halls during these months, they are discussing ways in which they can use this instrument to help people on the way to life in the Paradise earth. You are invited to attend and learn how you can share in this activity.
[Picture on page 14]
The book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth is truly excellent for conducting new Bible studies

