Questions From Readers
If a person is being harassed by the demons, what can he do to get relief?
God’s Word shows that those who are suffering from demon attacks can get free from such harassment. Prayer plays a vital role in such liberation. (Mark 9:25-29) But someone troubled by demons may need to take additional steps. Events involving first-century Christians illustrate what else may be required.
Before they became followers of Christ, some individuals in ancient Ephesus were involved with demonism. However, after they made up their mind to serve God, “those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them up before everybody.” (Acts 19:19) By destroying their books on divination, those new believers in Ephesus set an example for any who wish to free themselves from demon attacks today. It is imperative for such ones to get rid of all objects related to spiritism. This includes books, magazines, movies, material from electronic sources, music recordings that have spiritistic overtones, as well as amulets or other items worn for “protection” or linked to spiritistic practices.​—Deuteronomy 7:25, 26; 1 Corinthians 10:21.
Some years after those Christians in Ephesus had destroyed their books on magic, the apostle Paul wrote: “We have a wrestling . . . against the wicked spirit forces.” (Ephesians 6:12) Paul urged Christians: “Put on the complete suit of armor from God that you may be able to stand firm against the machinations [crafty acts, footnote] of the Devil.” (Ephesians 6:11) That advice is still valid. Christians must fortify their spiritual defenses in order to stay out of the reach of wicked spirits. “Above all things,” stressed Paul, “take up the large shield of faith, with which you will be able to quench all the wicked one’s burning missiles.” (Ephesians 6:16) A person strengthens his faith through Bible study. (Romans 10:17; Colossians 2:6, 7) Hence, regular Bible study helps us to develop faith that serves as a bulwark against the influence of wicked spirits.​—Psalm 91:4; 1 John 5:5.
Those Christians in Ephesus needed to take yet another important step. Paul told them: “With every form of prayer and supplication . . . carry on prayer on every occasion in spirit.” (Ephesians 6:18) Yes, praying intensely for Jehovah’s protection is, indeed, essential for those who want to be set free from demon attacks today. (Proverbs 18:10; Matthew 6:13; 1 John 5:18, 19) The Bible fittingly says: “Subject yourselves, therefore, to God; but oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.”​—James 4:7.
While the one under demon attack should pray fervently for relief, other true Christians may also pray in behalf of the individual who deeply desires to serve Jehovah and who is earnestly trying to resist wicked forces. They can ask God that the one afflicted by demons might gain the spiritual strength to resist demonic assaults. Since God’s Word states that “a righteous man’s supplication, when it is at work, has much force,” prayers said by God’s servants will certainly benefit afflicted ones who are doing their utmost to “oppose the Devil.”​—James 5:16.
[Picture on page 31]
Believers in Ephesus destroyed their books on magic

