Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
There is no greater comfort in the world today than that which comes from the Holy Scriptures. In fact, the Bible makes it plain that it is through the comfort and encouragement drawn from the Scriptures that true Christians have a glorious hope. (Rom. 15:4) Having gained this hope-inspiring comfort from God’s Word, Jehovah’s witnesses unselfishly want to share it with others. They want others to come to know “the God of all comfort,” Jehovah, so that they also may gain the precious hope of life everlasting. (2 Cor. 1:3, 4) During February these Christian witnesses will share the comfort from the Scriptures by offering in their house-to-house ministry a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, for just $1.
DOES GOD APPROVE OF YOUR RELIGION?
Does this question shock you? Even more shocking to many persons are the disturbing changes taking place in many of the prominent religions of the world. How timely, then, to examine one’s religion! Do you have the courage to compare what your religion does and teaches with the Bible? If you are sincerely interested in having a good relationship with your Creator you will not be afraid of the truth. What will greatly help you in this frank examination is the pocket-size book of 192 pages The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. You will find of particular interest its chapter “Why It Is Wise to Examine Your Religion.” The book is only 25c.
LORD’S EVENING MEAL
On Tuesday, April 1, 1969, after 6 p.m. Standard Time, all congregations of Jehovah’s witnesses earth wide will assemble to celebrate the Lord’s Evening Meal. This they do in obedience to Jesus’ instructions. (Luke 22:19, 20) All readers of The Watchtower are invited to be present for this most important occasion. Those of the remnant of Christ’s anointed followers will partake of the emblematic bread and wine, while those of the “other sheep” will be present as respectful and obedient observers. Your presence will enable you to benefit richly from the Scriptural matters considered at that time.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
March 9: Look to the Bible as Our Guide in Life. Page 105. Songs to Be Used: 41, 66.
March 16: Keep Making Straight Paths for Your Feet. Page 112. Songs to Be Used: 118, 60.

