Bethel’s Christian Atmosphere
RECENTLY a married couple living at the Brooklyn Bethel headquarters of the Watch Tower Society had guests for dinner. Shortly afterward, their guests sent them a “thank you” letter. What they wrote shows how deeply the Christian atmosphere of the Bethel home had impressed them:
“Dear Mr. and Mrs. G———,
“It is difficult to put into words our thanks and appreciation for the time you spent with us last Wednesday. We all flatter ourselves by believing we are thinking people, with the ability to solve, not only our problems, but if given the opportunity, the problems of the world.
“This Wednesday, however, we were shocked out of our complacency. Any ideas we may have had about religion, love of fellow man, politics, work, the U.N. and the future of mankind were completely shattered. At the Jehovah’s witnesses’ headquarters, we were privileged to see religion at work and what very well can be the solution to the future of mankind.
“During an ordinary work day, we sat down with about six hundred people at lunch [in one of Bethel’s largest dining rooms], each of whom was well behaved, courteous to his neighbor, soft spoken, at peace with himself and thankful to God for his daily bread. The gathering of about six hundred people of all ages, colors and varied upbringing at any other place under different circumstances would be a mass of confusion, boisterousness, group segregation, group disagreements, and at least one drunken brawl. Just to get order in such a group would take the efforts of Jehovah. On Wednesday it was just the opposite, it was the belief in Jehovah that made the difference. Perhaps this is the solution to everything.
“We three were all profoundly impressed by everything we saw and, although a few days have gone by since Wednesday, we find ourselves recalling to mind what we saw and heard and felt. Religion heretofore was something relegated to Saturday or Sunday, at a birth or a few words said at a funeral. It just wasn’t part of our everyday life. After all our years of schooling and independent thought, could we be completely wrong? Such a prospect is not very encouraging, but if the facts prove differently, and the truth is obvious, can logic refute it? . . .
“We wish to thank you for the privilege of visiting you and seeing religion at work.
Sincerely, [Signed]”

