VOL. XXXVI FEBRUARY 1 No. 3 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Imputation and Application of Our Lord's 
Human Life-Rights 35 

Right to Life on Two Planes 35 

Restitution Imputed to the Church 35 

The Church No Part of the Ransom 36 

"Your Father Knoweth" 38 

The Father of the Church 38 

The Everlasting Father of Humanity 39 

Proper Mental Attitude for Prayer 39 

More Convincing Evidence Demanded 40 

St. Thomas Not Reproved 40 

Two Great Facts Established 41 

God's Ark in Wicked Hands 42 

A Present-Day Parallel 42 

Israel Different from Other Nations 43 

Confession of Sin, Forgiveness, Victory 43 

A Lesson for Spiritual Israel 44 

Return of the Church from the Wilderness 45 

Interesting Letters 46 

Reply to a Critic of Present Expectations 46 

page 34 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



MEMORIAL SUPPER -MARCH 28th 

For the benefit of friends at a distance we note the fact 
that the anniversary of our Lord's last Supper with His 
disciples will this year be on Sunday, March 28th, after 6 
P.M. In due time we will have an article upon this subject. 



NEW VOLUNTEER PLAN FOR 1915 

The Lord willing, the Society hopes to supply a series of 
Volunteer issues this year instead of merely one number as in 
the past. Our thought is to cover the territory in quick succession, 
a few weeks apart, thus giving the public time to read 
each issue separately, but not allowing their minds to grow 
cold concerning the Kingdom Message. This plan will surely 
prove quite effective, increasing also our own privileges as 
Christ's ambassadors. Ask for B.S. MONTHLY, No. 67, "Why 
Financiers Tremble"; No. 68, "Clergy Ordination Proved 
Fraudulent"; and No. 69, "Church of the Living God." 



A GIFT FOR YOUR FRIENDS 

We have a special edition of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
Vol. I., to which we have added the Pyramid Chapter from 
Vol. III. It is bound in the same style as our regular editions, 
except the covers are embossed with a gold Pyramid. 

The Pyramid feature makes this volume specially attractive 
to beginners who are difficult to interest otherwise. After 
reading about the wonderful Pyramid of Egypt (which is the 
introductory chapter of this edition), their mental appetite is 
sure to be whetted enough to read with interest the "DIVINE 
PLAN OF THE AGES"; and whoever reads this, if he has a 
spiritual appetite, is pretty sure to go on as a Bible student. 

The price of this special edition is 50c. per copy, which is 
less than half what such books would ordinarily sell for. We, 
however, offer these to our readers as gifts, or for loaning to 
friends and neighbors, at 30c. per copy, postpaid— in any quantity, 
but preferably in lots of ten or multiples thereof. 



BEREAN QUESTIONS IN "SCRIPTURE STUDIES" 

The classes of Associated Bible Students throughout the 
world are very generally adopting our suggestion of using the 
"Berean Questions." These are furnished separate as pamphlets- 
one each for the six volumes of STUDIES, also for 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS at 5c. each. 

For the great convenience of Bible Students we have now 
added these "Berean Questions" as an appendix to the cloth-bound 
volumes. Note also that STUDIES Vol. V. now contains 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS and Questions on same. We are 
making no extra charge for this additional matter. 

Some of our readers may choose to use their present copies 
for missionary work, replacing them with the new edition containing 
the "Berean Questions." 



INDIA PAPER EDITION STUDIES 

Noting the growing desire for small, light weight books 
that can be carried conveniently in the coat pocket for reading 
on trains, etc., we have prepared the SCRIPTURE STUDIES in this 
most up-to-date form, and now have a good supply. Full 
leather binding, India paper, gold edges, round corners, the six 
volumes neatly packed in a cloth carton, thickness of the entire 
set only 2-3/4 inches, and weighing only 1-3/4 lbs., price $5. 

We are unable, on this edition, to give our Colporteurs 
their usual allowances. Nevertheless, in view of the fact that 
this edition specially appeals to a certain class of people who 
want something good, we are making the Colporteurs an allowance 
of $1 per set to permit them to handle them. 

This edition does not contain the "Berean Questions," because 
designed to be as small, light and portable as possible. 



KARATOL STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

By the word "Karatol" we indicate an edition of the 
STUDIES on thin Bible paper, with round corners, red burnished 
edges, flexible cloth covers, to take the place of the 
India paper edition with those who cannot afford the best, but 
who yet desire something convenient for carrying in the pocket 
for reading on journeys. These do not contain the Berean 
Index because they are kept in as small a size as possible. 
The entire set of six volumes, in cloth carton, $2, carriage pre-paid. 
Colporteurs may handle this edition on the same terms 
as the regular cloth -bound editions. 



R5621 : page 35 



IMPUTATION AND APPLICATION 
OF OUR LORD'S 
HUMAN LIFE-RIGHTS 

APPARENTLY a great many of God's people 

have difficulty in discerning just what 

is signified in the expression, "Gave Himself 

a Ransom for all." They ask, If 

our Lord Jesus gave His human life a 

Ransom for Adam and his race, where 

has He now any right to human life to 

give in justification to those who accept 

His favor, in view of the fact that we 

read, "He that believeth on the Son hath 

everlasting life"?— John 3:36. 

To appreciate the answer to this question, we must 
realize that the giving of the Ransom has various features. 
First of all, our Lord's consecration when He 
was thirty years of age, which He symbolized by water 
baptism, represents the giving up, the surrender, of His 
life to God. The life which He surrendered was a perfect 
human life, one to which He had a full right. St. 
Paul tells us that He was "holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners." Our Lord was not a member 
of the Adamic race in a direct sense— in the sense of 
having received His life from a human father; therefore 
His was not a condemned life, like that of the rest 
of the world. Nothing more was needed. He surrendered 
the full equivalent of Adam's life and perfection. 
But He did not surrender His life to Adam; He merely 
put it into the Father's hands without giving it to 
anybody. 

During the three and a half years of His ministry 
our Redeemer laid down His life. He completed that 
work at Calvary, saying there, "It is finished!" He 
there finished His Baptism into death; He continued 
His self-surrender to the end. But He has not yet 
made any application of this human life to Adam and 
His race. He has merely put it into the Father's 
hands. It was a life that had not been forfeited, that 
had not been mortgaged, that had not been embargoed. 
He simply surrendered His life in harmony with the 
Father's Plan— Luke 23:46. 

RIGHT TO LIFE ON TWO PLANES 

When the Father raised Him up on the third day, 
He made Jesus a spirit being. He was put to death in 
the flesh and was raised a spirit— quickened in spirit. 
(1 Peter 3:18— Diaglott.) This quickened One of the 
new nature had this new life as a reward for His obedience 
in permitting His earthly life to be taken from 
Him. But he had not forfeited His right to the earthly 
life; hence as a New Creature He still retained this 
right to perfect human life. Everything that belonged 



to a perfect life belonged to Him. He had permitted 
the Jews to take away His life, but he had neither 
surrendered nor forfeited His right to life. So when 
He was raised to life by the Father, He had not only 
the right to the spirit nature, but also the right to the 
earthly nature— not that He would have use for this 
for Himself; for any one having the Divine nature 
would have neither use nor desire for the earthly nature. 
The specific right that He had was the right to 
give, to bestow freely upon Adam and his race, human 
life— the very object He had in mind when He came 
into the world. 

So when the Lord Jesus arose from the dead and 
ascended up on High forty days later, He retained all 
the rights that He ever had. He had the right to human 
life, never having forfeited it; He also had the Divine 
nature, the reward of His obedience— a superior right, 
a superior nature. But when He ascended up on High, 
He did not apply the merit of His sacrifice for the 
world of mankind; otherwise the whole world would not 
now lie in the Wicked One. (1 John 5:19— Diaglott.) If 
our Redeemer had made an application of His merit 
for the world when He ascended, it would have taken 
away the sin of the world; but He did not do this. The 
Scriptures tell us that the Church alone has escaped 
from the condemnation upon the world. (Romans 8:1.) 
Evidently, then, the world is still in the Wicked One. 
The only ones who have escaped from this condemnation 
are those who have accepted the arrangement of 
this Gospel Age. Nobody else except the consecrated 
class has had merit and justification from Christ. 

RESTITUTION IMPUTED TO THE CHURCH 

How, then, does our Lord apply the merit to the 
Church? We answer, Not directly. If He were to apply 
His merit directly, it would give the Church human 
life, human perfection. God has some better thing for 
the Church— that the Church might attain to the same 
Divine nature to which Jesus attained. The Church 
attains this by following in the footsteps of Jesus. This 
signifies that as He sacrificed His human life, and laid 
down His earthly rights according to the will of the 
Father, so all who would become members of His Bride 
class must do the same, must surrender their earthly 
life, in order to be associated with Him. Only if we 
suffer with Him shall we reign with Him.— 2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

"If any man would be My disciple, let him deny himself, 
take up his cross and follow Me." (Matthew 16:24.) 

R5621 : page 36 

Then, "Where I am there shall My disciple be." 
(John 12:26.) Whosoever will so do during this Gospel 
Age will attain to the same Divine nature, the same 
glory, the same immortality— the difference being that 



our Lord will always be Head over all, the Chief over 

the Church, which is His Body, and that they will 

always be His members in particular, the Church in Glory. 

The question, then, comes up, if it was necessary for 
Jesus to be pure, holy, how could the Church be acceptable 
to the Father, when they are of the depraved 
human nature? The answer of the Bible is that to this 
class who become His disciples Jesus imputes the merit 
of His sacrifice to the extent of covering their blemishes, 
their imperfections. We are to discern between give 
and impute. He will give His merit to the world by and 
by. But now He is making an imputation to the Church. 

By this term imputation is signified, that if the Church 
had remained of the earthly nature the same as the world, 
they would by and by have the right, the same as the 
world, to come up out of degradation to human perfection. 
Jesus secured by His death the privilege of giving 
all those rights to the Church as well as to the remainder 
of Adam's race. But this class, the Church, forego all 
those rights to human perfection. When we consecrated 
ourselves to God, we gave up our right to become inheritors 
of the earth and earthly things; we gave up all our 
rights in the sense of merely surrendering them. By 
faith we believe that Jesus would in due time have given 
us those blessings of Restitution the same as to the whole 
world of mankind. By faith we accept those blessings 
and by faith we surrender them. The only thing left for 
the Church to do is to surrender their earthly lives. Some 
may have more vitality, and some may have less; some 
may have more talents, and some less; some may have 
more years, and some less; but whatever each has it is 
to be given up, surrendered. 

So, then, at consecration the Church class voluntarily 
surrender their earthly nature. They surrender all the 
earthly rights that they have of the present time, and also 
those rights that would have been theirs had they remained 
part and parcel of the world. Jesus does not give 
to the Church at the present time any part of the Ransom-sacrifice, 
but merely imputes to them, counts to them, that 
part which they might have had if they had remained a 
part of the world. 

When Jesus died, He did not pay over a ransom as an 
offset for Adam. When Jesus was raised from the dead, 
He had not paid a ransom; and when He ascended to 
the Father He did not pay over a ransom for the world. 
But He laid in the Father's hands the merit of His sacrifice. 
He has been imputing of this merit down through 
the Gospel Age to the Church only, but now He has about 
finished the imputing to the Church, and the work of 
giving to the world Restitution is about to begin; and before 
it begins the merit imputed (loaned) to the Church 
must be actually paid over to Divine Justice as the basis 
for human Restitution. 

WORK OF THE GOSPEL AGE TYPIFIED 



On the Jewish Atonement Day the High Priest, first 
of all, killed the bullock. That bullock represented our 
Lord Jesus, the perfect man, and the priest represented 
our Lord, the New Creature. Thus He typified the consecration 
of the human nature and also the condition of 
the New Creature, still in the fleshly body, typed by the 
priest in the first Holy. 

Our Lord was in this condition of the Holy during the 
three and a half years of His ministry. During that time 
He had the privileges of the Golden Altar, and the light 
from the Golden Candlestick (representing the light of 
God's Truth), and the blessings represented by the Table 
of Shewbread (the spiritual food). At the end of the 
three and a half years, having finished the work of sacrificing 
Himself, having burned the antitypical incense, He 
passed under the Second Veil. 

On the third day our Lord arose on the other side of 
the Second Veil— on the spirit plane— fully perfected as 
a New Creature, no longer in any sense of the word a 
man. He could go and come like the wind. He remained 
with His disciples to convince them that He was no 
longer a man— going and coming like the wind, and appearing 
in various bodily forms. Then, when He ascended 
up on High, as the great antitypical High Priest 
He took with Him the blood. The blood signifies the 
life of the sacrifice. He appeared in the presence of God, 
and there He sprinkled of the blood on the Mercy-Seat. 
This sprinkling of the blood on the Mercy-Seat was to 
make atonement for a certain class. That atonement we 
see was made only for the priests and the Levites— not 
for the world.— Leviticus 16:6. 

After the High Priest had finished making the atonement 
for the priests and the Levites, he went out into the 
Court again and there began a different work. Our 
Lord made application of the blood for the antitypical 
priests and the Levites during the ten days between His 

R5622 : page 36 

ascension and the descent of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost. 
He made application of His merit for the Church. We 
know this; for this satisfaction for sins was followed by the 
pouring out of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, the evidence 
that Divine mercy had come to them.— Hebrews 9:24. 

In the type, after the priest had offered the bullock, he 
then proceeded to the next part— the killing of the Lord's 
goat. A goat is inferior to a bullock. The Lord Himself 
was typified by the bullock. The Lord's goat symbolized 
the faithful members of the Church, His Body. It has 
been the work of the Gospel Age to offer up the Church. 
Not that they were able to offer up themselves; for being 
naturally the members of the condemned Adamic race, 
they were not fit to be priests, and could not be priests 
until the great High Priest had made an imputation of 
His merit for them. Therefore, the great High Priest 
who offered the bullock also offered the goat. 



Then we see the conclusion of the matter. In the type 
the blood of the goat was taken into the Most Holy and 
was applied, not for the priests, not for the Levites, but 
for the people. The blood of the bullock was applied only 
for the priests and the Levites; the blood of the goat, for 
the people. (Leviticus 16:6,15.) These two sacrifices 
represent all the sacrifices of the Gospel Age; the superior 
sacrifice was that of the Lord Jesus, the inferior 
sacrifice was that of the Church. 

THE CHURCH NO PART OF THE RANSOM 

There was a sufficiency of merit in the antitypical bullock 
to have been applied for the sins of the whole world. 
But it was God's arrangement that the Church might be 
permitted to share in the sacrifice. Only those who have 
the privilege of sharing in the sacrifice have the privilege 
of sharing in the glory. It was not necessary for the 
satisfaction of Justice that any of the Church should die; 
but it was necessary in order for them to partake of the 
promised glory. Therefore, while it was a sacrifice for 
our sins on the Lord's part, it was necessary on our part, 
in order to share in His glory. He makes the sacrifice; 
it is not our sacrifice. As the Apostle Paul points out, we 
merely present our bodies. (Romans 12:1.) God would 
not accept our sacrifice except through Christ; we are 
accepted only in the Beloved One. (Ephesians 1:3-6.) 

R5622 : page 37 

Thus by virtue of our Lord's acceptance of us is it that 
we have any privilege of sharing with Him in the sacrifice 
and in the glory. 

Our Lord, therefore, has still a human life ungiven 
away. He does not give to the Church human life. He 
does not part with even a particle of the right to human 
life which He had. The Lord does not need an earthly 
body; neither will His Church need earthly bodies. What 
use would Jesus make of earthly rights, or what use 
would we make of them? We never intend to become 
men again; nor does He intend to become a man again. 
The merit of Christ was imputed to us only for the purpose 
of making us acceptable sacrifices; and this merit 
becomes released again when the last member of the 
Church is glorified. Then the whole value of Christ's 
sacrifice will be ready for appropriation for the world 
of mankind; for at that time the Church will have 
ceased to be of Adam's race, having become of the Divine 
nature.— 2 Peter 1:4. 

This work, then, of appropriating the merit of Jesus 
on behalf of the world is left until the Millennial Age; 
when the Redeemer's Kingdom will make man's Restitution 
privileges a real boon. Therefore, as soon as the 
merit of Christ is appropriated for the world, He will immediately 
take charge of His purchased possession. He 
will then take His great power and reign. Then to all 



those redeemed ones for whom He will appropriate the 

merit of His sacrifice He will be ready to give the long-promised 

Restitution blessings. 

Through the Prophet David, Jehovah God said to His 
Son, "Ask of Me and I will give Thee the heathen [Gentiles, 
nations, people] for an inheritance and the uttermost 
parts of the earth for Thy possession." (Psalm 2:8.) 
This, we believe, is at the door. The Lord is about 
to take possession of the Church, which is the jewel class 
of the whole world. The blessings which He then will 
give are human Restitution to the race of Adam and the 
bringing of the whole earth, their earthly home, up to the 
grandeur of the Garden of Eden. This work He will 
share with His Body, His Bride. 

From this Scriptural standpoint the Ransom-price that 
Jesus gives has been a progressive matter, and is not 
yet completed. He began to give it when He became 
a man; He progressed in giving during the three and a 
half years of His earthly ministry; He finished the giving 
at Calvary. He has since been using that to which He 
had a right on behalf of the Church, by imputation. He 
will have all of this merit of His sacrifice to make satisfaction 
for the sins of the whole world— not a single individual 
omitted. During the thousand years He will be 
giving to mankind that which He has secured by His 
death, and which He will make applicable to them by 
sealing the New Covenant. That New Covenant will be 
sealed as soon as the Church shall have been completed, 
as soon as the Church shall have passed beyond the Veil. 

SPIRITUAL AND HUMAN NATURE NOT THE SAME 

The views of Christian people seem to be very confused. 
They acknowledge that Jesus was a spirit being 
before He came into the world, and that He experienced 
some kind of change of nature in becoming a man. But 
very inconsistently they seem erroneously and unscripturally 
to reason that, having become a man, He must 
stay a man to all eternity— "a little lower than the angels." 
We should remember that the Logos was "made flesh," 
"humbled himself," not for all eternity, but merely "for 
the suffering of death,. ..that He. ..might taste 
death for every man."— Hebrews 2:9. 

The Scriptures indicate that there is a difference in 
natures. As St. Paul points out, there is one flesh of man, 
another flesh of beasts, another of fishes and another of 
birds. And so on the spiritual plane— there are angels, 
cherubim and seraphim, just as there are beasts and birds, 
fishes and men, on the earthly plane. (1 Corinthians 15:39-41.) 
Our Lord distinctly told that He left the 
glory that He had with the Father. He said to His disciples, 
"What and if you should see the Son of Man ascend 
up where He was before?"— John 6:62. 

The expression, "Where He was before," refers to a 
difference in nature, in condition, from that He then had. 
Jesus had been in the world many times before, but never 



before was made flesh. Jesus perhaps was the Representative 
of God in the Garden of Eden with Adam. Very 
certain it is, He was the One who gave the Law to 
Moses as the Representative of the Father. And most 
assuredly He was the One who communicated with Abraham 
at the time when the Lord and two angels went down 
to Sodom, and stopped on the way to tell Abraham about 
the matter. Incidentally Abraham remembered that they 
appeared like men, ate like men, talked like men, but he 
knew not till afterward that they were angels. When 
our Lord was made flesh, it was not the first time He was 
on earth. On His previous visits He was a spirit being 
who merely assumed a flesh body as a convenience in 
communicating with men as the Father's Representative. 

We see that this same power of materialization was 
used by other angels. For instance, at the time of our 
Lord's ascension the angels said, "Ye men of Galilee, 
why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus 
shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go." 
We remember also that the fallen angels had the power 
to assume human bodies. As the Scriptures point out, 
they desired to be men, to live on the earthly plane and 
in the earthly condition, for sensual reasons. Thus they 
abandoned their own habitation, lived as men and sought 
to bring forth a new race. 

A MUCH MISUNDERSTOOD SUBJECT 

If Jesus during His First Advent had merely appeared 
as a man, but had all the while been really a spirit being 
veiled in flesh— "incarnate"— He could not have been the 
Redeemer at all. The Scriptures say that Jesus was a 
man, "the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us" 
(John 1:14)— not that He pretended to be a man. To be 
the Redeemer of man it was necessary for Him to become 
a man, not to pretend to be one. He must be really a 
man; otherwise He could not have been a ransom-price 
for Adam; for the Divine Law required like for like— 
"life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, 
foot for foot."— Deuteronomy 19:21. 

The word Ransom (antilutron in the Greek) signifies 
a corresponding price. And so Jesus actually left the 
Heavenly glory— not merely pretended to leave it. He 
who was rich for our sakes became poor, so that He was 
truly that which He appeared to be— the Man. He was 
the perfect Man who presented Himself at Jordan— the 
only one who could be the corresponding price for Adam. 
The Scriptures represent our Lord as saying to the 
Father, "A body hast Thou prepared Me" for the suffering 
of death. (Hebrews 10:5.) Many of us have overlooked 
the fact that this body was Divinely prepared for 
a purpose— for the suffering of death, and not, as many 
think, a body for placing the Lord Jesus in a state of permanent 
humiliation before all the holy angels, as expressed 
in the old hymn, 

"Five bleeding wounds He bears, 



Received on Calvary." 
Our Lord is not parading Heaven under the disadvantages 
of a body and a nature all out of accord with 

R5623 : page 38 

His surroundings. He has already accomplished the work 
of sacrifice, and the merit of His sacrifice is in the hands 
of God. God has accepted the sacrifice that was made 
more than eighteen centuries ago; and on the books of 
Justice there are to our Redeemer's credit those earthly 
life-rights to which, as a perfect man, He was entitled. 

When God conferred upon Father Adam human life 
and human life-rights, he immediately became the great 
king of earth. And so when Jesus became the natural Man 
He became the natural Ruler. He was the One to whom the 
earth belonged; and the perfect man would have had the 
right to earth and all the fulness thereof. Instead of 
keeping these rights and becoming the grand earthly 
Potentate, Jesus surrendered all these earthly rights and 
received the reward of obedience— not the reward of 
sacrifice, but the reward of obedience. He still has these 
human life-rights, and is about to give them to the world 
of mankind, upon condition that they shall desire to 
come into harmony with God, that they shall enter into 
a covenant of obedience. By His own blood Jesus makes 
them eligible to full Restitution to all that was lost in 
Eden and to all that was redeemed at Calvary. 

The appearance of our Lord in the flesh after His 
resurrection was only similar to the appearance that was 
made by Himself and the angels long centuries before, 
and does not indicate that He was still a man. As a Man 
He never went into a room, the door being shut; as a 
spirit being He could enter, the door being shut. As a 
spirit being He could materialize, and then dematerialize, 
vanish out of their sight. This materialization, dematerialization 
and vanishing appertain not only to the flesh, 
but also to the clothing. Once He appeared as a wayfarer, 
and once as a gardener; and then He appeared as His 
former self in the upper room, the doors being shut. At 
these various times He appeared in different garments, 
each time dressed suitably to the occasion. It was just 
as easy for Him to create one style of clothing as another, 
and one form of body as another. It is hard to tell just 
where the misconceptions held by many Christian people 
have come in. It behooves us to be very kind and sympathetic 
in reproving the error, and to remember that we 
ourselves once had the errors and held them just as tenaciously 
as do others. 

OUR LORD NO LONGER HUMAN 

Our Lord Jesus was put to death in the flesh and 
quickened in spirit, or made alive in spirit; and He has 
been a spirit being ever since. This Spirit Being, Saul of 
Tarsus saw on his way to Damascus. He tells us that what 



he saw was gloriously bright. It was not the flesh of 
Jesus that was shining. The Apostle says that he caught 
a glimpse of Jesus in His real personality— "Last of all 
He was seen by me also, as of one born out of due time"; 
that is to say, born before the time, referring to the 
Church, the resurrection birth. 

We are begotten of the Spirit, and the birth will be 
in the First Resurrection. As it was said of Jesus, He 
was the First-born from the dead; just so we, the Church, 
will be born to spirit conditions. Then "we shall be like 
Him; for we shall see Him as He is." (1 John 3:2.) 
We will not be in the flesh then, and it will not hurt 
our eyes to see our glorified Lord. We shall see Him 
as He is! We shall be with Him! And the Apostle explains 
that before this we shall be "changed," because 
"flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." 



R5623 : page 38 

"YOUR FATHER KNOWETH" 

"Your Father knoweth what things 
ye have need of. "-MATTHEW 6:8. 

SHORTLY after the beginning of our Lord's 

ministry, He gave the discourse commonly 

known as the Sermon on the Mount. The 

disciples had not yet become sons of God 

in the full, proper sense of the word; indeed, 

they could not be received into sonship 

until Pentecost. They were members 

of the fallen race, under the same condemnation 

as other men. The very highest 

claim that they could make was that which 

the Jews made— that of being servants of God. But 

now, as recorded in John 1:12, "As many as received 

Him, to them gave He power [privilege] to become the 

sons of God, even to them that believe on His name; 

who were begotten, not of blood, nor of the will of the 

flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God." 

This spirit-begetting was not possible in its full, 
proper sense until Jesus had made reconciliation for the 
sins of the world, or, at least, had prepared the way 
for reconciliation by His own death. In one sense of 
the word, however, His death had already occurred; 
namely, in that He had presented Himself a living sacrifice, 
and that the Father had accepted that sacrifice. 
But that death must be finished, and Jesus must ascend 
into the presence of God and present the merit of His 
sacrifice, before the Divine blessing would descend upon 
any, permitting them to be the sons of God. 

THE FATHER OF THE CHURCH 



We see, therefore, that Jesus spoke in an anticipatory, 
or prophetic, sense as to their relationship to God. Because 
they believed in Him and were seeking to do His 
will, they were in full line with God's arrangement for 
their becoming sons. Just as after a person has adopted 
a child and while the papers are in process of being 
drawn up in legal form, the child might be spoken of as 
a son, or he might address the one adopting him as 
Father or Mother; so these would have the privilege of 
addressing God as their Father and their privilege would 
depend on their faith. The majority of the Jews did 
not have this faith, and when Jesus said that He was the 
Son of God, they were about to take up stones to stone 
Him for blasphemy. But Jesus said that not only was He 
the Son of God, but that He would bring many sons to 
God; and He quoted from the Psalms in support of this 
assertion. --John 10:31-40; Psalm 82:6. 

Thus our Lord spoke to His disciples as if they were 
already New Creatures, had already become sons of 
God and had already received the Holy Spirit, even 
though both He and they knew that this was not to be 
completely accomplished, until, as He told them, "not 
many days hence" they should actually and personally 
have received it— at Pentecost. Addressing the disciples 
from this standpoint the Master said, "Your Father 
knoweth what things ye have need of." These words 
are part of His Sermon on the Mount. As we read, 
"When He was set, His disciples came unto Him; and 
He opened His mouth and taught them." The multitude 
were not to call God Father, but they were to understand 
that those who had become the followers of the Lord 
Jesus could call Him Father. 

The word Father implies a great deal when taken 
in conjunction with other Scriptures. God was the 
Father of Adam in the sense that He gave Adam his 
life. Jesus was not Adam's Father, although, as the 
Logos, He was the One particularly active in giving 
Adam life. By Adam's disobedience, this life was lost 

R5623 : page 39 

for himself and for all of his children. Not only life 
was lost, but the Spirit of the Lord was lost, and that 
included the relationship of sons. 

THE EVERLASTING FATHER OF HUMANITY 

After Adam, we find none called sons of God down 
to the time of Jesus. Jesus was the first Son of God 
after Adam; and since our Lord's time the Church have 
been called sons of God. (1 John 3:2.) The fact that 
we are called sons of God implies the begetting of a 
new life; for the old life which we inherited from 
Father Adam is gone. This new life which we have 
received is not from Jesus, but from the Father, Jesus 
being the channel through which this life comes to us. 



"The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ... 
hath begotten us." (1 Peter 1:3.) We see that the 
arrangement for the world is somewhat different. God 
does not purpose to beget the world of the Holy Spirit, 
as He has the Church. On the contrary, we see that 
Jesus is to become the Everlasting Father of the world, 
in due time. (Isaiah 9:6.) That due time will be the 
great thousand-year Day of the Messianic Kingdom. 

In that thousand-year Day Christ, as the great King, 
Mediator between God and men, will give life to 
humanity. We see that the life He will give will be 
human life. He will be the Father of humanity, because 
that human life which He will give them will be something 
that is His own. By His obedience to God's Plan 
He bought the right to give human life. Hence, in giving 
that life at His own cost, He is styled the Father of the 
human family. This will not mean that the world will 
not be considered sons of God, any more than a grandson 
would not be a son of the father and of the grandfather. 
Mankind will not receive their life directly 
from God, but indirectly through Christ— Christ is the 
Father and God the Grandfather. God does not speak 
in random terms, but with great exactness. This being 
true, we have great confidence in His Word. 

GOD'S DEALINGS WITH ISRAEL 

When Adam and his family became sinners, some of 
them went further than merely neglecting God. It was 
no fault of theirs that they were cut off from Him. But 
they did not retain God in their minds, and so God gave 
them over to a reprobate mind. They became children 
of Satan in the sense that they became obedient to him. 
He adopted them into his family, they willingly accepting 
him and becoming obedient to him. Of course, Satan 
did not give life actually to the world, but they adopted 
him as their father by accepting his terms and becoming 
members of his family. To some of the human family 
our Lord said, "Ye are of your father the Devil, and the 
lusts of your father ye will do."— John 8:44. 

When Adam was rejected, he came under the sentence 
of death. He was left to shift for himself. The 
statement, You are under a curse of death, would 
mean, You cannot avoid dying— "Dying thou shalt die." 
There will be pestilences, earthquakes and famines. You 

R5624 : page 39 

will be subject to these because you are sinners. Mankind 
could not expect God to do anything for them when 
they were under death sentence; yet God has done much 
for them, even though they are sinners. He causes the 
sun to shine and the rain to fall upon the just and upon 
the unjust.— Matthew 5:45. 

When the Jews were called of God under the Law 
Covenant, it brought them under a special relationship 



to Him as servants. "Moses was faithful over his own 
House," a servant over the House of Israel. These 
servants were subject to some care, even as a caretaker 
in a great house would look after all the servants as 
well as the sons. While the son would have the more 
particular care, yet the servant would be cared for also. 

Thus the Jews were invited to have a share in God's 
care. They were promised that everything would work 
together for their good. God would bless their flocks 
and herds, and would do them good if they would obey 
His statutes. They did not do so, and thus brought upon 
themselves chastisements. As we read the record of the 
people of Israel, we find that they were the most 
chastened people of history, passing through the most 
wonderful experiences and disciplines, through which 
they were brought to a high religious attitude. So when 
our Lord came into the world, they were of the highest 
religious sentiment, of the most devoted sentiment, of all 
mankind. Many of them were prepared to have the 
special favor that Jesus came to give; namely, the privilege 
of becoming sons of God. 

GOD'S DEALINGS WITH THE CHURCH 

The sons of God during this Gospel Age are similarly 
under special favor of God and under special Covenant 
with Him. He has engaged to treat them as sons, not as 
servants; not as opposers or enemies, but as children. 
"God dealeth with you as with sons." (Hebrews 12:7.) 
With this assurance that God will deal with His people 
as with sons, we might be surprised that the saintly 
people have not been blessed, as those who are unsaintly, 
with money, health, temporal prosperity. We inquire 
how this is. Is God neglecting His part when He has 
promised that He will deal with these as with sons? 
We are not sons of God according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit. Having been begotten of the 
Spirit, we are sons of God according to the New Creation, 
the interests of which are often best served by experiences 
which are not favorable to the flesh. 

With these sons of God, the New Creature is the 
special thing in God's sight. The flesh matters little. 
And God wishes these sons to have the proper experiences 
that will bring them to the required development 
as sons of God on the spirit plane. This means that 
they must ultimately die according to the flesh. There 
is no other way of entering into the spirit nature than 
by dying according to the flesh. We must all follow in 
the footsteps of the Master. 

The trials of the narrow way are special tests of the 
New Creature. How will the New Creature act under 
these trials and difficulties? Will he prove loyal to God 
when things seem unfavorable to him according to the 
flesh? If so, the New Creature will grow strong; and 
the warfare between the two, the spirit and the flesh, will 
finally result in the victory of the New Creature, and in 



his birth in the First Resurrection, or Chief Resurrection, 
to the spirit nature, the Divine nature. 

PROPER MENTAL ATTITUDE FOR PRAYER 

The words of our text apply only to the New 
Creatures. "Your Father knoweth what things ye have 
need of." It is not necessary for us to use vain 
repetitions as the heathen do, asking God over and over 
again for blessings of a temporal kind. He knoweth 
what things we have need of; that is to say, whether we 
as New Creatures will be most profited in the abundance 
of wealth or in the absence of wealth; whether we as 
New Creatures will be most profited in the possession of 
health or otherwise. We are not to tell God what we 
wish. We are to give up our will in order that His 
will may be done. We are to pray, therefore, as Jesus 
prayed, "Not My will, but Thine be done"; for "Your 
Father knoweth what things ye have need of." The 
heathen do not have God as their Father, and He is not 

R5624 : page 40 

supervising their affairs. They get certain common 
blessings that God is providing for all— sunshine and rain. 

The prayer of God's people should not be for temporal 
things. We know of no Scriptural illustration where 
the spiritual sons of God asked definitely for temporal 
things and received an answer. We remember that St. 
Paul prayed three times very earnestly for the restoration 
of his eyesight. God would not give him the thing 
he asked for, but would give him that which would be 
better for him as a New Creature. And this affliction of 
poor eyesight, watery eyes, would help to keep him in 
remembrance of the fact that he was once a persecutor 
of the Lord's people. The Lord would not take away 
his affliction, but would give him the grace necessary. 
Presumably, when the Apostle learned that lesson, he 
did not pray for such things again; but doubtless it 
was to our benefit that he did not find this out until he 
had prayed those three improper prayers. We learn 
from this that we should be in the attitude to say, "Lord, 
Thou knowest what I have need of. Give what is best." 

THE MODEL PRAYER 

Some might declare that this would not be the proper 
way to offer a petition— that we should ask God for something 
definite; for instance, if one needed a coat, he 
should ask for a coat. But our Father has said that we 
need not go into particulars. God knows that we have 
need of bread. Our petition, therefore, when we say, 
"Give us this day our daily bread," is not that we think 
that God would forget about it, but rather as an acknowledgement 
on our part that all we have— our food and 
everything else— comes from God. He knows what we 



have need of, and provides these things aside from our 
asking. Nevertheless, it is the Father's good pleasure 
that we should go to Him, asking forgiveness for our 
sins, realizing that He has made provision in advance for 
that forgiveness, and that only as we are merciful to 
others will He deal mercifully with us in respect to our 
trespasses. With regard to our food, we thank our 
Father as the Giver of every good and perfect gift. 

We hallow His name— honor His name— put it first 
in our petitions, in our thoughts. The idea is not as to 
how much glory we can get; but, first of all, we mention 
our Father and His glorious name— we hallow His name, 
make it holy. It should be hallowed and revered everywhere 
in the whole world. Then we follow with the 
petition desiring that His Kingdom would come; for we 
realize that His Kingdom is the very thing that the whole 
world needs, and that He has promised that it shall come. 
This is merely to tell Him of our dependence upon Him, 
and our waiting for Him and for those things which He 
has promised and arranged for in His Kingdom. We are 
not merely saying, "Thy Kingdom come"— we are waiting 
for it, expecting it. Then comes in the mention of our 
necessities. He knoweth what things we have need of 
—whether it be a full loaf, a half loaf or a quarter loaf, 
a small ration or a large one. Then we ask for protection 
from the Evil One. 

There is no such request as, "My shoes are needing 
to be replaced with new shoes," or "My coat is getting 
glossy." The heathen, the world might pray for these 
things; but we are children of God, and are to conform 
our prayers to what He has said. We are to take for 
examples the prayers of Jesus and such prayers as the 
Apostles offered. These prayers are not so much requirements 
made of God, but telling Him we are depending 
upon Him, seeking to have no will of our own- 
merely sinking into His will, asking that His will be 
done in all our affairs. Then we are to live and act according 
to that will and according to those prayers. 



R5624 : page 40 

MORE CONVINCING 
EVIDENCE DEMANDED 

"Be not faithless, but believing."— John 20:27. 

THE words of our text are found in connection 
with our Lord's appearance to the 
eleven disciples in the upper room, St. 
Thomas being of the number. From the 
narrative we learn that just a week before 
this Jesus had appeared to His disciples, 
but St. Thomas was absent at the time. The 
ten who had witnessed our Lord's manifestation 



related to St. Thomas the things 
which they had seen; but their accounts 
seemed idle tales to him and he could not believe them. 
He said he thought they were too easily convinced, and 
that it would require stronger evidence than they had had 
to convince him. Unless he could see the print of the 
nails in our Lord's hands, and put his fingers into the 
print of the nails, and could be able to thrust his hand 
into the spear-wound in His side, he would not believe. 
To some this might seem to be an example of extreme 
unbelief, an unwillingness to receive the testimony of the 
Ten as to the experiences through which they had passed. 
Yet to other minds it would not seem so strange. Some 
of us would find it difficult to believe from any lips that 
a person whom we had three days before seen dead and 
laid in the tomb had manifested by His presence to others 
that He was again alive; and especially hard would it be 
to believe that He had appeared when the doors were 
shut, and had disappeared, the doors still being shut. We 
rather fear that had we been in St. Thomas' place we 
would have been inclined to say, "Show us how that 
could be." We would have experienced the same difficulty, 
and would likely have said, "You think you saw 
something; you believe you are telling the truth, but we 

R5625 : page 40 

think that you have been deceived." We are born with 
differences of mental qualities, and it is easier for some 
to believe than it is for others. 

ST. THOMAS NOT REPROVED 

However, on this occasion Jesus gave the desired demonstration. 
His first appearance to them as a group was, 
we believe, on the first day of the week, and the second 
manifestation was given again on the first day of the 
week; eight days later, under similar circumstances, St. 
Thomas being present, Jesus said to him, "Reach hither 
thy finger, and behold My hands; and reach hither thy 
hand, and thrust it into My side; and be not faithless, but 
believing." (John 20:27.) These were the very things 
St. Thomas had demanded, the very proof he had required. 
The words of Jesus do not convey the thought of 
any special reproof to St. Thomas. It would seem that 
the fact that the Lord gave to him the desired evidence to 
convince him, was an indication that He did not disapprove 
of his demand for more convincing demonstration 
than the others had had before believing a statement so 
marvelous as that of the other ten disciples; for if it had 
been a thing of which He disapproved He would not have 
complied with St. Thomas' wish. 

Our Lord did, however, say (though speaking of those 
of us who would live subsequently, and not of the disciples), 
"Blessed are they who do not see, and do yet 
believe." This is our position. The Lord indicates a 



special blessing upon those who, not seeing, would be able 

R5625 : page 41 

to believe. But we are to remember that we have testimonies 
and evidences that St. Thomas did not have. If 
we had heard that ten men had seen certain things one 
night, we might have wondered if they had not been in 
a vision, just as the transfiguration on the Mount was a 
vision. We might have imagined some dream or some 
hallucination coming upon them. Here, however, was St. 
Thomas, a man like a great many of us, hard-headed and 
practical; but when the proof was given to him, when 
demonstration was made, he recognized that it was not a 
phantom, but that the Lord stood there before him in a 
body of flesh. This incident has proved a strengthener to 
the faith of many of us. 

It is quite probable that St. Thomas was not permitted 
to be present at that first interview for the very purpose 
that there might be that demonstration, to the intent that 
it might be easier for some of us to believe. We can 
readily see that an established faith was all-important to 
the disciples. "Without faith it is impossible to please 
God." (Hebrews 1 1:6.) If the disciples had been in 
doubt about our Lord's resurrection, they would not have 
been able to give us clear testimony on the subject, and 
how would we otherwise have known the facts? Some 
would have believed that He ascended to Heaven, and 
others of us would have thought differently, if we had 
not the positive testimony, the proof. So the Lord purposed 
that these eleven disciples should be thoroughly convinced. 
Unless they had had absolute faith in Him as the 
ascended Redeemer and Advocate they would not have 
been prepared to receive the Holy Spirit at Pentecost. 
And unless they had received the Holy Spirit, they would 
not have been fitted for the ministry. 

These forty days, then, seem to be the most important 
part of our Lord's ministry; for on them depended all 
the success of the Gospel Message, which was to be 
launched, not by angels, but by men— these very men to 
whom He appeared— it was for them to tell what they 
saw and believed. For them to have lost faith and to 
have gone back into the ordinary affairs of life would 
have been contrary to the Divine arrangement. 

Jesus appeared four times— once to the women on the 
morning of His resurrection, once later on the same day 
to two of His disciples who were going to Emmaus; later 
the same evening to the ten in the upper room; then after 
a week, this appearance to St. Thomas and the other ten 
disciples. Some two or three weeks then elapsed, in 
which they neither saw Him nor heard of Him. Jesus 
was giving them some time in which to develop faith. 
They had these proofs, that He had spirit power to go 
and come like the wind. But He had not told them what 
to do, so in spite of all they had seen they thought it best 
to go back into the fishing business. 



This was the moment for which Jesus was waiting. 
He knew they would have doubts and wonderments, and 
was on the alert to be invisibly with them to teach them 
a necessary lesson just as soon as they returned to the 
fishing business. As a result they did not catch even one 
fish. None were allowed to go into their net. All night 
long the disciples toiled in vain. 

In the morning Jesus was standing on the shore. They 
had not seen Him for about three weeks, and at first did 
not recognize Him. He told them to cast their net on the 
other side of the boat. If there were no fish on one side, 
there would probably not be any on the other side; for a 
little distance would not make much difference. But they 
had had such a trying experience during the night that 
they were willing to do almost anything. While it did not 
seem reasonable that it would do any good to cast the net 
just a few feet further away, yet having lost all confidence, 
they were ready to follow the suggestion of the stranger. 
So they put the net down, and enclosed a great haul of 
fish. It was a great miracle; for the net was full. But 
it was nothing remarkable for a spirit being to make this 
exhibition, this manifestation, of Divine power. 

By this experience the disciples were taught two great 
lessons— that without the Divine blessing they could not 
succeed even in the fishing business, the occupation in 
which they had been engaged all their lives. The second 
great lesson was that He who had been a Fisher of men 
had the Divine power to supply all their needs; that as He 
had the power to supply the fish, so He had power to 
supply all other needs. Furthermore, when they got to 
the shore, He had fish there and had cooked them— He 
was not dependent upon the fish in the net. Of course we 
do not understand the power— it was Divine Power, unlimited 
power. This experience became to the disciples 
almost a final demonstration of Divine power. They knew 
that it was Jesus, although they did not ask Him. He 
showed them that He had all the while known just what 
they were doing, and that He had absolute power to give 
or to withhold blessings from them. It must have been a 
great strengthener of their faith to realize that He was as 
able to provide for them in one place as in another, and 
that they did not need to go back into the world and its 
pursuits; for He would be with them always, even to the 
end of the Age. -Matthew 28:20. 

TWO GREAT FACTS ESTABLISHED 

Subsequently our Lord appeared to His disciples twice 
more— seven times altogether. Then He ascended up on 
High. Later He appeared to St. Paul. By these different 
demonstrations Jesus thoroughly convinced His disciples 
of two great things; first, that He was no longer 
dead, that He was alive; secondly, that He had supreme 
power. "All power is given unto Me in Heaven and in 
earth." (Matthew 28:18.) This great Being was their 
Master. He had not lost anything, but had gained much in 



passing into death and then out of it. So they might 
have great confidence in Him, and might go forth to 
speak of His death, of the fact of His resurrection and of 
His ascension into God's presence, as manifested by the 
giving of the Holy Spirit. But they would not have been 
ready to declare any of these things had they not been 
thoroughly convinced. 

We do not think that Jesus reproved St. Thomas for 
His doubts. It is a great satisfaction to one whose mind 
happens to be of that particular kind as was St. Thomas'. 
Some minds require more proof than do others. Undoubtedly 
the whole Church has been blessed by St. 
Thomas' action at this time. If we had been one of the 
disciples and had been absent when Jesus first appeared, 
and had been told of it by the others we would have said, 
"You are dreaming, gentlemen. In your perplexity and 
excitement you are telling us a fairy tale." We would wish 
to be satisfied and to have the sense of touch to prove the 
matter. Now the Lord gave us this evidence, and it is a 
great blessing to us. 

A POWER POSSESSED BY SPIRIT BEINGS 

The evidence of the resurrection of Jesus lay in the 
fact that there was a Person there in that upper room who 
had the power to come and go like the wind and to demonstrate 
that He was not dead by any means. That body 
which St. Thomas and the other disciples saw was not the 
body crucified and buried in Joseph's tomb, but a materialized 
body— with the same facial expression, the same 
hands, the same feet, that the human body of Jesus had. 
Jesus said that it was flesh, that "a spirit hath not flesh 

R5625 : page 42 

and bones as ye see me have." He had both the flesh and 
the bones there.— John 24:39. 

St. Thomas and the others could not appreciate how 
a spirit could materialize a body. In fact, with all that 
we know, more than eighteen centuries later, we do not 
understand how it could be. We know, however, that 
angels appeared like men and could talk, eat and walk. 
We know that various evil spirit beings appeared in the 
days of Noah, and sought to dwell on earth as men. The 
disciples knew this, but they had not thought to apply this 
to the Lord. They were learning how to apply these 
things to the Lord— how a spirit being could materialize 
and dematerialize in their presence. This was a matter of 
education. Subsequently they would come to a more particular 
understanding of this— when they received the 
Holy Spirit; just as with us. When we come to a better 
knowledge, in this proportion the Holy Spirit has guided 
our understanding. 

We have come to a full ability to believe these matters, 
although we do not understand them yet; for to understand 
would be to enter into the matter in a philosophical 



way and to know how the thing is done. We do not think 
that the Apostles saw the body of our Lord in the resurrection. 
But what they saw was proof that He was no 
longer a human being, but a spirit being. To make a 
body suitable for the occasion was no more of a miracle 
than were any of the other things connected with the 
resurrection. 



R5626 : page 42 

GOD'S ARK IN 
WICKED HANDS 

--FEBRUARY 21.-1 SAMUEL 4:1-18.- 

A CORRUPT PRIESTHOOD-A DEMORALIZED PEOPLE-ATTEMPT 
TO BRING GOD INTO THE WAR-THE ARK OF THE COVENANT 
CAPTURED-PUNISHMENT AT THE HANDS OF THEIR 
ENEMIES-THE SAME PRINCIPLE IN OPERATION TODAY- 
TRAGIC DEATH OF ELI AND HIS SONS-WHICH NATIONS 
ARE IN COVENANT RELATIONSHIP WITH GOD? 

"Be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, 
deluding your own selves."— James 1:22. 

SOME twenty years after God's prediction of 

the calamities that would befall Eli and his 

family, the tragedy related in this lesson 

occurred. In all those twenty years, apparently 

no reformations had taken place— 

the aged Eli, now ninety -eight years old, had 

not purged the servants or the service of the 

Lord. He had allowed matters to continue 

in the hands of his sons, notwithstanding 

their continual dishonesty in the things of 

God, and their immorality and pernicious example. 

Samuel, apparently, may have been absent at the time of 

this lesson, and perhaps for years before. Wherever he 

was, we may be sure he was a true servant of God, and 

more and more recognized of the people as such. 

We are not to overestimate the moral and religious 
conditions of the people during those twenty years; but 
we may assume that the evil example of the priests, the 
sons of Eli, whom he had associated with him in the 
priestly office, had an injurious effect upon the people— a 
demoralizing effect. According to God's covenant with 
the nation, He was bound to reprove them, punish them. 
A fresh invasion of the Philistines took place. The 
Israelites went out to meet them in battle and were defeated. 
In their chagrin, and groping after some help, 
they looked to God, just as all the nations of Europe today 
are looking to God for help and praying in vain. 

The usual customs under such conditions today are the 
same as then; namely, an attempt to bring God into the 



war, an attempt to invoke the assistance of religious 
symbols, etc. And, indeed, the Israelites had more ground 
for so doing than have the warring kingdoms of today; 
for God had declared Himself to be the Keeper of Israel, 
and that they were His special nation, His ward, and that 
He would protect them as long as they would be loyal to 
Him. On the other hand, the kingdoms of this world have 
no such Divine promise, have no ground for such expectations 
of Divine aid. They are falsely styling themselves 
Christian kingdoms, "Christendom"; whereas they 
have neither part nor lot with the Lord. He recognizes 
no nations except Natural Israel of the past and Spiritual 
Israel of the present. "Ye are a holy nation, a peculiar 
people, a Royal Priesthood, to show forth the praises of 
Him who hath called you from darkness into His marvelous 
light."- 1 Peter 2:9. 

The Israelites doubtless had read how the Ark went 
before them in the Wilderness journey, how it was in the 
midst of the River Jordan when the people crossed over 
dry-shod, and how it was in the procession that marched 
around Jericho when the walls fell. And so they determined 
to bring up the Ark of the Lord and put it in the 
battle with the people of Israel; and thus they thought 
they would insure victory. Their reasoning, apparently, 
was that God would not permit the Ark of the Covenant 
to be injured or to be captured; and hence they would be 
safe and victory would be bound to come to Israel. 

With our mental eye we see the pageant: Here come 
the Levites, bearing the holy Ark of God, and the two 
sons of Eli, arrayed as the priests of the Most High, the 
representatives of God's Holiness; and the people, enthused 
with the thought of victory through the Ark of 
God, shouted their usual battle-hymn, "Rise up, Lord, and 
let Thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate 
Thee flee before Thee."— Numbers 10:35. 

The people forgot that they had been living irreligiously, 
in violation of their Covenant with God; and 
that that Covenant called for punishment upon them at 
the hand of their enemies. They forgot that the two 
representative priests by no means represented God and 
His Righteousness— that they were thieves and robbers, 
garbed as the priests of God; that they were immoral, 
impure, posing as the representatives of the Divine Holiness. 
They forgot that God's blessing was not to be expected 
under such conditions. 

A PRESENT-DAY PARALLEL 

And alas! Although we are many centuries removed 
from their time, we see much of this same principle today- 
much sham, much pretense, much misrepresentation 
of God on the part of those who profess to be His representatives. 
We behold the present war, with the Kaiser 
of Germany at the head of the Lutheran Church; with 
Emperor Francis Joseph of Austria-Hungary, the chief 
son of the Papacy; with King George at the head of the 



Church of England; with the Czar, the "little father" of 
Russia, the chief representative of the Greek Catholic 
Church— all these marching out to battle, each rallying his 
soldiers with the thought of God, each treading the 
precious Name of the Prince of Peace into the dust, each 
bent on the use of the sword for the selfish purpose of 
promoting the greatness of his empire and its commercial 
prosperity, and, incidentally, upholding the traditions of 
the past respecting his authority to establish the Kingdom 
of God upon earth. 
Today, as in the days of Eli's sons, the people give a 

R5626 : page 43 

shout as they couple the Cause of God with their national 

projects. Again they forget that the two are entirely 

separate; that God's Cause is under Divine direction; and 

that His Cause will prosper best by the permission of a 

great defeat to all these systems of men, preparing incidentally 

for the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom, 

after the Armageddon of the Bible shall have humbled 

the world and made them ready to acclaim the new King 

Immanuel and His Kingdom "the desire of all nations." 

Calling upon the Name of the Lord and having the 
Ark of God in the battle did not help the Israelites, even 
as the carrying of the ikons by the Russian soldiers will 
not give them the victory, or the wearing of the name of 
God upon their belts give the victory to the Germans, or 
the carrying of the Cross of St. George give victory to 
the armies of the British. 

There was a great slaughter and a scattering of the 
forces of the Israelites. The two sons of Eli were slain. 
The Ark of God was captured. A swift runner from the 
army brought the sad intelligence to Shiloh, where Eli 
as judge sat upon his high seat in the gate, anxiously 
wondering, fearfully remembering the twenty-year-before 
prediction of disaster. The runner reported to Eli that 
the battle had gone against the Israelites, that his two 
sons were slain, and concluded by telling that the Ark of 
the Lord had also been captured by the Philistines. 

ISRAEL DIFFERENT FROM OTHER NATIONS 

Eli heard all with equanimity until the last sentence. 
When he learned that his precious treasure, for which he 
was the guardian by Divine appointment, had been taken 
by the Philistines, the poor man fell over in a faint, his 
chair toppled, his neck was broken. Although faithful at 
heart until death at ninety-eight, he, nevertheless, is not 
without reproof in that he neglected his family and neglected 
to see that the work entrusted to him was not interfered 
with by those of his own household. His loyalty 
to God was not sufficiently great to hinder him from shirking 
his responsibility. In his character was too much of 
the spirit of "peace at any price," not enough of that 
courage which is prepared to die for righteousness' sake. 



The lesson taught to God's Covenant people, Israel, the 
Lord next sent chastisements upon the Philistines, so that 
they were glad to return the Ark to the people of God. 
Some are inclined to make light of the declaration that 
the Philistines were plagued with mice and with hemorrhoids 
so long as they had the Ark with them; and that 
when the Ark had been restored to the Israelites, these 
plagues were removed. We have no reason, however, to 
doubt that the Philistines had cause for the realization 
that these were special plagues, and the Scriptures seem 
to uphold the thought that they were of the Lord. 

This does not authorize us in supposing that every kind 
of plague today is of the Lord— that pestilences, etc., are 
special punishments of God. We must remember, when 
considering this matter, that the nation of Israel, and 
everything appertaining to it, was in a special covenant 
relationship with God and under Divine supervision. 
Whoever touched Israel or any of the things pertaining 
to the typical system was to that extent adverse to the 
Lord, His Cause, His interests, and this could be done 
only by the Lord's permission; and when the Lord wished 
to bring back the Ark, or deliver His people from such 
circumstances, it was for Him to bring to pass conditions 
necessary to that end. 

There is no such condition of things prevailing today. 
The nation of Israel is temporarily cut off from the Divine 
protection which was with them— until the full number 
from the Gentiles shall have been brought into Spiritual 
Israel. Then all Israel will be recovered from their blindness 
and their alienation from God, as it is written: "This 
is My covenant with them when I shall take away their 
sins."— Romans 11:26-32. 

The only people or nation now in covenant relationship 
with God, according to the Bible, is Spiritual Israel, 
"a holy nation, a peculiar people." And, as respects 

R5627 : page 43 

Spiritual Israel, their interests are spiritual; and the 
Divine promises do not guarantee them earthly blessings 
and protection, but rather the reverse— persecution and 
opposition. God's guarantee to Spiritual Israel, however, 
is that all the adversities of the present life which He 
permits to come to them will work out to their eternal 
spiritual welfare, if they are rightly exercised thereby. 



R5627 : page 43 

CONFESSION OF SIN, 
FORGIVENESS, VICTORY 

-FEBRUARY 28.-1 SAMUEL 7:3-17.- 

SAMUEL, PROPHET AND JUDGE-HIS INFLUENCE FOR GOOD- 



ISRAEL BECAME PENITENT--A CONVENTION AT MOUNT 
MIZPEH--THE WATCH TOWER-FASTING AND PRAYER- 
GOD'S FAVOR RETURNED-PHILISTINES REBUKED-ISRAEL 
BLESSED UNDER SAMUEL'S JUDGESHIP-A CIRCUIT JUDGE. 

"Hitherto hath the Lord helped us."— 1 Samuel 7:12. 

SAMUEL the Prophet might serve Eli the 

Priest, but he could not become his successor, 

because not of the priestly family. 

It is probable therefore that, as he reached 

maturity, he found other service; but there 

is a blank in the record of twenty years at 

least. The intimation, however, is that he 

was faithful to God and to the interests of 

his people, and that the people trusted him 

as a servant of God. We may be sure, 

therefore, that he was not idle, but engaged in some good 

work. Quite possibly he engaged himself in instructing 

the people respecting their wrong conditions, the permission 

of idolatry amongst them, their neglect of God, etc. 

Our lesson introduces him to us as the leader of the 
hour, when the people had become thoroughly aroused 
to a sense of their unholiness, their need of God, and 
their need of mutual help if they would come back into 
relationship with God. Having brought the people to this 
proper condition of mind, the Prophet Samuel appointed a 
general meeting at a small mountain called Mizpeh; that 
is, Watch Tower. They came in considerable numbers 
and with hearts bowed down with grief in recognition 
that they were sinners, and that therefore they had been 
foreigners— out of Divine favor. They came seeking 
God, and He was found of them. 

A GREAT REFORMATION EFFECTED 

The Prophet Samuel put the matter before the people 
in plain, distinct terms, saying, "If ye do return unto the 
Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange 
gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your 
hearts unto the Lord, and serve Him only; and He will 
deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines." Samuel 
was warranted in telling the people that they would be 
delivered from the power of the Philistines; because this 
was God's standing agreement with them by the Covenant 
He entered into with them; namely, that if they would 
obey His Laws and be loyal to Him, He would be their 

R5627 : page 44 

God and they would be His people, and He would guide 
their interests to their highest welfare, both as a nation 
and as individuals; but if they would not obey His statutes 
and be loyal to Him, then He would deliver them into the 
hands of their enemies and punish them Seven Times. 
God was keeping His part of the Covenant; it was Israel 



that had failed, and Samuel was properly bringing the 
matter to their attention and urging repentance. 

"Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and 
Ashtaroth, and served Jehovah only." Baalim was the 
plural name for Baal. The word Baal signifies overseer, 
caretaker. The Israelites had been distinctly forewarned 
not to make any kind of idols, and to keep themselves 
separate from all idols to such an extent that they might 
not even make an image of their own God, Jehovah. He 
would not have any symbols before His people, but have 
them worship Him in spirit and in truth. But all around 
them were the Canaanites, whom they had not had faith 
and obedience to drive out of the land. These Canaanites 
had the Baal idols in all their towns, and some had them 
in their homes and trusted in them as protective genii. 

Ashtaroth is the plural for Ashtoreth, a female deity 
—the same known to the Babylonians as Ishtar and to the 
Greeks as Astarte. She was the goddess of fertility and 
the sexual relations; and connected with her worship 
were many licentious services supposed to promote fertility— 
the propagation of the human species. If Samuel's 
work of twenty years reached this harvest where the 
whole people of Israel decided to put away their Ashtaroth 
of gods and to worship and serve Jehovah only, he certainly 
accomplished much. We may be sure also that 
some human agency was connected with so great an outward 
manifestation. Such reformations do not come by 
chance, nor are they miraculous. 

Samuel prayed for the people of Israel; "and they 
drew water and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted 
on that day, and said there, We have sinned against the 
Lord." The confession of sin was not only creditable to 
the people as a manifestation of their honesty and sincerity, 
but it was appropriate that they should do this 
when asking the God whom they had offended to receive 
them back again into covenant relationship with Himself. 
The poet has said that confession is good for the soul, and 
surely all have proven it so. It served to commit them. 
The humility which was necessary to the making of such 
confession would be profitable in respect to their 
character-building . 

The water poured out may be viewed from various 
angles. One suggestion is that it represented the Truth 
which they could not gainsay, could not take back, even 
as water spilled upon the ground cannot be recovered. 
Another suggestion is that as the water was drawn from 
the depth of the earth, so their confession came from the 
depths of their hearts. Another is that it represented 
their vows of faithfulness to the Lord, which would be as 
irrevocable as water poured out. 

A LESSON FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

"And Samuel judged the children of Israel in Mizpeh." 
That is to say, as a judge, a counselor, he gave advice, 
gave decision in respect to their affairs, disputes, proper 



course of conduct, right and wrong on any subject, etc. 

Thus the nation of Israel was making a new start; and 

as a people they were more drawn together than at any 

time in their history from the days of Joshua onward. 

But, as though it were a trial of their faith, at this very 

time, while they were resolving on the course of righteousness, 

their enemies, the Philistines, having heard of the 

gathering, sought to nip the rebellion in the bud, and 

came against them with an army of considerable size. 

The Israelites had not come together for battle, but 
for prayer; nevertheless they were probably more or less 
armed. But they felt themselves quite unprepared to 
meet the Philistine hosts. And they said unto Samuel, 
"Cease not to cry unto Jehovah our God for us, that He 
save us out of the hand of the Philistines." They were 
learning to look for help in the right direction. This cry 
coming to the Lord after they had abandoned their idols 
and had vowed to be loyal to Jehovah, put them in a 
very different attitude toward Him from that of twenty 
years previous, when they called for the Ark of God to 
lead them in battling against the Philistines without any 
reformation of character, without repentance for sins. 

Is there not a lesson here for all of God's people? Is 
it not as true today as it ever was that it is vain for the 
Lord's people to call upon the Lord for assistance and 
blessing while they are living in sin, in violation of their 
Covenant and its obligations? The first lesson of all, 
then, for those who realize their being in sin is repentance, 
and definite vows to the Lord respecting faithfulness in 
petition to Him for His mercy unto them. Those who 
thus come to the Lord now, as Christians, under the 
Headship of our Lord Jesus Christ, are sure to have 
Divine mercy and "grace to help in every time of need." 

Our Philistines that come upon us and enslave us are 
our passions and weaknesses, and the oppositions of the 
world and the Adversary. These are our foes, and 
against these only Divine Power can enable us to fight a 
good fight and come off victorious. 

In response to the cry of the people, Samuel the 
Prophet offered to the Lord a sacrifice— a lamb of the first 
year. He knew it not, but it was a type of "the Lamb of 
God, which taketh away the sin of the world." Beside 
this typical sacrifice, Samuel cried to the Lord on behalf 
of his people, and the Lord heard him. So with all that 
stand beside the great Antitypical Sacrifice, and in the 
name and merit of that Sacrifice, as people of God in 
covenant relationship with Him— having put away sins 
and weaknesses to the best of our ability, we may be sure 
of Divine help, deliverance. 

SIGNAL MANIFESTATION OF DIVINE FAVOR 

While yet the offering was upon the altar, the noise of 
the approaching hosts of the Philistines was heard. How 
would God assist His people? How could they hope for 
deliverance against the Philistine hosts? Would they in 



fear scatter or would God's power to help be manifest? 
The deliverance came in the shape of a great, violent, 
sudden storm. Going hastily, it swept down the hill 
Mizpeh, in the faces of the approaching hosts. They 
turned their backs against the violent storm; and the 
Israelites perceiving the opportunity, rushed onward with 

R5628 : page 44 

the storm, pursuing the Philistines and driving them before 
them, and thus gaining a great victory. The place of 
the victory was the very spot where, twenty years before, 
the Ark of the Lord had been captured by the Philistines. 
Samuel there set a stone as a pillar and monument, and 
called it Ebenezer, saying, "Hitherto hath the Lord 
helped us."— Verse 12. 

So with Christians in their victories under the Lord's 
assistance; when by the Lord's grace they gain victories 
they should set up memorials or monuments in their 
minds, in their hearts, and not pass these blessings by or 
forget that the victories were gained by help from on 
High. Every Christian, therefore, should have his 
Ebenezers, his monuments of victory, as it were, of Divine 
assistance over his foes, the world, the flesh and the Adversary, 
and he should rejoice in these. This sentiment 

R5628 : page 45 

has come down to us in the words of a beautiful hymn, 
familiar to nearly all who read the English language: 

"Here I'll raise my Ebenezer, 

Hither by Thy help I'm come; 
And I hope by Thy good pleasure, 

Safely to arrive at Home." 

PROPER AND IMPROPER JUDGMENTS 

The record is that Samuel continued to be a judge, an 
interpreter of the Divine Law, a counselor to his people, 
"all the days of his life." The Israelites had accepted 
God's Law, and had agreed to abide by its decisions. 
Whoever, therefore, they would have confidence in as an 
interpreter of the Divine Law, they, in proper condition 
of heart, would be ready to obey his rulings, his judgments. 
Spiritual Israelites similarly have come into 
covenant relationship with God, and have bound themselves 
to seek to know and to do the will of God and not 
their own wills. Hence whoever may be the person of opportunity 
who can show "an Israelite indeed" the mind of 
the Lord in any manner, he becomes his counselor, the 
Lord's mouthpiece to him; thus all the people of God 
assist one another to judge themselves, to build each other 
up in the most holy faith, to guide each other to know 
and to do the will of the Lord. 

This office is not left to ministers, to priests, but is 



open to all the Lord's people; for St. Peter declares all 
the Lord's people are priests— "Ye are a Royal Priesthood." 
True, these priests have not entered into their 
royalty, nor yet have they entered fully upon their priestly 
office. These glorious offices belong especially to the 
future, when by virtue of the resurrection change, these 
priests, who are now sacrificing, will be Priests in glory, 
reigning with Christ and judging the world— assisting the 
world, counseling the world, instructing the world regarding 
God's will and helping them to know and do that will. 

The Royal Priesthood are to remember that their judging 
in the present time is not a judging of the hearts, but 
merely a judging of the conduct. As respects the hearts, 
they are informed of the Lord that they are not competent 
to judge; and hence the words of the Apostle Paul, 
"Judge nothing before the time." The time for the judging 
of the hearts, when this work will be committed to the 
Church, will be after that which is perfect shall have 
come, after the resurrection change shall have made us 
like our Redeemer and qualified, therefore, to read the 
hearts of mankind and to judge a righteous judgment, a 
merciful judgment, a sympathetic judgment, a helpful one. 

The only judging which the people of God may now do 
for and toward each other, is that which the Lord represented 
when He said, "By their fruits ye shall know 
them." Men do not gather grapes off thorn bushes or 
figs off thistles. A good spring will not send forth bitter 
water. We are, therefore, to judge ourselves as to whether 
or not our conduct is in harmony with the principles of 
righteousness; and we may similarly assist in judging one 
another as respects outward conduct, leaving the judgment 
of the heart to the individual himself and to the Lord. 

The Prophet Samuel established a new order of things, 
which we see was the outgrowth of his reformation work 
amongst the people of God, his nation. He did not do as 
others before him had done— have his place of residence, 
to which all the people must go to ask his advice, his 
counsel, his judgment; but he introduced the circuit judge 
system, and went from place to place holding a court, not 
so much to condemn anybody, but rather to advise those 
who desired advice. Thus the nation of Israel began to 
be cemented as one people, and to realize that their interests 
were in common; and that all of their interests were 
bound up with God, His Law, His Covenant with them, 
and the interpretation of these through such agents as the 
Lord might send to them— Samuel the Prophet being one 
of these. 



R5628 : page 45 

RETURN OF THE CHURCH 
FROM THE WILDERNESS 

A WILDERNESS condition is one of separation 



from the blessings of civilization; it 
is a cut-off condition, a separation from 
the world. In the case of the Church, we 
read that the Lord provided her with two 
wings, that she might go into the wilderness 
1260 symbolic days, or years. Apparently 
she went into the wilderness condition of 
her own accord, and became voluntarily an 
outcast from the privileges and advantages 
of the world's society; she underwent a general 
ostracism or separation. 

In the account of the typical Atonement Day sacrifices 
we read that the scapegoat went into the wilderness, but 
it did not go voluntarily; it was sent away. In the antitype 
the faithful, consecrated class go into the wilderness 
voluntarily, while the others will go into it of compulsion. 
The two classes will have similar experiences, however. 
The experiences of the Church have been tribulations, 
brought on by reason of their loyalty to the Lord and the 
Truth. The Lord's people can be in this wilderness condition 
even while surrounded by all the affairs of the 
world. We are separate from the world; we are in the 
world, but not of it— isolated. 

In the Book of Revelation we read that the Church 
fled for 1260 years into the wilderness, and that during a 
similar period of time a great system had control of affairs. 
This period, we understand, began in 539 A.D. 
and ended with the year 1799. It was a period of 
ostracism, called the wilderness condition, but not necessarily 
of persecution. One might go into the wilderness 
condition and not receive persecution— not be shot, not be 
hanged, or anything like that. Hence the wilderness condition 
does not include the thought of persecution, but 
merely of separation. 

In figurative language the city represents honor, distinction 
and prominence in the world, while the wilderness 
signifies the reverse condition— that of being ignored, 
ostracized, etc. During the 1260 symbolic days the 
Church was in the condition of ostracism. The governments 
paid no attention to her; but on the other hand, 
they gave a great deal of attention to the great system 
which exalted itself and became "that great city which 
reigneth over the kings of the earth"— Mystic Babylon. 

THE RETURN FROM THE WILDERNESS 

At the end of this period, beginning with 1799, the 
proper conception of the Church was more nearly recognized 
by the world in general, when the power of Papacy 
was broken, when the Pope was carried a prisoner to 
France. Then the nations realized that they had been 
more or less mistaken as to the Pope being Christ's representative. 
From that time on the Papacy, as a great 
system, has not had the persecuting power, but has been 
compelled to vie with others. The Baptist denomination, 
the Methodist denomination, and others, have prospered 



during this period, and the world has recognized them in 
the same degree as it has recognized Papacy. 

The Papacy did not go into the wilderness, however; 
but Protestantism stepped out of the wilderness condition, 
to be more particularly recognized by the people and 

R5628 : page 46 

by the government. This has continued for quite a while 
and the Bible has been more generally recognized than 
before. Shortly after 1799, Bible Societies began to be 
organized. The Bible was brought into great prominence. 
Old and New Testaments, God's two witnesses, were exalted 
to Heaven. Those who advocated the Bible came 
out into the full light. Bible students and Bible study 
became more approved than ever before. Bibles were 
printed and everybody favored Bible Study. 

There is no Scriptural declaration that the Church 
will go back into the wilderness condition. Our reference 
to a second wilderness experience is founded upon the 
symbolic picture of our day that is given to us in the 
experiences of Elijah the Prophet. Elijah, representing 
the true Church of God, had been a true Prophet for some 
time. He was unpopular with Queen Jezebel, who had 
influenced King Ahab against him. The King threatened 
Elijah's life and he fled to the wilderness for 1260 days, 
or three and a half years. This was symbolical of the 
1 260 years during which the Church remained in the 
wilderness condition. 

At the close of the 1260 days in Elijah's experience, he 
returned from the wilderness, and made a great demonstration. 
He made an exhibition of the priests of Baal, 
who had been favored by Queen Jezebel and by King 
Ahab. This manifestation resulted in a great exaltation 
of the Word of God, and a great downfall of the priests 

R5629 : page 46 

of Baal. From that time they were obliged to hold themselves 
in seclusion. The people said, "Jehovah is God." 

We understand that all this particularly represents how 
the true Church, in 1799, manifested itself before the 
kings of the world, and stood up for God and the Bible. 
Elijah represented the true Church; Jezebel represented 
the Papal System and other systems closely related to 
her; Ahab represented the government; and the people of 
Israel represented the world. The Bible was forced upon 
Jezebel and Ahab, and everybody. The two witnesses 
were exalted because the people took notice of them. 

ELIJAH'S SECOND WILDERNESS EXPERIENCE 

Coming back to the picture: Queen Jezebel represented 
her daughters, her kind, her family. The Prophet Elijah 
represented the true people of God in the present time. 
The Queen did not persecute him, but threatened him; 



and again he fled into the wilderness— not for a specified 
time, however. The people in general were not under the 
same kind of restraint as previously. The priests of Baal 
never regained their influence. Elijah went again into 
the wilderness and was there nourished for a time; it was 
not the previous nourishment of the 1260 days by the 
ravens, but an especially provided food for a time. 

To our understanding this food especially provided for 
Elijah, after his experience with the priests of Baal and 
after his fleeing from Jezebel, represents the special Message 
that is now feeding the people of God. After Elijah 
had reached the wilderness, there was an inclination on 
his part to feel discouraged; and he said, "Ah, Lord God! 
..."—this signifying his discouragement. But the Lord 
strengthened him and gave him a special food, in the 
strength of which he went to Mt. Horeb. This mountain 
represents the Kingdom of God, the Messianic Kingdom. 
And we believe that by this spiritual food we are now 
brought to the time when the Kingdom is to be established. 

When Elijah got to Mt. Horeb the Lord gave him 
three witnesses. (1 Kings 19:1-18.) The wind rending 
the mountains represents the present war. The great 
earthquake symbolically represents a social revolution, the 
like of which was never before in the world, and which 
we believe is due to come very soon. This will not come 
as soon as the war begins, but the war might continue 
while the earthquake is on. This was not all. The third 
demonstration was a great fire, which consumed everything 
before it. This represents wide-spread anarchy, 
which will prevail in the world, following the social revolution. 
Then after the fire Elijah heard the "still, small 
voice," representing the Divine Power, which will bring 
the blessings to the world. 



R5629 : page 46 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
REPLY TO A CRITIC OF PRESENT EXPECTATIONS 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your first letter was unanswered, not because of any discourtesy, 
but through pity. But now that you have written 
again respecting the disappointment of my expectation mentioned 
Nov. 29, 1911, that "within three years I shall have 
been joined to the Bridegroom," I have concluded to answer 
your letter, conceiving that after you have read my reply, my 
past, present and future faith may not seem so distressingly 
funny to you. 

Twenty years ago you and I believed in infant baptism; in 
the Divine right of the clergy to administer that baptism; that 
baptism was necessary to escape eternal torment; that God is 
love; that God created and continues to create billions of beings 
in His likeness who will spend the countless ages of 



eternity in the strangling fumes of burning sulphur, pleading 
in vain for one drop of water to relieve their agonies; we 
believed in the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of 
man; we believed that we should be followers of God as dear 
children; in baptizing our infants we believed that God saved 
some and did not save others, or else we believed in the salvation 
of all infants, except those poor unfortunates to whose 
parents the Gospel had not been preached; for such, we believed, 
no salvation was provided outside of baptism into some 
one of the hundreds of sects into which Christianity is divided. 

We believed that after a man dies, he is alive; we believed 
that Jesus Christ never died; that He could not die; that no 
Ransom was ever paid or ever will be paid; that Jehovah God 
and Christ Jesus His Son are one and the same person; that 
Christ was His own Father; that Jesus was His own Son; that 
the Holy Spirit is a person; that one plus one, plus one, equal 
one; that when Jesus hung on the cross and said, "My God, 
My God, why hast Thou Forsaken Me," He was merely talking 
to Himself; that He was raised in the flesh; that He still 
bears, and will forever bear, His scars; that He alone of all 
mankind will have to go scarred and marred throughout 
eternity; that He will come again in the flesh; that the Day of 
Judgment is a Day of horror; that the literal earth is to be 
burned up with literal fire; that all human beings who are 
saved become angels; that Paradise is Heaven; that the crucified 
thief became an angel the day he died and went to 
Heaven; that Christ did not become an angel, but was raised 
from the dead as a man three days later than the thief, but 
did not ascend to Heaven until forty days afterward; that all 
the Ancient Worthies went to Heaven when they died, including 
David; that present kingdoms are part of Christ's Kingdom; 
that the Devil has been away off somewhere in an unlocated 
Hell, instead of exercising dominion over the kingdoms 
of this earth; that the Antichrist is to be a literal man; 
that sectarianism is a good thing and will be perpetuated forever; 
that one can be born of the Spirit while he is still in 
the flesh; that a resurrection from the dead is impossible 
because none are dead; that it merely means in the case of 
the saints the taking back of the poor bodies that they had, in 
place of the perfectly good ones they secured when they died. 

We believed that sanctification means sinlessness, not self-sacrificing 
devotion to the will of God; that the expression 
"Bride of Christ" means nothing; because everybody who is 
saved will be the Bride of Christ; that the expression High 
calling means nothing, because everybody who is saved, will 
be saved to the High calling; that the "prize of the High 
calling," therefore means nothing; that the Time of the End 
will never come in your day, in my day, nor in anybody else's 
day; that present running to and fro, means nothing; that 
there will never be any end of the "Times of the Gentiles"; 
that there will never be any special "Time of Trouble such 
as never was since there was a nation"; that there will be no 
"Restitution of all things"; that the Jubilee arrangements 
signify nothing; that the "abomination of desolation" signifies 
nothing; that there never was and never will be a great 



R5629 : page 47 

falling away; that there never was and never will be a great 
Mother Apostate Church, and she never had and never will 
have any daughters; that the expression "Royal Priesthood" 
means nothing, because everybody who is saved will be of 
the priesthood; that there can never be a Second Death, not 
even a first one; that a human soul once born, lives on forever; 
that the Tabernacle signifies nothing; that there is no 
witness to the Lord in the land of Egypt; that the Memorial 
Supper can be properly observed any old time; that the 
Christian Sabbath is not a rest of faith, but merely a formal 
observance of one day in seven; that the literal heavens will 
be literally rolled together as a literal scroll; that at that time 
men will pray for literal mountains to fall on top of them. 

I praise God for the day that brought Present Truth to 
my door. It was so wholesome, so refreshing to mind and 
heart, that I quickly left the humbug and claptrap of the 
past and was used of God to also open your blinded eyes. 
We rejoiced in the Truth together, working side by side for 
fifteen years. The Lord greatly honored you as a mouthpiece; 
I never knew anybody who could make the follies of 
Babylon look so ridiculous. In your letter you ask, "What 
next?" Ah, now comes the pity of it! The next thing is 
that you permit your heart to become embittered against the 
one whose labors of love and whose blessing from on High 
brought the Truth to both our hearts. You went out, and 
took several of the sheep with you. 

I am reliably informed that when Billy Sunday was in 
your city you were one of the most prominent workers for 
"the cause." I am reliably informed also that you are now 
serving as superintendent of a Sunday School in the denomination 
from which you withdrew when you accepted Present 
Truth. You either believe the foregoing "confession of 
faith," or you don't believe it. If you don't believe it, and 
are helping to boost the organizations that do believe it, then 
Doc. Cook, the discoverer (?) of the North Pole, should 
enlist as your pupil. If you do not believe it, and admit, as 
you must, that you got all your light on these and thousands 
of other subjects from Brother Russell, then, by comparison, 
the boy who wished that his father would die so that he 
could have his jack-knife, should be considered a model of 
gratitude and loyalty and faithfulness; and his name should 
be handed down to posterity as a shining example of the way 
we should act toward our benefactors. 

On the contrary, if you have returned to your belief of 

R5630 : page 47 

the foregoing "faith," you must admit that it is something 
you once believed and once vomited forth, and like the 
Scriptural dog, you have returned to your vomit; I hope you 
like it.— 2 Peter 2:20-22. 

Probably I look ridiculous to you because I did not go to 
Heaven, October 1st, 1914, but you don't look ridiculous to me 
—oh no! 



With ten of the greatest nations of earth writhing in 
their death agonies, it seems to me a particularly inopportune 
time to seek to ridicule the man, and the only man, who for 
forty years has taught that the Times of the Gentiles would 
end in 1914. 

If you believe these stupid and worse than childish 
blunders of the past and seek to revivify them, you have a 
worse job on your hands than Christ had when He raised 
Lazarus. Pastor Russell's teachings have killed them so 
completely that they are in a far worse condition than 
Lazarus was when he had been dead four days. 

I presume that when Zedekiah struck Micaiah upon the 
cheek and ridiculed the latter's confidence in the Lord's Message, 
he thought it was really funny, and still more so when 
Micaiah warned him that he would soon attempt to hide 
himself unsuccessfully from the Syrians in his inner chamber. 
I doubt, however, whether Zedekiah considered it so funny 
shortly afterward when he saw the armies of the Syrians in 
front of his house, and especially when he heard them coming 
up stairs.— 1 Kings 22. 

If this letter shall awaken you to your true condition, I 
shall be glad. If it does not, it will not be necessary for you 
to write to me again; for I shall consider it a hopeless task. 

With best wishes, I remain, C. J. WOODWORTH. 



MANY HEARTS RECEIVING COMFORT 

W.T.B.&T. SOC'Y, DEAR FRIENDS :- 

I think you should know of the blessing of the Lord on 
the service last week, and in making calls on those who 
handed in their names at Brother Rutherford's meeting. I 
never saw such interest! The sale of books was reasonably 
good— 450 (all but 50 of which are delivered)— sold in four 
days. The fine class of business men represented was quite 
exceptional, although every week there are some. 

Three young ladies from the Y.W.C.A. bought the books, 
and one gives good evidence of coming fully into the Truth 
in a very short time. A piano dealer said, "This is no denominational 
work, is it? I have no use for denominations. This 
man's theory is worthy of investigation." A lawyer said, 
"That man is a wonder! I never read my Bible, but I am 
going to begin now. Every reasoning person ought to have 
those books— I am going to read every word in them." 

A merchant remarked, "This is the greatest reformation 
movement we ever had; we must keep it going." He sent to 
me twice for more books for his friends; and he is a man 
who had thrown all religion aside. 

A Doctor I called on said, "I was interested to hear he 
was a Baptist; so was I, and I had the same experience he 
had— threw the whole thing over in disgust— and I was a 
preacher." He was glad to examine the work. The cloth 
books were not fine enough for him; he got the leather-bound. 

A very fine office man said, "I will read every moment I 
can get. Of course, I take it for granted that these books 



are along the lines of that lecture." He ordered a set. 

It would take a book to tell the rest! But it is such a joy 
to see some of the "refuge of lies" being swept away, confidence 
in Babylon on the wane, and many hearts comforted. 

With love and prayers for you all, and asking a continued 
interest in your petitions, I am, by His grace, 

Your Sister, CHARLOTTE WHITE. 



"NOT SLOTHFUL IN BUSINESS" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I believe many of us would work with greater zeal if we 
could better realize the opportunities for presenting the Truth 
among those we know. We are apt to think that many have 
no ear for the Message. 

Recently I resolved to be more diligent in searching for 
those who might be hungry for the Truth. Accordingly I 
carried in my produce wagon a supply of BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY, displayed more conspicuously than usual. 

One thanked me very kindly for a copy. I had known 
him to be somewhat friendly to the Truth. Another came to 
the wagon with Bible in hand, and when asked whether a 
Baptist or a Methodist replied Presbyterian, but had lately 
begun to read Pastor Russell's SCRIPTURE STUDIES and was 
greatly interested in them; adding, "I have gone to my Pastor 
with some Bible questions that he has so far failed to answer." 
Another asked my purpose in displaying the papers, and said 
he had two little books which were very interesting that he 
wanted me to read. They were TABERNACLE SHADOWS and 
the HELL booklet. He asked me to bring him Vol. I. 

In our daily petitions we remember you and the Harvest 
work. Pray for me that I may never look back. 

Yours by His grace, F. M. MORRIS. --Florida. 



"A PRAYER OF CONSECRATION" 

Realizing that I must draw nearer to God to be kept in this 
hour of trial now upon the whole world, I have prayed more; 
and I find the following form very helpful; I therefore call it 

"THE PRAYER OF THE CONSECRATED": 

"Dear Heavenly Father, reverently, and in the name of 
Jesus, I approach Thy Throne of Grace to renew my consecration 
vows today. Not content with having made my consecration 
years ago, nor even yesterday, I renew it today, and 
present to Thee my body and all its powers, my heart and all 
its affections. I give to Thee, willingly and gladly, everything 
I possess, to be wholly Thine— today. I would not withhold 
from Thee one single thing. 

"Gracious and loving Father and dear Lord Jesus, come 
in all Your fulness into my heart and life; take full possession 



and reign there supreme, without a rival today. Dear 
Lord Jesus, my glorious High Priest and Head to Thy Body, 
the Church, continue to offer me today upon God's holy altar 
of sacrifice, and until the sacrifice is completed in death." 

I have found that doing this daily I have been greatly 
enriched and blessed spiritually. 

Yours, in His love and service, W. J. THORN. 

Isa. 41:10; Num. 6:24-26. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MARCH 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
March follow: (1) 153; (2) 105; (3) 143; (4) 108; (5) 119; (6) 
99; (7) 95; (8) 83; (9) 1; (10) 53; (11) 145; (12) 188; (13) 
211; (14) 240; (15) 307; (16) 23; (17) 281; (18) 155; (19) 221; 
(20) 22; (21) 16; (22) 114; (23) 107; (24) 113; (25) 212; (26) 
192; (27) 78; (28) 235; (29) 4; (30) 303; (31) 173. 



page 48 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 49 
