





COVER SUBJECT | HOW TO GET MORE FROM READING THE BIBLE
How Can the Bible Improve My Life?




The Bible is no ordinary book. It contains advice from our Creator. (2 Timothy 3:16) Its message can influence us profoundly. In fact, the Bible states: “The word of God is alive and exerts power.” (Hebrews 4:12) It has the power to improve our life in two key ways—offering guidance in our daily life now and helping us get to know God and his promises.—1 Timothy 4:8; James 4:8.
Improving your life now. The Bible can help with very personal matters. It gives practical advice about the following.
  Relationships with others.—Ephesians 4:31, 32; 5:22, 25, 28, 33.

  Emotional and physical health.—Psalm 37:8; Proverbs 17:22.

  Moral values.—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10.

  Economic welfare.—Proverbs 10:4; 28:19; Ephesians 4:28.a


A young couple in Asia greatly appreciated the value of the Bible’s advice. Like many newly married couples, they struggled with adjusting to each other’s personality and with having open communication. But they began applying what they read in the Bible. With what result? The husband, Vicent, says: “What I read in the Bible helped me to deal with challenges in our marriage in a loving way. Living by the Bible has given us a happy life together.” His wife, Annalou, agrees: “Reading examples in the Bible helped us. I now feel happy and content with our marriage and our goals in life.”
Getting to know God. Aside from his comments about marriage, Vicent also says: “By reading the Bible, I feel much closer to Jehovah now than ever before.” Vicent’s observation focuses on an important point—the Bible can help you get acquainted with God. In so doing, you will not only benefit from his advice but also find that you can get to know him as a friend. And you will see that he reveals details about a better future, a time when you can enjoy “the real life”—which will last forever. (1 Timothy 6:19) That is something that no other book can offer.
If you set out to read the Bible and keep at it, you too can gain those benefits—improving your life now and getting to know God. However, as you read the Bible, you will likely think of numerous questions. And when you do, keep in mind the good example of an Ethiopian official who lived 2,000 years ago. He was full of questions about the Bible. When asked if he understood what he was reading, he replied: “Really, how could I ever do so unless someone guided me?”b He then eagerly accepted help from someone who was already a qualified Bible teacher, Philip, an early disciple of Jesus. (Acts 8:30, 31, 34) In the same spirit, if you would like to know more about the Bible, we invite you to submit a request online at www.jw.org or write to the nearest address, as listed in this magazine. You may also contact Jehovah’s Witnesses near you or visit a Kingdom Hall in your area. Why not pick up a Bible today and let it guide you to a better life?



If you are wondering whether you can fully trust the Bible, please see the short video How Can We Be Sure the Bible Is True? You can find it by going to jw.org, clicking the Search button, and entering the title.

For more examples of the Bible’s practical advice, see our website, jw.org. Look under BIBLE TEACHINGS > BIBLE QUESTIONS ANSWERED.
Also see the article in this issue entitled “Is It Just a Small Misunderstanding?”

