





COVER SUBJECT | HOW TO GET MORE FROM READING THE BIBLE
What Will Make It Interesting?




Boring? Or refreshing? What will Bible reading be for you? Much depends on how you approach your reading. Let us take a look at what you can do to increase your interest and enjoyment.
Select a reliable, modern-language translation. If you read material that contains a great many difficult or out-of-date words that you do not know, you are not likely to enjoy reading it. So look for a Bible that uses easy-to-understand language that will touch your heart. At the same time, though, it should be carefully and accurately translated.a
Use modern technology. Today the Bible is available not only as a bound, printed book but also as a digital book. Some Bibles can be read online or downloaded for personal reading on computers, tablets, or cell phones. Certain versions include additional tools that allow you quickly to check other Bible verses on the same topic or even compare several translations. If you prefer to listen rather than to read, the Bible is also available in recorded form. Many people enjoy listening while they commute by public transportation, do laundry, or engage in some other activity that permits listening. Why not try a method that suits you?
Use Bible study tools. Bible study tools can help you get much more out of your reading. There are maps of the Bible lands, which will help you locate places you encounter in your reading and put events in perspective. Articles such as those in this magazine or in the “Bible Teachings” section of the jw.org website can help you explore the meaning of many parts of the Bible.
Vary your approach. If reading the Bible from cover to cover seems daunting, why not stimulate your interest by starting with a portion that especially appeals to you? If you want to find out about famous people in the Bible, you could try character-based reading. A sample of that approach is included in the accompanying box “Dig Into the Bible by Getting to Know Its People.” Or maybe you want to read the Bible by topic or by the order in which events occurred. Why not try one of these approaches?



Many have found the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures to be accurate, reliable, and very readable as well. This Bible, produced by Jehovah’s Witnesses, is available in over 130 languages. You can download a copy from the website jw.org or download the JW Library app. Or if you prefer, Jehovah’s Witnesses can deliver a printed copy to your home.

DIG INTO THE BIBLE BY GETTING TO KNOW ITS PEOPLE
Some faithful women

Abigail

1 Samuel chapter 25


Esther

Esther chapters 2-5, 7-9


Hannah

1 Samuel chapters 1-2


Mary

(Jesus’ mother) Matthew chapters 1-2; Luke chapters 1-2; see also John 2:1-12; Acts 1:12-14; 2:1-4


Rahab

Joshua chapters 2, 6; see also Hebrews 11:30, 31; James 2:24-26


Rebekah

Genesis chapters 24-27


Sarah

Genesis chapters 17-18, 20-21, 23; see also Hebrews 11:11; 1 Peter 3:1-6



Some outstanding men

Abraham

Genesis chapters 11-24; see also 25:1-11


David

1 Samuel chapters 16-30; 2 Samuel chapters 1-24; 1 Kings chapters 1-2


Jesus

The Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John


Moses

Exodus chapters 2-20, 24, 32-34; Numbers chapters 11-17, 20, 21, 27, 31; Deuteronomy chapter 34


Noah

Genesis chapters 5-9


Paul

Acts chapters 7-9, 13-28


Peter

Matthew chapters 4, 10, 14, 16-17, 26; Acts chapters 1-5, 8-12





BIBLE STUDY TOOLS PRODUCED BY JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
  JW.ORG—This website features many study tools, including the feature “Bible Questions Answered.” It also contains instructions for downloading the JW Library app

  “See the Good Land”—This brochure features maps and photographs of places mentioned in the Bible

  Insight on the Scriptures—A two-volume Bible encyclopedia that includes explanations of people, places, and terms found in the Bible

  “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial”—This scholarly book explains when, where, and why each book of the Bible was written and gives a summary of each book’s contents

  The Bible—God’s Word or Man’s?—This small, carefully researched book examines the evidence for the Bible’s claim that it is the inspired Word of God

  The Bible—What Is Its Message?—A 32-page brochure that summarizes the Bible’s overall theme




