First Chronicles​—A Record of Meaningful Names
TO MANY people today, the opening nine chapters 1-9 of First Chronicles are simply extensive listings of meaningless names. However, that was not the case when this Bible book was compiled in the fifth century B.C.E. The genealogical material served to link the Jews with their past history and provided the basis for establishing family inheritances, royal descent and authorization to fulfill official duties at the temple. Especially important was the genealogy of the Davidic line, since it was to lead to the promised Messiah.
For us, the genealogies prove that true worship has its foundation in fact and not in myth, for the names and places mentioned confirm the record to be factual and real. The following items are just a sample of what we can glean from the 1 Ch first chapter: The entire human race descended from Adam through Noah and his three sons Shem, Ham and Japheth. A grandson of Ham, Nimrod, distinguished himself as a “mighty one,” that is, as a hunter and a warrior. Men ceased to speak one language in the days of Peleg, for it was during the lifetime of this descendant of Shem that “the earth was divided.” The Edomites, who descended from Esau, had kings long before the Israelites, who sprang from Esau’s twin brother Jacob.
At times the genealogies provide information that cannot be found elsewhere in the Bible. How many of David’s seven brothers, for example, can you name without the help of First Chronicles? First Samuel 16:6-9 provides the names of only three​—Eliab, Abinadab and Shammah (Shimea[h], Shimei). But the Chronicles account lists three more by name​—Nethanel, Raddai and Ozem. Since only seven of Jesse’s eight sons are named, it is probable that one died before fathering any offspring and, therefore, was omitted from the genealogy.​—1 Chron. 2:13-15.
Occasionally, the genealogies include mention of something truly outstanding about certain individuals. Jabez, in the line of Judah, distinguished himself as more honorable than his brothers. On account of his fervent prayer, he was granted divine blessing and protection as he went about enlarging his hereditary possession. (1 Chron. 4:9, 10) Similarly, because they looked to Jehovah for aid, the tribes living east of the Jordan defeated the Hagrites.​—1 Chron. 5:18-22.
The genealogy of Zerubbabel is of note, as it has been used by many to support a late date for writing Chronicles. At 1 Chronicles 3:19-24, the renderings of many translations take the line of Zerubbabel to the 10th generation. Since he returned to Jerusalem in 537 B.C.E., there would not have been enough time for so many generations to have been born by 460 B.C.E., when Ezra is thought to have committed the record to writing. However, the Hebrew text is incomplete in this section, as indicated by the fact that, in an attempt to make the passage understandable, translators have repeated the names “Jeshaiah,” “Rephaiah,” “Arnan” and “Obadiah.” Hence, because it cannot be determined how most of the men listed at 1 Chronicles 3:19-24 were related to Zerubbabel, there is no reason to reject the traditional view that Ezra compiled the account.
From chapter 10 onward, the record relates events about the death of Saul and the reign of King David. Lists of names continue to be prominent. We find the names of outstanding warriors associated with David, and the names of priests and Levites, including musicians and gatekeepers, who shared in the procession that brought the sacred Ark to Mount Zion. (1 Chron. 11:11–12:20; 15:4–16:6) Starting with the first verse 1 of chapter 23 and concluding with the last verse 34 of chapter 27, First Chronicles provides information regarding David’s organizational arrangements of priests, Levites and government officials and gives the names of individuals involved.
The emphasis in First Chronicles on matters of worship also enabled the Israelites to identify themselves with the past. While kingship in the line of David did not resume after the exile, temple services did, with Levites and Aaronic priests officiating. So it must have been very encouraging for the Israelites to have a historical record that focused on the reason for their return from Babylonian exile, namely, the restoration of Jehovah’s worship at Jerusalem.
Our reading the inspired account with the ancient background in mind can make it much more interesting. Yes, for us also, First Chronicles may then be a record of names full of meaning.

