Fascinating Ethiopia
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN ETHIOPIA
FOR years Ethiopia was known as the hidden empire. And while its centuries of isolation have ended, few today are aware of its fascinating history, diverse peoples and cultures, and unusual geographic features. With over 50 million inhabitants—nearly as many as in France—it is hardly a land to be overlooked.
Apparently it was the ancient Greeks who coined the word “Ethiopia,” meaning “Region of Burnt Faces.” However, its early political history is shrouded in mystery and legend. Tradition claims that Ethiopia was part of ancient Sheba of Biblical fame and that its queen was the wealthy dignitary who visited King Solomon. A number of past rulers of Ethiopia thus claimed to be descendants of a man named Menelik, supposedly the offspring of a romance between Solomon and this queen.
In all likelihood, though, Sheba was actually located in southwest Arabia.a The Bible does mention Ethiopia in both its Hebrew (“Old Testament”) and Greek (“New Testament”) sections. Acts chapter 8, for example, tells of an Ethiopian “eunuch,” or government official, who converted to Christianity. But according to present-day boundaries, Biblical Ethiopia primarily embraced the area now known as Sudan.
By the third century of our Common Era, the Aksum kingdom had been established in Ethiopia. It reached its peak under King ‛Ēzānā in the fourth century. A convert himself, ‛Ēzānā converted his entire empire to “Christianity.” Ethiopia stayed in touch with the Western world for a while, but such relations were severed by the seventh century. The Encyclopedia Americana explains: “For almost 1,000 years afterward, Ethiopia was isolated from the rest of the Christian world in its efforts to defend itself against the encroaching Muslims from the north and east, as well as from pagan invaders from the south.” In particular did the Muslim conquests of Egypt and Nubia cut Ethiopia off from the rest of Christendom.
Unlike other African lands, Ethiopia never went through an extended period of European colonization, except for a brief Italian presence about the turn of this century and from 1935 to 1941. In 1974 a military coup brought a violent end to the old empire. Since 1991 a new government has brought reforms toward making this land a more open society. As a result, it is now possible to take a closer look at this once hidden country.
The People and Their Culture
It is hard to make generalizations regarding the Ethiopians because the variety among them is so great. There are the Afar nomads who roam the sizzling Danakil Desert. To the west there are the dark-skinned Nilotic peoples. In the south live particularly the Oromo people. The Amhara people dwell in the central highlands, where they cultivate the windy mountaintops. Not surprisingly, then, Ethiopia has nearly 300 languages. Ethnic groups have their own hairstyles, type of clothing, and architecture. The architecture ranges from the circular bamboo tukuls common in the south to the thatched adobe homes in central Ethiopia and storied stone structures in the north.
There is also a fascinating variety of personal names. More than mere labels, the exotic-sounding names have meanings that are almost always well-known locally. Girls may be called Fikre (My Love), Desta (Joy), Senait (Goodness), Emnet (Faith), Ababa (Flower), or Trunesh (You Are Good). Some samples of men’s names are Berhanu (Light), Wolde Mariam (Son of Mary), Gebre Yesus (Servant of Jesus), Haile Sellassie (Power of the Trinity), or Tekle Haimanot (Plant of Religion).
Many of these names give clear evidence of the influence of the Orthodox religion. Indeed, religion pervades virtually all of Ethiopian culture! The calendar of 13 months is full of religious festivals. Most prominent among these are Meskel, the “Festival of the Cross,” and Timkat, with its colorful processions to celebrate the baptism of Christ. And it should come as no surprise that most of Ethiopia’s traditional art is religious in nature.
Geographic Features
Your first glimpse of Ethiopia should also take in its stunning geography. One prominent feature is the Great Rift Valley, which bisects the country on its way to Kenya. Along its edges are found many hot springs and caves. Seven beautiful lakes dot its course. Highlands of over 6,600 feet [2,000 m] rise on either side, culminating in the north in the Simyen Mountains. These are called the Roof of Africa with a peak height of over 15,000 feet [4,600 m]! The towering buttresses and dazzling gorges of this area are truly spectacular. Not far from there is Lake Tana and the source of the Blue Nile. This has its own impressive gorge that winds its way westward toward Sudan. Near Lake Tana, the Blue Nile also provides a beautiful spectacle—the Tisissat Falls, which cascade over cliffs like a smaller version of the famous Victoria Falls. In the northeast, multicolored salt pans decorate the Danakil, a desert that constitutes Africa’s lowest point. It is below sea level.
Ethiopia produces an amazing variety of crops, ranging from wheat, barley, bananas, maize, and cotton to grapes, oranges, and a profusion of spices. Ethiopia also claims to be the original home of the coffee plant, and to this day it is a major producer of coffee beans. Then there is the unusual grain called teff. It resembles grass, and its tiny seeds are ground to provide injera, Ethiopia’s main staple food and national dish. Injera is made in a special oven and is often presented in a large round basket, the decorative mesob. Placed on the floor of many Ethiopians homes, the mesob is both utilitarian and indispensable as part of the decor!
Wildlife
What does Ethiopia have to offer in regard to wildlife? Quite a lot. In fact, Ethiopia has a number of remote game parks populated by a variety of antelope and lions. Over 830 species of birds are said to reside in this country, some of which are found only in Ethiopia.
Among the more unusual animals is the stately walia ibex, a splendid mountain goat that remains only in the lofty heights of the Simyen Mountains. A mere few hundred still live among the most inaccessible cliffs. They can jump over a seemingly bottomless abyss without a slip. There is also the beautiful gelada. Because of its long hair and the striking red spot on its chest, it has also been called lion monkey and bleeding-heart baboon. You do not have to travel far to see animal life. Why, the roads in Ethiopia often teem with camels, mules, cattle, and donkeys!
Admittedly, the country is far from problem free. The capital city, Addis Ababa, is a modern metropolis with more than a million people. But it suffers from housing shortages and unemployment. Drought and civil war have resulted in homelessness, cripples, and a large number of widows and orphans. Jehovah’s Witnesses in this land are working hard to help Ethiopians to see that the ultimate solution to their problems is God’s Kingdom by Christ Jesus.—Matthew 6:9, 10.
In the meantime, Ethiopia is a land worth getting to know. We hope this brief glimpse has whet your appetite, so that you will take another glimpse, perhaps someday a firsthand look, at this fascinating land.
[Footnote]
For further information, see the article “Sheba” in Insight on the Scriptures, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Pictures on page 18]
The “mesob” is used to serve “injera,” Ethiopia’s national dish

