From Our Readers
Watching the World  Your magazines get more and more interesting. They deal with all kinds of subjects—current events, sports, science, and so forth. “Watching the World” is extremely interesting. I think that if TV news were based on this feature, it would be a lot more interesting.
R. S., Italy
I really appreciate the topics covered in “Watching the World.” One I could relate to completely was in the April 22, 1995, issue. The topic was “What Makes Teachers Popular?” The article said that students don’t necessarily like the teachers that give less homework, but they like the teachers that are kind, caring, and fair. That is the truth! I’ve had so many experiences with teachers that favor the students that are popular in an effort to be popular. But in the long run, such teachers don’t stay popular. Thanks again for this valuable information.
L. K., United States
False Predictions  Thank you for the series “False Predictions or True Prophecy—How Can You Tell the Difference?” (June 22, 1995) Although I have studied the Bible daily for 42 years and have tried to absorb the information about the sign of the last days, I can say that the clear sum-up you gave of all the scriptures on this subject really helped me. You have made this subject easier to remember. It was wonderful spiritual food!
M. B., United States
Stealing  I am 13 years old, and the problem I was having was stealing. I would steal money, or I would go to a store and steal bubble gum. I wanted to stop, but nothing helped until I received the June 22, 1995, Awake! and turned to the article “Young People Ask . . . Stealing—Why Not?” It really touched me. It helped me pray to Jehovah and know that he would forgive me in a large way. I want to be in God’s Kingdom, and I know that people who steal will not be there. Thanks for publishing this article.
J. A., Canada
I am 23 years old and am locked up for stealing. It all started because of peer pressure. They wanted me to do a prank on someone, and from there things escalated. The article is so true. I just hope young people heed the counsel before it’s too late. That way, they can avoid ending up where I am—in prison.
M. S., United States
Life Story  I just finished reading the article “How I Benefited From God’s Care.” (June 22, 1995) Reading about how Celeste Jones was mistreated by family members—and yet kept her faith and endured—made me promise that I would try hard never again to complain about my own health problems.
J. P., United States
As a person somewhat less disabled than Celeste Jones, I have an inkling of the courage it has taken for her to remain steadfast. Special thanks to all those who have quietly assisted Celeste and given her the care necessary for her ministry.
W. R., Canada
I was touched by the article. It has strengthened my faith and helped me to realize that the most effective way to help our neighbors is to use all possible means to preach to them.
P. H. P., Nigeria
I was greatly moved and encouraged by Celeste’s experience. I am aging and experiencing all the aches and pains that accompany aging, but her experience gives me added strength to cope.
M. R., Jamaica

