R897 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. PITTSBURGH, PA., FEBRUARY, 1887. NO. 6. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 
PITTSBURGH, PA. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 

No. 40 Federal Street, Allegheny. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:-FIFTY CENTS. A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., 
paper bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. 
Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. 
T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," 
four shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money 
Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. Freely 
we have received and freely we would give the truth. 
"Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters; 
and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat- 
yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 



without price." And you that have it— "Wherefore 
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and 
your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let 
your soul delight itself in fatness."— ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



ORDER all the sample copies you can 
judiciously use, free. 



WE send this February number to 
many whose subscriptions expired with 
the December number, whose names 
will be dropped unless heard from at 



R897

DID YOU GET A PAPER "DAWN" VOL I, 
AS NOV., DEC. AND JAN. TOWER? 

To all regular subscribers, including 
those on the "poor list" unable to pay, 
and also to a large number whose subscription 
closed with December, 1886, 
we sent a paper bound edition of Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. I, as representing 
three numbers of the TOWER, November 
and December, '86, and January, '87. 

The wrapper of this was of specially 
heavy paper, but some of them sent 
without tying got the wrappers much 
torn, and not a few lost the address entirely 
and failed to reach the proper 
hands. All therefore who failed to get 
that number, and who were entitled to 
it, either as paying subscribers or as the 
"Lord's poor," according to the terms 
at the head of this column, should write 
and let us know at once. 

Because of the mutilation of so many 
wrappers, it becomes proper for us to 
reprint here a supplement which was 
printed inside of the wrapper, as 
follows:— 

SUPPLEMENT TO ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

VOLUME VIIL, NUMBERS 3, 4 AND 5. 

TO ALL READERS, GREETING: We 



wish you all a very happy New Year 
and pray that it may be to all of us a 
very profitable one, very favorable to our 
further growth in grace and in knowledge, 
and in the love of God. And if 
the love of God thus united with and 
built upon the knowledge of his plan be 
shed abroad in our hearts, filling them, 
it will make us NOT ASHAMED of the 
Gospel of Christ, nor unfruitful in its 
service, but, on the contrary, valient supporters 
and expounders of it, willing and 
glad to support it in the face even of opposition 
and evil speaking on the part of 
those whom the God of this world hath 
blinded to the truth, by prejudices and 
misconceptions sacred with age and 
loved associations. And it is to render 
aid to you all in putting on the whole 
armor of God and to shed abroad in 
your hearts more fully the love, and 
thus provoke you to love and good service 
for the truth, that this special number 
is sent out thus. Let us explain: 
The book MILLENNIAL DAWN, Volume 
I. (cloth-bound, $1.00), which some of 
you have already had and read, seemed 
to be doing so much good that we earnestly 
desired to have you all possess a 
copy, but all were not able to purchase, 
and we had not the means to supply 
them gratis. So, to meet the many calls 
for a cheaper edition, which all could 
possess, and of which a large number 
could be used in loaning to friends and 
neighbors, we were led to issue the 
present edition as a special number of 
the TOWER, on the terms mentioned on 
back of same. We issued the October 
number late in the month, and will, commencing 
with February, 1887, hereafter 
issue at the first instead of the 15th of 
each month. Thus the time between the 
October, 1886, and February, 1887, issues 
which this edition fills, will not be too 
long for a thorough study of the subjects 
treated, even for those who already 
have the cloth-bound edition; for it is 
the general testimony of those who have 
been most blessed by the book, that the 
second or third readings benefitted them 
most, and paid better than the first even. 
We could not think of getting out this 
edition on poor, common paper and with 
poor workmanship, hence the saving is 
in the binding and the quantity. The 



message it carries is clean and beautiful 
—"good news" indeed, and the Lord, 
we think, would be pleased to see the 
truth-bearers also clean and good. 

The price of this number is 50c, but 
to our subscribers to whom it represents 
three numbers of the TOWER, we make 
the extra charge only 25c. Those who 
do not wish to retain it on these terms 
may return it to us and recken their term 
of subscription extended three months 
further, instead. Those who cannot pay 
the extra charge, and yet desire it and 
will read it, may keep it without pay- 
freely, if they will drop us a postal card 
stating these facts. Any subscriber to 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER who may desire 
copies of this edition for loaning or 
giving may have them on the following 
special terms (free of postage in U.S. 
and Canada; 5c. each extra for postage 
to Foreign Countries): 

10 Copies $3.00 

20 " 5.50 

50 " 13.00 

100 " 15.00 

Anyone can have the present volume 
(VIII.) including this number at 75c. 

With the hearty co-operation of you 
all we can have this edition in the hands 
of 50,000 readers before this time next 
year. Do you know of any better 
method of preaching the good news? 

Yours in fellowship and service, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



R898 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Matters are rapidly shaping themselves 
for the great physical struggle of 
the "Battle of the great day of God 
Almighty." In Europe all the great 
men and many of the little ones are full 
of fear and anxiety, looking after those 
things coming upon the earth— seeking 
to read the future and desiring to shape 
their course accordingly. 

Britain's government is weaker than 
it has been for a long time; consequently 
she is without policy, except to endeavor 

R899 : page 1 



to keep hold of all the countries 
over which in the name of God she 
claims the right to rule, because by force 
of arms she took control years ago. 
She is beset by her dependencies, whose 
people, under the increasing light of 
this day of increasing knowledge, are 
demanding greater privileges and liberties 
than she feels would be consistent 
with her self-preservation. Her common 
people are almost paupers, made such by 
drunkenness, combined with the injustice 
which in years past permitted 
the aristocracy to "seize" and call 
their own, all the land, which God gave 
to all the people. English statesmen 
and others see that she has enough to 
do to preserve her present arrangements, 
and that not for long. 

Germany and France, armed now far 
beyond what reasonable taxation can support, 
are voting for increased military arrangements. 
But in Germany even pride 

of country and fear of France have not influenced 
their parliament to grant all the 
enormous increase asked for by their 
King, whose Prime Minister urged that the 
entire sum was needed and indispensable 
to the preservation of the Empire's 
peace, and who dissolved parliament 
rather than accept a less liberal allowance. 
Prince Bismarck's speech upon 
that occasion aroused the attention of 
the world, and showed that Germany is 
so fully engaged in keeping guard over 
her own Socialists, and in holding 
France at bay, that she is quite willing 
to let Russia have her own way in the 
overthrow of Turkey, Bulgaria, etc. 

In view of the reorganized policy of 
Russia in connection with Turkey, this 
speech is significant as preparing the 
way for all of the great powers of Europe 
hitherto opposed to it, to give their 
consent to such an arrangement, or by 
declaring themselves opposed to it, to 
involve themselves in war to protect 
Turkey. This all looks as though next 
Summer would see a war on foot which 
might engage every nation of Europe. 
Already France is building extra barracks 
for troops upon the German frontier, 
and Austria is ordering extra hospital 
supplies and provisions, and arranging 
for transportation of troops in 



March, while Germans in England have 
been notified to be in readiness for a 
twenty-four hour notice to return home 
for military duty. 

Wars in Europe would be no new 
thing, but circumstances are greatly 
changed and results would doubtless be 
greater than ever before. Every country 
contains a large class whose chief 
disease is discontent, and frequently not 
without just cause. These will gradually 
conclude that themselves and their 
sons can fill a better mission in life than 
that of supporting Royalty either by 
laboring under excessive taxation, or 
acting as bullet-stoppers. The fact that 
General Von Moltke and Prince Bismarck, 
as the agents of their Emperor, 
failed during the last month, even by 
the strongest appeals to patriotism, and 
the statement that the Empire would be 
endangered unless the measure and the 
funds it demanded were granted, failed 
to influence the one-half of the people's 
representatives, is an evidence that the 
Germans are no longer easily moved by 
that poor sentimentalism called patriotism. 
This is well; good sense and 
broader ideas will cause men to look 
with as much sympathy and care at the 
homes of others, as at their own. And 
it will lead them to withhold their aid 
and support from Kings and Emperors 
who take from them the flowers of the 
family in their very bloom for soldiers, 
and rob the remainder through taxation 
to support their thrones and gratify their 
vanities or spites— all under the name 
of patriotism! 

But let no one imagine that such a 
war will bring final results. It will be 
but one act in the drama— one skirmish 
in the "Battle of the great day of God 
Almighty," which covers the coming 
twenty-seven years. It will doubtless 
change the map of Europe some, and 
by weakening and draining the empires 
it will prepare them for overthrow at the 
hands of the Communist vultures of 
Rev. 19:17,18. 

Russia, recently refused a large loan 
of money by the great Jewish Banking 
House of the Rothchilds, has found 
another way of replenishing her treasury. 
She has ordered all Jews to leave 
Russia. She will thus from their confiscated 



property be able to supply herself 

with sinews of war, while taking revenge 

on the Rothchilds and helping to 

fulfill the predictions of Scripture, that 

in this day of the Lord the Jews in large 

numbers shall return to their own land. 

There are 4,000,000 [See R1465:2] Jews in Russia 

more than in all other countries. 

R899 : page 2 

At home the interval of peace has 
come temporarily, only to be succeeded 
shortly by another travail pang more severe 
than before. 

The large vote which Henry George 
polled in New York city, has alarmed 
some who dreamed not of so many in 
sympathy with views so socialistic, [we 
use the word in its true and proper 
sense] as those advocated by Mr. 
George. Now repressive measures 
are introduced. One Lutheran church 
has excommunicated several of its members 
for belonging to the Knights of 
Labor. The Catholic church in Canada 
has taken a similar stand, and a priest 
who has assisted Mr. George in his New 
York city canvass, has been relieved of 
his pulpit, a successor appointed, and 
he has been ordered to Rome. He has 
refused to go. He does not submit as 
the Catholic clergy used to do. He has 
been thinking to himself that as a man 
he has some rights, while in this country 
at least. His congregation has rebelled 
against the Archbishop's decree. 
The choristers refuse to officiate, and 
even the janitor will not open the house 
for the services of the newly appointed 
priest. At a largely attended meeting 
of the congregation, resolutions were 
passed demanding the reinstatement of 
the deposed priest, and declaring that 
until it is done they will neither attend 
its services nor contribute to its 
support. These resolutions were sent 
by a committee of thirty of the prominent 
members to Archbishop Corrigan. 
A banner displayed by one of the 
priests' adherents, read: "Give us from 
Rome all the religion you want, but of 
politics nothing." Rather unusual for 
Catholics, is it not? This goes to sustain 
our prediction of some years ago, 
(based upon our interpretation of Rev. 19:19-21,) 



that in the coming struggle 

the Nominal Church will take sides with 

and fall with the earthly empires, in their 

overthrow. 

In spite of encouraging "statistics" 
skillfully manipulated to make a good 
showing, in spite of the retention on 
church rolls of the names of the dead, 
etc., candid minds are reluctantly admitting 
that Protestantism, and in fact all 
religion, is going rapidly backward. 
Babylon's fall from power and influence 
was thus attested to by Mr. J. W. 
Sproul, an Allegheny preacher of the 
Reformed Presbyterian Church, recently. 
He said, "it is a disagreeable truth, 
but it cannot be denied that the church 
is losing ground in every respect, and 
this despite the statements of statisticians." 
"How lamentable it is to be 
obliged to say that the church is not 
even holding her own." 

Babylon is so wedded to the darkness 
and errors of human traditions that she 
cannot and will not admit the light and 
"meat in due season" to her children. 
Since some of these are the Lord's, the 
whole institution he declares, must be 
wrecked to set at liberty his captive 
children. It begins to fall. 

All men are waking up, and girding 
on their various swords and drawing 
nigh to the battle. "It is near and 
hasteth greatly." As the prophet has 
expressed it, (Joel 3:9-16,) the plowshares 
will first be turned into swords, 
and the great conflict must take place, 
before they shall peacefully be turned 
back again to plowshares. So though 
the dread evil is coming which will 
cause great trouble to us and to all, yet 
seeing the outcome of it, and relying 
upon God's sustaining power throughout, 
we alone can look forward with 
composure and trust. 

"In God we have found a retreat 

Where we can securely abide: 
No refuge nor rest so complete, 
And here we intend to reside." 

But what is the outlook of our own 
battlefield close around the bulwarks of 
Zion? some one inquires. We answer 
that the enemy by first one agent and 
then another in heavenly garb seeks 
still, and more, to overthrow the truth, 
using all subtilty. Thank God we are 



not ignorant of at least some of his devices. 

(2 Cor. 2:11.) But more on this 

under the caption, "As the Serpent Beguiled 

Eve," crowded out of this issue. 

It will appear in our next. 



R899 : page 2 

THE LORD'S SUPPER. 

The anniversary of the Lord's Supper 
will this year fall upon Thursday 
evening, April 7th; and in harmony 
with a custom among the early Christians, 
we esteem it as they did, a blessed 
privilege to commemorate our Lord's 
death in the manner which he requested 
us to observe, and at the time observed 
by him. Though he has made free 
from the Law all believers in him who 
were under it (Israelites), yet he was 
"under the Law" and was limited by 
it. Accordingly he could be crucified 
only upon the fourteenth day of the 
Jewish month Nisan (which this year 
commences Thursday evening, April 
7th, and ends at 6 P.M. on Friday, the 
8th), because his death was the antitype 
of the death of the lamb whose blood 
sprinkled upon their door-posts covered 
or protected the firstborn of Israel. 
And these firstborn in turn were exchanged 
for the tribe of Levi (Num. 3:12,13), 
of whom came the priests through 
whose sacrificial ministrations all the 

R900 : page 2 

people were justified. 

The lamb typified Christ Jesus our 
Lord; its death represented his death. 
And, in exact correspondence with the 
type, his sacrificial death, must and 
did occur at the same date. The firstborn 
saved by the blood of the typical 
lamb, typified "the church of the firstborn, 
which he (Jesus) hath purchased 
with his own blood." Those firstborn 
Israelites, afterward the priests, typified 
the "Royal Priesthood" of whom the 
Lord himself is Chief Priest; and this 
anointed company is to be God's instrumentality 
for blessing all people who 
will come into harmony with him, typified 



by all Israel. Thus seen, the blood 

of the typical lamb cleansed and preserved 

all Israel, though applied at first 

and directly only to the firstborn. For 

if the firstborn ones had not been preserved, 

there would have been no priesthood; 

and if no priesthood, no reconciliation. 

So also in the antitype, the merit 

of the Lamb of God which taketh away 

the sin of the world, is applied during the 

gospel night only to the firstborn, the 

church, the select little flock, the Royal 

Priesthood, who under the direction of 

the High Priest, shall soon in the incoming 

age, bring all of honest hearts 

(Israelites indeed) into full harmony 

with God. 

Let all of the Church of Firstborns 
then intelligently and reverently commemorate, 
not the typical lamb, nor eat 
it as did the typical people (Israel), but 
let them celebrate the death of our Paschal 
Lamb, the Lamb of God. Let us as 
often as its anniversary recurs, keep it in 
remembrance of him; for even Christ our 
Passover [lamb] is slain, therefore (let us 
not only commemorate his death) but 
let us joyfully afterward keep the antitype 
of the Feast of Passover.* 

We do not celebrate the "Feast of 
Passover" on the night of April 7th. It 
is celebrated throughout the remainder 
of our lives which the seven days of its 
continuance represented; but we will 
celebrate the Supper, whose elements 
(bread and wine) symbolize the flesh and 
the blood of our Redeemer. 

And yet the bread and wine are only 
symbols, and to appreciate what we do 
we must see deeper than these while 
using them as our Lord directed, saying, 
"Do this, in remembrance of me." The 
partaking of the bread representing his 
flesh, to us means a partaking of those 
perfections which were in him as a perfect 
man, which we and all, lost through 
Adam. In partaking of the wine representing 
his blood, his life, we accept from 
God again through him, the right to live, 
lost in Adam. Thus the eating and 
drinking of the bread and wine, emblematic 
of his flesh and blood, signifies our 
complete justification. All of the Redeemer's 
human perfections and his right 
to life— given for us— are thus accepted 
by us, in this symbol. All believers in 



the ransom are thus privileged to celebrate 
or commemorate it, and the blessings 
it brings. 

But among those "believers" there is 
a class, a "little flock," to whom it means 
all this and more. These are those who 
have consecrated themselves as the under 
priests, under their great Chief. To these 
the emblems not only signify the Lord's 
sacrifice by which they are justified to 
human life and all its rights, but also their 
own consecration to be joined in sacrifice 
with him, to suffer with him, to be dead 
with him; to sacrifice all the rights to 
human perfection and life to which their 
justification through acceptance of his 
sacrifice had entitled them. To these 
the emblems (bread and wine) are not 
only remembrancers of the Lord's sacrifice, 
but also of their own covenant to 
share the sacrifice with him, if by any 
means they might fulfill the conditions 
and be accounted worthy to be "made 
partakers of the divine nature," and to be 
with him, his "joint-heirs" and co-workers 
in blessing all the people. 

Paul calls our attention to this feature 
of the commemoration, saying: "The 
loaf which we break, is it not the communion 
of the body of Christ [the "little 
flock," the Church, of which our 
Lord is the head]? the cup of blessing 
which we bless, is it not the communion 
of the blood of Christ [the entire anointed 
company]? For we, though many, 
[members] are one loaf and one body, 
for we are all partakers of that one loaf. 
-1 Cor. 10:15-17. 

All must eat of the flesh and blood of 
our Lord Jesus: i.e., they must partake 
of those human rights and privileges 
which his sacrifice secured for all, 
either in this age by faith, or in the next 
age actually, else they will have no life 
rights, either to make sacrifice of now, 
or to enjoy (without the privilege of 
sacrificing them) hereafter. So then we 
urge all believers to "do this" intelligently, 
and while using the emblems, to 
accept and apply and appropriate fully 
the justification from all sin and the 
right to life which God holds out through 
the Lamb of God, and in no other name 
or way. And especially let all believers 
who have been immersed with Christ 
into his death, and thus into membership 



in his "body" (Rom. 6:3,4), do 
this, remembering their justification 
through his blood and renewing their 
covenant to be dead with him as human 
beings, that they may live with him as 
partakers of the new, the divine nature. 

So far as possible meet with such as 
you can recognize as fellow-members of 
the same body, and exclude no believer 
in the ransom. Arrange for the meeting 
long enough beforehand. It matters 
not who shall pass the emblems, even 
Judas may have assisted at the first 
celebration. 

All who can do so are cordially invited 
to be present and celebrate with 
the church that is at Pittsburgh. If possible 
arrange your affairs to stay over 
the following Lord's day, which will be 
the anniversary of our Lord's resurrection. 
Turn aside— let us devote a few 
days to the pursuit of our spiritual interests 
exclusively. It will help possibly 
to break some of the cords by which 
the world, the flesh and the devil would 
bind us down to "diligence in business," 
to the dwarfing of the fervency of spirit 
in serving the Lord, so indispensable to 
every crown-winner. 

Quite a number were present from a 
distance last year, and many more have 
expressed the intention of attending the 
coming celebration. Especially those 
whose labors are of a public character, 
will do well to come. Make a memorandum 
of questions which you would 
like to discuss, so that our communings 
together may be the more profitable. So 
far as possible all of our readers will be 
provided with board and lodging free 
during the meetings. Let us know of 
your coming a day or two ahead. Notice 
the date and get here some time before 
6 P.M., of April 7th, that you may 
be in time for the celebration of the 
"supper." Come to the Z.W. TOWER 
business office. 



*The "Feast" is not the "supper," but follows 
it and has a totally different significance. The 
"Feast" with the Jews lasted a week, and commenced 
after the lamb had been killed and eaten. 
Its observance was marked by joy of heart, separation 
from all carnality and from leaven. It 



represents the life of joy and purity and separation 
from sin [leaven] which all who recognize 
the value of the lamb, etc., are to enjoy. 



R902 : page 2 

THE EASY YOKE. 

"Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke 
upon you and learn of me; for I am meek and 
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your 
souls. For my yoke is easy and my burden is 
light. "-Matt. 11:28-30. 

Satan the prince of this world has 
placed many yokes upon the necks of 
all mankind. They are bound and fettered 
by every device which he could 
arrange. But Jesus invites all such to 
come to him and find rest— the blessed 
rest of freedom from the galling yoke 
of the oppressor. That rest is found in 
the meek and quiet spirit which humbly 
submits to the easy yoke of the divine 
will and ceases the strife to gratify the 
perverted human will. The burden of 
the divinely imposed yoke is easy and 
light when we let it rest naturally upon 
us. It is only placed upon us for our 
good, and only those who cheerfully 
submit to it have rest and safety. 

Our Lord's words were addressed to 
those of his day, bound by Jewish 
creeds and traditions and their own fears, 
engendered by their erroneous misconception 
of God and his plan. As with the 
Jewish church, so with the Christian 
church, the "yokes" of sectarianism 
and the "burdens" of tradition, fetter 
and gall those who possess the spirit of 
Christ, whose zeal and love are according 
to knowledge and for Christ and the 
church which is his body, rather than 
for a sect of human organization. Such 
cannot be comfortable with the yokes 
and burdens of men and must claim the 
freedom of sons of God, the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made them free. 



R902 : page 3 



THE CHURCH OF GOD. 

"Zion, arise, break forth in songs 

Of everlasting joy; 
To God eternal praise belongs, 

Who doth thy foes destroy. 
Thou Church of God, awake, awake, 

For light beams from on high; 
From earth and dust thy garments shake, 

Thy glory's drawing nigh. 

"To raise thee high above the earth, 

God will his power employ; 
He'll turn thy mourning into mirth, 

Thy sorrow into joy. 
In shining robes thyself array, 

Put on thy garments pure; 
Thy king shall lead thee in the way, 

That's holy, safe and sure. 

"In thee, the Lord shall place His name, 

And make thee His delight, 
And place on thee a diadem, 

Divinely fair and bright; 
And thou shalt be the dwelling place, 

Of him that reigns above, 
Yea, thou shalt be adorn'd with grace 

And everlasting love. 

"The joy of nations thou shalt be; 

A bright and shining light; 
For God is in the midst of thee, 

To keep thee day and night. 
He'll bring thy wandering children home, 

And gather those without; 
And with a wall of jasper stone, 

Will guard thee round about. 

"Arise, O Zion, praise thy King, 

And make His name thy trust; 
With joy and triumph loudly sing; 

For he is true and just. 
O Zion, sing with truthful voice, 

Thy great Redeemer's praise; 
In His almighty power, rejoice 

Throughout eternal days."— Manifesto. 



R900 : page 3 

THE TIME IS SHORT. 

"But this I say, brethren, the time is short; so 
that they who have wives, should be as if they 
had none; and they who weep, as if they wept 



not; and they who rejoice, as though they rejoiced 
not; and they who acquire, as though 
they acquired not; and those occupied with this 
world, not going beyond the proper using of it." 
-1 Cor. 7:29-31. 

It is a great mistake, and yet a very 
common one, to apply the teaching of 
the Apostle Paul to the world and the 
church indiscriminately. It should be 
borne in mind that the apostle is addressing 
the church only, as a peculiar 
people, separate from the world, with 
hopes and aims, and present conditions 
and future destiny entirely different 
from those of the world, although they 
appear to be as other men. It would 
seem strange indeed if such a class 
should need no special instruction. 

Under the erroneous impression that 
these and other teachings of the apostle 
were intended alike for all, Paul is generally 
considered as an extremist, and 
as a teacher who though good in some 
respects, had his peculiarities which 
colored his teachings, and which should 
therefore be received at a discount to 
that extent. Paul was indeed a man 
of marked personal peculiarities, and 
therefore he was a fit instrument and a 
chosen vessel to do the greatest work 
that any man, except "the man Christ 
Jesus," was ever privileged to accomplish. 
He was a man true to his convictions, 
untiring in energy, and full of 
zeal,— one of the meek who, when called 
upon by the Lord even in the midst of 
his zealous persecution of the saints, in 
which he verily thought he was doing 
God service, meekly inquired, "Lord, 
what wilt thou have me to do?" And 
what the Lord showed him to do, he 
did immediately, not stopping to confer 
with flesh and blood. 

But these were not the only peculiarities 
which influenced Paul's teaching. 
By the favor of God, Paul was caught 
away (in the spirit, that is, mentally) to 
Paradise, to the third heaven, the new 
dispensation or kingdom of God, where 
he saw things to come, which were not 
then lawful to be uttered clearly, because 
it was not yet due time. And the broad 
view of God's plan thus given to the apostle 
enabled him to realize the real position 



R901 : page 3 

of the saints, and the weighty interests 
involved in their development as members 
of the body of Christ. Yes, Paul 
at that early day of the church's history 
was by special favor of God permitted 
to know what is now due to all the 
saints, viz., the plan of God spanning 
the ages past and future. And from 
this standpoint of knowledge he was 
able to guide the church by his teachings 
all through the age— from the beginning 
down to the closing days of her 
course, until she is presented to her 
Lord as a chaste virgin accounted 
worthy to be his bride. In this great 
work of preparing the bride for the 
marriage, the various apostles and 
prophets were privileged to share; but 
Paul was more highly honored thus 
than any other. 

As we are now privileged to see from 
the same standpoint of knowledge, it 
now being due time, we can see a propriety 
in Paul's teaching which is in perfect 
accord with God's plan and purpose for 
the saints, though it must seem extreme 
to others. Being begotten to a new nature, 
they are no longer to live after the 
old. We should now live, not as men, 
concentrating our interests, affections, 
hopes and aims on earthly things and 
striving after them, but as new creatures, 
whose sole interest and concern is for 
the advancement of the interests of the 
heavenly kingdom. 

The principal work in the interest of 
the heavenly kingdom during the present 
age has been the selecting and development 
of the church, who are to be 
God's agents for the enlightenment, 
conversion and blessing of the world in 
the age to come. The all-important 
work, therefore, to which every earthly 
consideration should now bend, is the 
seeking out and preaching the gospel to 
the meek, few though they be; encouraging, 
strengthening, and helping them 
in every possible way to make their 
election sure. 

For this great work we are reminded 
that the time is short, and that if we 
would have a share in it, we must push 
aside the earthly hindrances and improve 
every passing hour; for very 



soon our opportunity will be gone. 

Consider for a moment how very short 

is the opportunity which as an individual 

you possess, that you may more fully 

realize the necessity for haste and diligence 

in the service. Deduct from the 

brief space of your present life the 

years past, before you came to a knowledge 

of the truth and consecrated your 

life to the service of God, and then the 

declining years of life, when sight grows 

dim and physical strength grows more 

and more feeble, and then the time and 

strength which must be expended in 

providing things needful for the temporal 

wants of ourselves and those necessarily 

dependent upon us, and with the 

greatest economy of time, how much is 

left for the great work in hand to which 

we have consecrated ourselves? When 

we actually figure it out, how very insignificant 

it appears! Truly, Paul is 

right here— the time left for service is 

extremely "short"; and it behooves 

the saints to resolutely push aside the 

hindrances and overcome the obstacles, 

if they would run successfully for the 

prize, or accomplish anything to the 

Master's honor, or to show their love 

and appreciation of the good tidings by 

sounding the trumpet of truth to 

fellow-pilgrims. 

The time is short; so that they [of 
us] who have wives should be as if they 
had none. The establishing of an 
earthly home and the rearing of an 
earthly family, which is generally regarded 
as the principal business of life, 
should not be the ambition of the 
saints. The injunction to increase and 
multiply and fill the earth, was given to 
the natural man, but not to the little 
flock, the new creatures, partakers of 
the divine nature. Their mission is not 
to help to people the earth, but to help 
bring to the spiritual birth the new creatures 
of the divine nature— the little 
flock— begotten of the heavenly promises. 
And the time for that work being 
short, they cannot afford to further cumber 
themselves by increasing their earthly 
cares. The idea of consecrating one's 
life to the service of God, and then going 
on, year after year, tying ourselves 
down and loading ourselves with cares 
and responsibilities of an earthly character, 



which when once incurred we 

dare not shirk, and which with increasing 

and necessary demands will require 

more and more of our time and thought, 

and care and attention, is simply preposterous, 

and entirely out of harmony 

with our covenant. It is not following 

the footsteps of either the Lord or his 

most faithful apostle. 

Jesus said he had finished the work 
given him to do at his first advent, and 
how did he spend his life? He spent it 
in selecting, teaching, training and developing 
a small and apparently insignificant 
company of men and women, 
who should form the nucleus of the 
church, which under his future direction 
and care would be fully developed and 
perfected. He did not cumber himself 
with the cares of this life, and let his 
special work take its chances, in the 
odds and ends of time which could be 
spared from earthly things. The increase 
of the earth's population, he considered 
no part of his work; nor is it 
the mission of those who follow in his 
footsteps. 

With his clear insight into the plan of 
God, and a realization of the importance 
of the great work in hand, Paul's counsel 
that the unmarried should remain so, 
that they might thus give themselves 
without hindrance to the Lord's service, 
and that the married should not add to 
their earthly cares, and thus make their 
pathway more difficult and their opportunity 
for service less, was timely and 
important, and in perfect harmony with 
The Lord's example and teaching (Matt. 19:12), 
which he also so closely 
followed. 

None should make the mistake, however, 
of supposing that the responsibilities 
of a family already incurred can be 
ignored or set aside; on the contrary, it 
is written, that he that provideth not for 
his own is worse than an unbeliever, 
and hath denied the faith.— 1 Tim. 5:8. 

The worldly and lukewarm Christians 
are in total ignorance of the great work 
before the saints either in the future or 
in the present age, and therefore our 
work seems to them unimportant and 
foolish— a waste of energy; but we must 
not for a moment view it from their 
standpoint. This work, insignificant 



though it may seem in the eyes of 
others, and small though it may appear 
to us now in its results, is the grandest 
work in which it was ever the privilege 
of any to engage. Eternity alone will 
reveal to the world its magnitude and 
importance, or enable us to fully realize 
it. 

Further, we are told that because the 
time is short, those who weep should be 
as if they wept not, and those who rejoice 
as though they rejoiced not, and 
they who buy as if they acquired not. 
We may and have, in common with all 
mankind, causes of an earthly character 
for both weeping and rejoicing; but we 
should not allow either joy or sorrow to 
unfit us for our work, nor to detract 
from our interest and effort in it. But 
we may rejoice always in the Lord, 
knowing that in due time all tears shall 
be wiped away, and that fleeting earthly 
joys shall give place to the songs and 
everlasting joy which by-and-by shall 
be upon every head. And those who 
acquire wealth or goods should not 
reckon their acquirements their own, or 
for the gratification of self -pride or 
the love of display, but as something 
belonging to the Lord, something more 
of his entrusted to them to be utilized 
in his service. If once thoroughly 
awake to the fact that every acquirement 
is the Lord's and not their own, 
that their time, influence and talent, 
past, present and future, is all consecrated, 
it would free such from many of 
the snares to which they are subject— 
"which some coveting after, wandered 
away from the faith and pierced themselves 
through with many sorrows."— 
1 Tim. 6:7-12. 

Finally, while necessarily occupied 
with the business of this life and the 
expenditure of its income, we should 
not go beyond the just using of it for 
ourselves as becometh saints. Provide 
things honest, neat and comfortable for 
the temporal necessities, and then give 
them no further thought. Though we 
have consecrated ourselves and all our 
goods which we have acquired or may 
acquire, to the Lord, he permits us to 
appropriate this much of it for our temporal 
wants. In harmony with our covenant, 
this only is the "proper using" 



of earthly goods. 

O how narrow is the way in which 
the saints must walk who follow in the 
footsteps of the Master! There is self-denial 
at every step, but Jesus said, 
"He that taketh not up his cross, and 
followeth not after me, is not worthy of 
me." If we cannot prove our love for 
the Lord by thus sharing in his reproaches 
and self-denials, we are not of 
the class he wishes to make his Bride. 
It will be no easy thing for any to endure 
unto the end, but blessed is he 
that shall do it. If we keep looking at 
the things behind, cherishing the old 
ambitions and fostering the old spirit 
which once impelled us, endurance of 
our trials will become more difficult if 
not impossible; but let us take the 
apostle's advice, and forgetting the 
things behind, seek new conquests over 
the world and flesh and devil. Let us 
thus press forward to the mark of the 
prize of our high calling, which is of 
God through Christ Jesus. And bearing 
in mind that the time is short, let us 
make haste to improve passing opportunities 
for such a grand and blessed 
service. 



HE is a great conqueror who can conquer 
himself. 



page 3 



WHEN you make a mistake don't 
look back at it long. Take the reason 
of the thing into your mind, and then 
look forward. Mistakes are lessons of 
wisdom. The past cannot be changed. 
The future is now in your power.— 
Hugh White. 



R902 : page 4 

BIBLE LIGHT ON PROBATION AFTER 
DEATH. 

Brother Stowe is a contributing member 
of one of the branch Bible Societies. 



At one of their recent meetings the so-called 
" Andover question" of probation 
for infants and heathen in death, was 
taken up for discussion. Brother S., 
though not a public speaker, prepared 
and delivered the following paper, which 
shows the question from our standpoint 
in a good light. It made quite an impression 
on some of the D.D.'s who 
heard, and we doubt not they wondered 
that a Christian business-man could become 
so well versed in theology as to be 
able to teach them on this subject. It 
shows how the earnest ones who have 
the will can find some way to serve the 
truth. Each saint should seek to multiply 
his opportunities for service and 
thereby increase his talents. Willing 
hearts, hands and voices are finding and 
using hundreds of ways, great and small, 
and making openings.— Editor. 



Opinions, from other sources than the 
Bible, differ as to what the act of death 
is, but the agreement of the whole Bible 
seems to be that it is a total extinction of 
life, and, therefore, that the state of death 
is an entire suspension of being, mental 
as well as physical. This being so, 
man's probation or trial must occur, not 
in death, but before the state of death 
has begun or after it has ended— in 
resurrection. 

"So man lieth down and riseth not; 
till the heavens be no more they shall 
not awake, nor be raised out of their 
sleep. Oh, that thou wouldst hide me 
in the grave, that thou wouldst keep me 
secret until thy wrath be past, that thou 
wouldst appoint me a set time and remember 
me! If a man die, shall he live 
again? All the days of my appointed 
time will I wait till my change come. 
Thou shalt call and I will answer thee; 
thou wilt have a desire to the work of 
thine hands. "-Job 14:12-15. 

"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, 
do it with thy might; for there is no 
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom, in the grave, whither thou 
goest."— Eccles. 9:10. ("Grave" is 
here translated from "sheol.") 

"For in death there is no remembrance 
of thee; in the grave (sheol) who 



shall give thee thanks?"— Ps. 6:5. 

"For if the dead rise not, then is not 
Christ raised; and if Christ be not raised 
your faith is vain; ye are yet in your 
sins. Then they also which are fallen 
asleep in Christ are perished." 
-1 Cor. 15:16-18. 

A great multitude of texts convey the 
same meaning. This death is the Adamic 
death, from which Christ, by virtue 
of his sacrifice, giving a ransom or corresponding 
price, redeems all men. The 
first probation of the race was a representative 
one in Adam, whereby all became 
subject unto death. Were there 
not to be a recovery as wide as the condemnation 
the first probation would be 
properly regarded as a total failure, a 
sweeping victory for the adversary at the 
outset of creation. But "Known unto 
God are all his works from the beginning 
of the world." (Acts 15:18.) "For 
the Lord of Hosts hath purposed, and 
who shall disannul it? and his hand is 
stretched out, and who shall turn it 
back?" (Isa. 14:27.) We who believe 
in the infinite power, wisdom and 
benevolence of God cannot doubt that 
he has a definite and systematic plan for 
the development of the race, by which 
the largest possible proportion thereof 
shall be brought to ultimate and permanent 
good. This idea was hinted at 
when God told Adam that the seed of 
the woman should bruise the serpent's 
head. Two thousand years later he told 
Abraham plainly that in his seed should 
all the families of the earth be blessed. 
Gradually the features of the plan were 
delineated in the prophecies, but it was 
yet a mystery until its fulfillment began. 
Paul declares (Col. 1:27) that "this 
mystery which hath been hid from ages 
and from generations,. ..now 
made manifest to his saints,... 
is Christ in you the hope of glory." 

Jesus is anointed to be the Head or 
Lord over the Church, which is his body, 
and unitedly they constitute the promised 
"seed"— the Great Deliverer. "If 
ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's 
seed and heirs, according to the promise" 
(Gal. 3:29)— the promise of blessing to 
all the families of the earth. 

There never was a publication to the 
Gentiles of the "only name" given 



whereby men must be saved until the 
world was 4000 years old, and the very 
gradual and intermittent progress of the 
"good tidings which shall be to all people" 
up to this day, indicates the purpose 
of God hitherto to have been other than 

R903 : page 4 

the application of the ransom to the world 
in this life. Who can doubt God's power 
to have enlightened all men had he so 
chosen? He has not done so. More 
than nine-tenths of the race have died 
without any knowledge of Christ. Only 
a "little flock" has been "called and 
chosen and sanctified," while mankind at 
large have only lived that they might 
learn the sad but needful lesson that sin 
brings misery and evil brings destruction. 
With this experience which Adam 
had not, they will be better prepared than 
he to accept the favor of God when it 
shall be extended to them. To them, 
indeed, "the law," whether written on 
tables of stone or in their hearts, has 
been a "schoolmaster," availing for their 
condemnation, but not for their salvation, 
since that must come through Christ 
alone. 

The present mission of Christ to the 
Gentiles has been to take out of them "a 
people for his name." Convinced of 
this, many have supposed that all not so 
chosen were forever lost. In reality the 
few are chosen and severely disciplined 
now, that through their labors in the 
coming new day "all the families of the 
earth" shall be blessed. 

There is to be a resurrection of all. 
"But now is Christ risen from the dead 
and become the first fruits of them that 
slept. For since by man came death, by 
man came also the resurrection of the 
dead. For as in Adam all die, even so 
in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:20-22.) 
"Therefore, as by the 
offence of one, judgment came upon all 
men to condemnation [to death], even 
so by the righteousness of one, the free 
gift came upon all men unto justification 
of life." (Rom. 5:18.) "And he 
shall send Jesus Christ, which before was 
preached unto you, whom the heaven 
must receive until the times of restitution 
of all things which God hath spoken 



by the mouth of all his holy prophets 
since the world began." All that was 
lost in Adam by the world of mankind 
will thus be restored through Christ. 
All the prophets had declared it, though 
it is improbable that they understood it. 
This resurrection, this "justification to 
life," then, is a part of the Savior's work 
of blessing all the "nations," "kindreds" 
and "families of the earth." How, then, 
shall we read his words— John 5:28-29 
—"Marvel not at this, for the hour is 
coming in the which all that are in the 
graves shall hear his voice and shall 
come forth; they that have done good 
unto the resurrection of life, and they 
that have done evil unto the resurrection 
of damnation." The new version renders 
the last word "judgment" instead 
of "damnation," and a glance at the 
original discloses the fact that the change 
is wisely made. The Greek word is 
"Krisis." Webster gives eight definitions 
to the word "judgment," which includes 
trial as well as sentence. Read 
now verses 24 to 27, the burden of which 
tends toward the giving of life, rather 
than its withdrawal. 

"Judgment must begin at the house of 
God," says Peter. The church has its 
trial now; the world will have its trial 
hereafter. The "day of judgment" will 
be a period commensurate with the extent 
and grandeur of the work to be 
done in it. 

"Then said one unto him, Lord, are 
there few that be saved? And he said 
unto them, Strive to enter in at the 
straight gate; for many, I say unto you, 
will seek to enter in and shall not be 
able when once the master of the house 
has risen up and hath shut to the door." 
This refers to the present dispensation. 

Now note a picture of the coming day: 
"Strengthen ye the weak hands and confirm 
the feeble knees. Say to them that 
are of a fearful heart, Be strong; fear 
not; behold your God will come with 
vengeance, even God with a recompense; 
he will come and save you. 
Then the eyes of the blind shall be 
opened and the ears of the deaf shall be 
unstopped. Then shall the lame man 
leap as a hart and the tongue of the 
dumb sing, for in the wilderness shall 
waters break out and streams in the 



desert.... And a highway shall 
be there, and a way, and it shall be called 
the way of holiness; the unclean shall 
not pass over it; the wayfaring men, 
though fools, shall not err therein." 
And the ransomed of the Lord shall return 
(from death) and come to Zion with 
songs and everlasting joy upon their 
heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, 
and sorrow and sighing shall flee 
away."— Isa. 35:3-10. 

Every age is tributary to its successor 
in the revealed plan of God. In the 
present the rod of God smiteth the rocky 
heart of a man, and lo! it becomes a 
"well of water springing up into everlasting 
life;" but in the broader day, 
when the New Jerusalem "cometh down 
from God out of heaven," the water of 
life is not a little well here and there, but 
a mighty river, and then "whosoever 
will may partake" thereof freely. (Rev. 22:1,2,17.) 
The church is then complete; 
yet we are told that the leaves of 
the trees upon the margin of the river 
are for the healing of the nations, showing 
that there will then be nations not in 
health, but capable of being healed. 

"The ransom given does not excuse 
sin in any; it does not propose to count 
sinners saints and usher them into everlasting 
bliss. It merely settles the first 
condemnation and its penalty, and 
reckons the sinner released from that 
condemnation and its results, direct and 
indirect, and places him again on trial 
for life, in which his own willful obedience 
or willful disobedience shall decide 
whether he may or not have everlasting 
life. "-Millennial Dawn," Vol. I., p. 148. 

"But, beloved, be not ignorant of this 
one thing, that one day is with the Lord 
as a thousand years and a thousand 
years as one day. The Lord is not 
slack concerning his promise as some 
men count slackness, but is long-suffering 
to us-ward, not willing that any 
should perish, but that all should come 
to repentance."— 2 Peter, 3:8-9. 

"Who will have all men to be saved 
(from death) and come to a knowledge 
of the truth. For there is one God and 
one mediator between God and men, the 
man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time." 
-1 Tim. 2:4-6. 



In this last clause lies the key to the 
mystery. To the millions of the living 
to-day and to the far vaster myriads of 
the dead the ransom has not been testified, 
but that it will be we have many a 
"Thus saith the Lord." When even 
extinct and sinful Sodom shall be brought 
back to her "former estate" and made 
a daughter to Jerusalem, as we read in 
Ezek. 16:44 to end, we may well believe 
that "the mercy of the Lord endureth 
forever," and that "I will give 
thee the heathen for thine inheritance 
and the uttermost parts of the earth for 
a possession." The mysteries of human 
destiny that have pained our hearts and 
tested our faith are clearing up in the advancing 
light due to the household of 
faith, and as the Church beholds her 
work spreading out before her in the 
coming life, and sees the grandeur of her 
association with her head in ruling and 
blessing the nation's new-born from the 
grave, she is filled with gratitude and 
gladness and her heart is stirred with 
passionate zeal for present self-purification 
and to make known to all the good 
tidings which shall be to all people. 
J. A. STOWE. 



R903 : page 4 
LIVING BY FAITH. 



"Now the just shall live by faith, but if any 
man draw back my soul shall have no pleasure in 
him."-Heb. 10:38. 

Living by faith is a very different thing 
from living by sight. To live by sight 
is to act in the present, and plan for the 
future, according to our own knowledge, 
experience and judgment; while to live 
by faith is to study and accept God's 
plan for both the present and future, and 
to act as he directs, ignoring our own 
ideas of expediency whenever God's 
word speaks to the contrary. 

It will not require very deep penetration 
therefore to decide to which of these 
two classes we belong. Every man belongs 
to either the one or the other, unless 
he be an idiot or insane. The great 
mass of mankind are endeavoring to 



walk by sight; yet they are so very 
short sighted that they can see but a 
short distance in advance, and their past 
experience has been so brief and varied, 
that it forms a poor criterion on which 
to base a correct judgment in devising 
plans for the future. Yet, lacking faith 
in God, it is the best they can do for 
themselves, and they very generally 
realize that all their plans must end with 
the present existence, as they know 
nothing of the future beyond the tomb. 

But there is a small class who walk by 
faith. They are a peculiar people, separate 
from the world, and cannot assimilate 
with it. Having learned and believed 
God's plan, and seeing that it not 
only includes all the present but stretches 
on into eternity, and having implicit 
confidence in his infinite wisdom and 
boundless love, they simply place their 
hand in his, accepting of his proffered 
leading, and promising to follow wherever 
he directs, trusting that however 
dark or thorny the way may be, the end 
will be blessed and glorious. They are 
not promised that the pathway in the 

R903 : page 5 

present life shall be one of luxury and 
ease, that they shall have abundance of 
comforts, that their business plans shall 
all succeed, that friends will multiply, 
and that their declining years, specially, 
shall be years of rest, after the heat and 
burden of the day is past. 

No, these things are not promised, 
but it is promised that their bread and 
water shall be sure as long as God desires 

R904 : page 5 

to have them live; and having food 
and clothing they are to be therewith 
contented, and whatever temporal adversity 
may come, to remember through 
it all, that all things whether good or 
evil, shall, under the divine management 
work together for good to them. Having 
this confidence it is their privilege 
to be always rejoicing, trusting with 
childlike simplicity to their heavenly 
Father's love and care, and faithfully 
meekly and obediently following in 
the footsteps of our leader and head, 



Christ Jesus, who set us an example 
that we should follow in his steps. 

His life was one of implicit faith in 
the promises of God, and his daily walk 
in perfect harmony with his faith— obedient 
even unto death. He took no 
thought more than was necessary for the 
life that he then possessed— either for 
the present or future of his earthly existence; 
and beyond that, he had nothing 
except what was secured to him by 
the promise of God. 

The apostle denominates this class 
who now thus live by faith, the just. 
This includes Jesus their Lord and head, 
the just one, and all those now justified 
by faith in his blood and following in 
his footsteps. These justified ones are 
just, having received the favor of justification 
through Christ, and in grateful 
and cheerful obedience submitted themselves 
to God. Blessed "little flock" follow 
on, through evil report and good 
report, through present tribulation and 
trial and conflicts within and without; it 
is your Father's good pleasure to give 
you the kingdom; blessed virgin church 
"the King hath greatly desired thy 
beauty" and thou shalt be his bride and 
joint-heir, if thou wilt prove thy love for 
him by cheerful endurance unto the 
end. 

But if any of this class draw back 
the Lord will have no pleasure in them. 
To draw back from this high privilege 
into which we have come by faith, is to 
go back to the world and to live after 
the course of this world, to take the 
world's standpoint of observation and 
to reject the Lord's leading. The drawing 
back is not generally done suddenly 
but gradually. It begins with discontent, 
and the discontent soon finds expression 
in complaint; and complaint 
soon developes into open opposition, 
which grows more and more fixed and 
obstinate. Paul declares the end of such 
apostacy when in the next verse he remarks 
hopefully, "But we are not of 
them who draw back unto destruction, 
but of them that believe to the saving of 
the soul." 

Let each of the dear consecrated 
company beware of taking the first 
steps backward; and if you realize that 
you have already done so, wake up to a 



sense of your danger and recover yourself 
at once from the snare of the adversary. 
Your only safety dear ones is in 
keeping your eye of faith fixed on the 
mark of the prize of your high calling 
and forgetting the things behind. If 
you keep looking back at the sacrifices 
already made you will only see the 
things behind, and the things before- 
unseen except by the eye of faith— will 
cease to attract you, and very soon you 
will be caught in the snare of the prince 
of this world. Besides the malady of 
discontent is contageous and may spread 
to some other members of the household 
of faith, and so many be defiled. 
Thus you would be a stumbling block 
and adversary of the body of Christ 
rather than an aid and upbuilder of it. 
"Watch and pray that ye enter not into 
temptation. "-MRS. C. T. R. 



R904 : page 5 

"NO VARIABLENESS, NEITHER SHADOW 
OF TURNING." 

"Do not err, my beloved brethren: Every 
good gift and every perfect gift is from above 
and cometh down from the Father of lights, with 
whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning 
Of his own will begat he us with the word 
of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits 
of his creatures."— Jas. 5:16-18. 

Only those who have been brought to 
a clear knowledge of the plan of God, 
can really rejoice in those assurances 
which the Scriptures give of the unchangeableness 
of his character, and the 
certainty that all his purposes shall be 
accomplished. To the great majority 
of Christians this assurance only awakens 
fearful apprehensions. For centuries 
the church has been taught that 
God's plan is to consign all but a few of 
his creatures to eternal and hopeless 
misery; and as they look at his perfect 
law and realize their own shortcomings 
when measured by it, and much more 
the utter failure of all the world to find 
justification through it, the assurances 
of God's unchangeableness sounds like 
the knell of an eternal and merciless 



doom for the great majority of the human 
race. 

But with what different feelings we 
read the blessed words, "With Him is 
no variableness, neither shadow of turning" 
—we who have been so wonderfully 
enlightened through the Scriptures 
concerning God's plan: as to how it was 
wisely designed before the creation began; 
how it has been developing in the 
ages past; what is its present status and 
mode of development; and what and 
when will be the glorious outcome. As 
we take in the grand scope of the wondrous 
plan and perceive the blessings in 
store through it for all creation, both 
spiritual and human, our hearts are 
filled with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory as we read, "With him is no variableness, 
neither shadow of turning." 
"I am the Lord, I change not." "My 
word that goeth forth out of my mouth 
shall not return unto me void, but it 
shall accomplish that which I please, 
and it shall prosper in the thing whereto 
I sent it."-Mal. 3:6; Isa. 55:11. 

Do not err, beloved brethren: every 
good and perfect gift comes from God. 
God's plans for mankind are all good 
and perfect, and when fully realized in 
his appointed time will amply demonstrate 
his glorious and benevolent character. 
Every purpose of God is for the 
ultimate good of his creatures. His severest 
chastisements are for the reformation 
of the wayward and their final establishment 
in righteousness and everlasting 
happiness; and only when they 
absolutely refuse to be rightly exercised 
by the discipline of the Lord will he 
administer the final punishment which 
forever blots them out of existence, because 
unworthy of life. And this he 
declares will be the last resort; for "As 
I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure 
in the death [second death] of the 
wicked, but that the wicked turn from 
his way and live.— Ezek. 33:11. 

God is not the vindictive tyrant which 
so-called orthodoxy represents him to 
be, delighting in the eternal misery and 
torture and hopeless despair of millions 
of his creatures; and those who have 
been taught to so regard him should 
reflect upon his words through the 
prophet Isaiah (29:13)— "Their fear 



toward me, is taught by the precept of 
men." 

God's eternal purpose is briefly epitomized 
in two great covenants carefully 
recorded by the prophets— the Abrahamic 
Covenant, and the New Covenant. 
The former, addressed to Abraham, 
reads thus: "In thy seed shall all the 
nations of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 12:3; 
22:18.) The latter, addressed 
to the typical people Israel who represented 
the whole world [see Tabernacle 
Types] is recorded thus: "Behold the 
days come, saith the Lord, that I will 
make a new covenant with the house of 
Israel and with the house of Judah. 
Not according to the covenant that I 
made with their fathers in the day that 
I took them by the hand to bring them 
out of the land of Egypt, which my 
covenant they brake, although I was a 
husband unto them, saith the Lord. 
But this shall be the covenant that I 
will make with the house of Israel: 
After those days [when the days are 
accomplished for the overthrow of the 
kingdoms of this world and the setting 
up of the kingdom of God] saith the 
Lord, I will put my law in their inward 
parts, and write it in their hearts; and 
will be their God, and they shall be my 
people. And they shall teach no more 
every man his neighbor, and every man 
his brother, saying, Know the Lord; 
for they shall all know me, from the 
least of them unto the greatest of them, 
saith the Lord; for I will forgive their 
iniquity, and I will remember their sin 
no more. In those days they shall say 
no more, The fathers have eaten a sour 
grape, and the children's teeth are set 
on edge. But every one [who dies then 
—the second death] shall die for his 
own iniquity [his own wilful sin, and 
not because of inherited weaknesses 
and tendencies to sin] . Every man 
that eateth the sour grape, his teeth 
shall be set on edge." 
-Jer. 31:31-34,29,30. 

Of these two covenants it will be 
seen, that the latter, or new covenant 
guarantees to all mankind, represented 
by Israel, a restitution. This is the 
prophet Jeremiah's testimony concerning 
the restitution of all things which 
Peter says, God has spoken by the 



mouth of all his holy prophets since 

the world began (Acts 3:21). A restitution, 

as all must know, signifies a restoration 

of that which was lost— the 

restoration of mankind to the perfection 

and blessedness lost in Eden. Read it 

again, and see how emphatically and 

clearly the Lord here states his purpose; 

and notice further that it is unconditional 

—an affirmation of Jehovah 

not subject to any contingencies which 

might hinder its going into effect. And 

then remember his words: "I am the 

Lord, I change not," and the words of 

the Apostle James, "With him is no 

variableness, neither shadow of turning"; 

and the words of the Apostle 

Peter, which show that the times of refreshing 

the times of restitution, are 

due to begin with the return of our 

Lord Jesus Christ whom the heavens 

receive until that time.— Acts 3:19-21. 

R905 : page 5 

In view of this glorious purpose of 
God for all mankind, is there not cause 
for great rejoicing in the unchangeableness 
of God's purpose, and also in 
looking for the appearing of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ clothed with 
divine power for the accomplishment of 
that purpose? 

The former or Abrahamic covenant, 
it will be observed, is not applicable to 
the whole world, except in the sense 
that the whole world shall be blessed 
through it. It guarantees that a class 
called the "seed," whom God shall 
elect, shall be clothed with authority 
and power as Jehovah's agents for the 
accomplishment of his purposed blessing 
of all, as indicated in the new covenant. 
This promised Seed of Abraham 
is the Great Prophet of whom Moses 
wrote (Deut. 18:15-19; Acts 3:22,23), 
and whom the Apostle Paul explains to 
be the Christ— Jesus the head, and the 
overcoming church the members of his 
body.-Gal. 3:16,29. 

As the new covenant which guarantees 
restitution for all, belongs specially 
to the Millennial Age, so the Abrahamic 
covenant, which guarantees the selection 
and exaltation to power of the Great 
Prophet who shall restore all things, is 



confined exclusively to the Gospel Age. 
This covenant must be fulfilled, before 
the New Covenant can go fully into 
operation. And of course when it is 
fulfilled, the special favors now offered 
through it will no longer be offered to 
or attainable by any. The favors of the 
Abrahamic Covenant do not go beyond 
this age, in which the selection of the 
little flock to receive the kingdom will 
be fully accomplished. 

It is in this covenant that those who 
are Christ's faithful followers now, may 
read their title clear to joint heirship 
with him in his kingdom.— "Now to 
Abraham and his seed... which 
is Christ, were the promises made. And 
if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's 
seed, and heirs according to the promise." 
-Gal. 3:29. 

Abraham was the father of this seed 
only in a typical sense— "like unto him 
whom he believed, even God." (Rom. 4:16,17, 
see margin.) Like as Abraham 
was the father of the natural Isaac 
(type of Christ-Gal. 4:28; Rom. 9:8), 
so God is the father of the spiritual seed, 
the spiritual Isaac, which is Christ, head 
and body." (Gal. 3:16.) And yet a 
special blessing will come to the natural 
seed of Abraham in fulfilment of this 
covenant as he understood it. The covenant 
has two phases and will be fulfilled 
in each. (See "Millennial Dawn," Chap. 
XIV.) As James explains, "Of his own 
will begat he us with the word of truth, 
that we should be a kind of first fruits of 
his creatures." Not only was Jesus thus 
begotten of God, but every member of 
the anointed body is thus begotten." 
(1 Pet. 1:3; John 20:17.) Of this spiritual 
body or class Jesus was the first 
fruits, and they all as a class are a first 
fruits of all classes or orders which shall 
be brought back to harmony with God 
through their ministry of sacrifice. 

To be begotten is to receive the first 
impulse of life. As a race we were all 
dead, having lost life and all right and 
claim upon it through Adam's transgression. 
And not until begotten again, 
through faith in and acceptance of his 
promises, are any alive in the sight of 
God. The whole world yet lieth in condemnation 
[condemned to death], and 
consequently the steady tread of the 



whole race is downward toward the 
tomb. The time for their begetting 
again, or regeneration, has not yet come, 
but will have come when the great Restorer 
has fully taken unto himself his 
great power, and begun his reign. Then 
the fact of their redemption and consequent 

R905 : page 6 

right to life through faith in the 

Redeemer, and grateful acceptance of 

the unmerited favor, will be clearly testified 

to all (1 Tim. 2:6), and the hope 

begotten of this truth will be the first impulse 

of that life which when fully developed 

will be eternal. Those thus begotten 

of the truth, and who go on unto 

perfection, will be fully born into life 

when actually and fully delivered from 

the bondage of corruption into the glorious 

liberty of the children of God— when 

the great work of restitution is complete. 

But there is a class who are now begotten 
of the truth, as the apostle James 
here asserts, before the time appointed 
for the begetting or regeneration of the 
world in general. By faith they now 
accept the promised redemption, and 
though their restitution to perfection 
does not follow their acceptance of the 
ransom in this age, they are reckoned of 
God as restored and are told to so reckon 
themselves. They are thus not only begotten 
again, but are reckoned of God as 
born again, made perfect, fully restored, 
just as all mankind will be when the 
great work of restitution is complete in 
the end of the millennial age. Thus by 
faith they become partakers of the blessings 
of the New Covenant before its 
time for coming into force fully or for 
all. The blessings of restitution are 
reckonedly theirs, and God can now treat 
them as sons, "holy and acceptable" 
unto him. 

The apostle explains why it is that 
some are thus begotten now. It is that 
they may be "a kind of first-fruits of his 
creatures." When this class is fully developed, 
born, in the resurrection, they 
will be the first ripe, perfected fruit of his 
plan. "Blessed and holy are all they 
that have part in the first resurrection." 
These are justified, begotten, in this age, 
in order that they may lay hold by faith 



upon another and still greater favor of 

God offered in this age, that they may 

be eligible to a yet higher calling, even 

to the divine nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) 

The conditions of this high calling are 

works and sacrifices added to faith; and 

since only perfect works and unblemished 

sacrifices are acceptable with God, 

it was needful that all of the sin-defiled 

ones called to such service should first 

be justified or reckoned pure and perfect, 

that they might present themselves 

living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to 

God. Those begotten of the truth, who 

hear and obey this call to become join t-sacrificers 

with Christ Jesus (Rom. 12:1) 

thus become heirs of the Abrahamic 

Covenant, joint-heirs with Christ, members 

of the "seed," the "Great Prophet," 

the "anointed," which is to bless and restore 

all nations; which is to apply the 

blessings of the New Covenant actually 

to all mankind. 

As members of the condemned race 
we never could have become heirs of the 
Abrahamic Covenant had we not first 
had the favors of the New Covenant applied 
to us; for only that which is holy, 
without spot or blemish or any such 
thing, is acceptable as a sacrifice (Lev. 22:20; 
Deut. 15:21; 17:1; 1 Pet. 1:19,16-19; 
Eph. 5:27), and we are so 
reckoned through Christ, our Redeemer. 

We notice further the expression of 
the apostle— "a kind of first fruits." 
While this class will be the very first 
fruit of God's creatures, it is only one 
kind of fruit, and there will be other kinds 
to follow, both human and angelic. But 
the divine kind will be first of all— first, 
both in point of time and also of rank. 
And through the divine kind shall all 
the other kinds be blessed; for they are 
to be exalted far above angels and principalities 
and powers, with Christ, even 
at the right hand of God [chief place of 
divine favor]. "Eye hath not seen, nor 
ear heard, neither have entered into the 
heart of man the things which God hath 
prepared for them that love him, but 
God hath revealed them unto us by his 
spirit." (1 Cor. 2:10.) Surely our 
light afflictions, our little crosses of the 
present time, are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed 
in us, if we prove faithful unto 



death and are counted worthy of the 
crown of life. 

Language seems too weak to paint 
the glories of our high calling, and the 
blessedness vouchsafed to the heirs of 
the Abrahamic Covenant. Only those 
who are diligently delving into the 
depths of God's revealed truth are able 
to grasp these promises and to realize 
their value. And we might add, that 
only those who are faithful also in 
spreading the knowledge of the truth 
are able to fully appreciate it themselves. 
As we tell it to others, its blessed inspiration 
fills our own hearts to overflowing, 
and we are enabled to run more 
swiftly and more patiently the heavenly 
race. Let those who are faithfully running 
the race remember that "Faithful is 
he that calleth you, who also will do it." 
(1 Thes. 5:24.) Let not your faith 
stagger at the promises of God; for what 
he has promised he is able also to perform 
(Rom. 4:21), and "with him is no 
variableness, neither shadow of turning." 



R905 : page 6 

A VAST MAJORITY IN HELL. 

In the Christian Register, a Unitarian 
paper, we find the following: 

"The Examiner (Baptist) freely concedes 
the point we have pressed in regard 
to the damnation of the vast majority, 
at least of the adult portion, of the 
race. It says: The idea of a probation 
in this life does imply the possibility of 
salvation, but the possibility may never 
be realized. As a matter of fact, we believe 
that, for the vast majority of the 
heathen, this possibility never is realized, 
and we never yet heard of an orthodox 
theologian who held any other belief 
than this.'" 

In its comments, the Christian Register 
makes the following remarks: 

"This is meeting the issue fairly and 
squarely. The Examiner does not seem 
to be afraid to show its colors. Now let 
it print its weekly edition on black paper 
with a small margin of white, and its 
color will correspond with its doctrine. 
We are glad, however, that the Examiner 



is consistent. In these days of word-twisting 
and mental reservation, consistency 
is a notable virtue." 

R906 : page 6 

Another writer copying the above 
adds: "The suggestion is good, but if 
the white margin is to represent the few 
saved, even from Christendom, saying 
nothing about heathen lands, according 
to church creeds, the white margin will 
be so very small as to hardly be discernable. 
The hell into which our Baptist 
brethren would thrust the whole world, 
except the few who accept their terms of 
salvation, is described by the Christian 
poet, Dr. Watts: 

'Tempests of angry fire shall roll 

To blast the rebel worm, 
And beat upon the naked soul 
In one eternal storm.'" 

Here we see the difficulty which is 
rapidly overtaking intelligent Christians 
everywhere. It is a struggle between 
old creeds and reason, and the cause is 
that they falsely suppose their creeds to 
represent the Bible's teaching, and hence 
neglect the Bible and seek not in it, for 
the wisdom of God which alone is able 
to solve the question now rising prominently 
before men's minds, viz.:— What 
is the fate of those who have died in ignorance 
of the only name given under 
heaven or among men whereby we must 
be saved? 

In the above controversy the Examiner 
seeks to hold on to the Bible statements, 
that only believers in and accepters 
of the Lord as their Ransomer will 
be saved. But it failed to see that the 
present age is for the selection of a little 
flock, and that an age is coming in which 
all the blind eyes shall be opened and 
the deaf ears unstopped, when the knowledge 
of the Lord shall fill the earth, and 
when all shall know [believe in] him— 
when the "little flock" shall have become 
the Bride, the Lamb's wife, and as such 
shall say unto all the world, "Come," to 
the waters of truth and grace and live. 
(Rev. 22:17.) And failing to see this, 
it is forced to the position it takes, that 
the "vast majority" of the race never 
have had, and never will have a chance 
for life through Christ's ransom sacrifice 



—hence his ransom was not a ransom 
for all to be testified [to all] in due time." 
This in the Examiner's creed implies 
that the vast majority of humanity go 
into an eternity of torture because God 
did not make ample provision for them, 
either in the ransom or in the granting 
of a knowledge of that ransom as a basis 
for belief, without which they cannot be 
justified. 

Would that the Examiner and all 
could see that God's "due time" for 
granting a knowledge of the only name, 
is not limited to the present age and 
present adverse conditions: that As the 
heavens are higher than the earth, so are 
his ways and thoughts higher and wider 
than those of the vast majority of his 
children whose fear toward him, and too 
narrow views of his character and plan, 
are taught by the precepts of men.— 
Isa. 29:13 and 55:9. 

The Christian Register's views of the 
subject are broader and more reasonable 
when it repudiates the thought that God 
will consign the vast majority of mankind 
to endless torture simply because they 
knew not of Christ, and did not believe 
on him of whom they had not heard. 
But its reasonings are human merely. 
Not seeing the plan of God as set forth 
in the Bible, of a ransom for all and a 
due time for all to partake of the benefits 
of that ransom and believe in, and accept 
of Christ, it rejects the Bible's teachings 
entirely and represents a large and 
growing class who while professing a respect 
for the Bible, and calling Christ 
the Redeemer, in fact deny the teachings 
of the Bible and reject Christ as a Redeemer; 
denying that there was any 
need of a ransom for all, or for any. 
They virtually make everlasting life a 
reward for every man who will wear the 
filthy rags of his own righteousness, 
claiming that every man who lives the 
best he knows how, avoiding gross sins, 
will be accepted of God and granted 
everlasting life as a reward therefor. 
With such a view where was the necessity 
of testifying it now, or in any other 
"due time?" In such a view where 
could Paul's statement apply— "There 
is none other name given under heaven 
or among men whereby we must be 
saved?"— or where is the sense of urging 



men now, or at any time to believe on the 
Lord Jesus Christ to be saved, if they 
are to be saved without believing, and on 
the basis of works merely? 



R909 : page 6 

To do or not to do, to have 

Or not to have, I leave to thee; 

To be or not to be, I leave: 

Thine only will be done in me; 

All my requests are lost in one, 
Father, thy only will be done. 
-C. Wesley. 



R906 : page 6 

SAMARITANS LOOKING FOR MESSIAH. 

The woman of Samaria, talking with 
Jesus at Jacob's well, said, "I know that 
Messiah cometh (which is called Christ") 
(John 4:25, Revised Version.) Her people 
accepted the five books of Moses 
and from them drew their hope of a 
coming Messiah. 

A most wonderful corroboration of the 
woman's words is found in the belief of 
the Samaritans to-day. They belong to 
the race of the woman with whom Christ 
talked. They live at the ancient Shechem, 
(now Nablus,) not far from Jacob's 
well. They have a copy of the Pentateuch, 
which is of great antiquity. They 
celebrate all the Mosaic festivals, and are 
the only ones of all the Jewish race who 
offer sacrifices at the Passover. 

The Jewish Intelligence gives some interesting 
facts. The community now 
numbers about a hundred and fifty souls. 
By wearing of pink turbans they are distinguished 
from other people of the land. 
Their high priest is Jacob ibn Harun. 
Prof. Strack, of the German Palestine 
Association, had an interview with the 
high priest and questioned him concerning 
the belief of his people. The high 
priest replied in a letter, saying that their 
word Taheb (Ta'ib in Hebrew, signifying 
the Promised Prophet who will convert 
the people) refers to the prophet promised 
by the Lord, "I will raise them 



up a prophet," etc. (Deut. 18:15,18.) 
They interpret this as meaning "one 
who will teach the nations the good 
way, and lead them to walk in it only, 
so that the whole world will repent of its 
sin and become converted and purified 
from all evil." It is indeed a remarkable 
fact that the Samaritans, who accept only 
the Pentateuch, should have so strong a 
belief in the coming Messiah, and adopt 
the interpretation of Deut. 18:15,18, 
which the New Testament gives (Acts 3:22; 
7:37; John 4:25.) They think 
that they are now living in the age of 
"apostacy," which will only end with the 
appearance of Taheb, the Messiah, who 
will re-establish worship on Gerizim in 
its pristine purity. 

Great political convulsions will precede. 
"Then, the wisest of all the nations 
will be charged by the kings of the 
earth to find out the true faith. Among 
them will appear also Taheb, as the representative 
of the Samaritans, and quite 
unconscious of his Messiahship. But 
the whole council will be so impressed 
by his superior wisdom that they will 
follow him to Gerizim, where they will 
find the law of Moses, the vessels of the 
temple, and the hidden manna." Then 
the whole earth will submit to the law 
of Moses and to Taheb. At the foot 
of "this mountain" (Gerizim) of which 
the woman spoke to Jesus, her people 
still worship in a humble synagogue, in 
their prostrations throwing themselves 
on their faces towards the eastern summit 
of Mount Gerizim. They are still 
looking for Messiah.— S.S. World. 



R906 : page 6 

ANSWERS TO YOUR LETTERS. 

It is not possible for us to answer 
your letters as we should like to do. 
Our mail averages fifty to one hundred 
letters a day, some of them full of citations 
to Scripture which we have no 
time to look up, much less to reply to 
at length. We state this as an explanation 
why your letters have gone unanswered 
often, or perhaps a ten paged 
letter has been answered on a postal 



card. 

Please put all orders for books, etc., 
separate from your letter on another 

R906 : page 7 

piece of paper. And please state any 
questions as concisely as possible after 
you have finished your letter— as a 
Postscript. And be sure you write your 
name and full address plainly. Many 
letters come without and cause us much 
annoyance, as well as you. 

But think not, dear brethren and sisters, 
that your letters are unappreciated 
because unanswered. We can read 
five, for one we can answer; and were 
it not for the strength and encouragement 
which your many excellent letters 
afford, we would no doubt long ago 
have felt quite discouraged. But such 
wonderful letters from all quarters— 
from China, Britain, India, Sweden, 
Hayti, Australia, South America, besides 
the thousands from our own States 
and Canada, give evidence of such a 
work of grace in your hearts, and such 
zeal and variety of effort on your part 
to serve the truth, often at great sacrifice, 
that our hearts are re-invigorated. 
We wish you could all share this comfort 
and encouragement with us, and for 
this reason publish extracts (this month 
from an unusually large number) of letters. 
We give you but a sample, and 
we are by no means sure that they are 
the best; for some contain orders written 
in the body of the letter, and get 
lost after those orders are filled. 

So then write on, dear friends; your 
letters give us points, and frequently 
suggest subjects for TOWER articles. 
But do not be disappointed if your answer 
is slow, or if you get none. The 
TOWER, from month to month, is our 
letter to you; and the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, when finished in its several volumes, 
will, we trust, answer all reasonable 
questions. 



R907 : page 7 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



page 7 

Brother Adamson has been laboring 
for the truth in New York state for some 
time past with good success. In Buffalo 
especially quite a number were awakened 
to see the morning light. A hasty 
note recently received from him at Rochester, 
says among other things, "I 
have excellent letters from various 
places, especially Buffalo. Saints are 
encouraged and comforted by the truth, 
and growing daily in favor and knowledge. 
Here, storms have prevented 
much out-door work, but I have out 336 
of the Packets, (containing Food and sample 
TOWER) nevertheless. Catholics and 
Presbyterians seem to have gotten some 
"orders" respecting the Packets, not to 
read. Poor, stupid, blind "orthodoxy." 

Yours in tender regard and love in 
the anointed. J. B. A . 

Word received from Brothers Marting, 
Gillis, Myers, Bryan, Cobb, Blundin, 
Hickey, Van Hook, Bowman, 
[Brother Bowman, please send your 
present address in another good letter.] 
and many others, indicate that amid circumstances 
sometimes favorable and 
sometimes adverse, each is seeking to 
do what he can. And though our home 
(Pittsburgh) missionaries are seldom referred 
to, you should know that there 
are here quite a number who will we 
doubt not, receive of the Master in due 
time such honorable mention as, "She hath 
done what she could," "Thou hast been 
faithful over a few things, I will make 
thee ruler over many things." 

We are more and more convinced 
that the "slothful servant" becomes a 
wicked one, and in the present time of 
trial will be sifted out, and by getting 
out of the light into darkness, will thus 
get his portion with the hypocrites. It 
will be found that every one who shall 
be of that "little flock," the "Royal 
Priesthood," will have been a priest not 
in name only but in deed and in truth- 
he must sacrifice his own will, and spend 
and be spent in the Royal service if he 
would share in the glories to be revealed 
in that Priesthood. This applies to 
each, not merely the public teachers, 
but to the private also. Every under 
priest will not only recognize his justification 



by the High Priest's sacrifice, 
but must also bring his sacrifice to God, 
acceptable in the name and merit of the 
great High Priest.-EDITOR. 

Orangeburg, S.C., Dec. 13, 1886. 
BROTHER RUSSELL: The special 
number of TOWER is at hand. I am 
highly pleased with your plan in thus 
absorbing the three issues of the TOWER 
whereby the many readers of the 
TOWER may obtain so invaluable a work 
as the Millennial Dawn, at the trifling 
extra charge of 25 cents. I sincerely 
hope that not only every subscriber may 
obtain it, but that many of the thousands 
of creed-bound and famishing ones in 
the various sects may obtain one, or 
read one thoroughly. No book is more 
calculated to establish one in the truths 
of God's word than Millennial Dawn, 
and those who are drifting upon the sea 
of insecurity would do well to clasp 
Millennial Dawn very warmly. Enclosed 
is 75 cents, the extra charge for 
three of us here. 

Yours in Christ, . 

R907 : page 7 

Ohio, Dec. 13, 1886. 
MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: I am so 

near the wall that my being cries out 
with anguish— hard pressed by the flesh 
and Satan. My desire is to resign my position 
in the nominal church— that of 
pastor, (though not a salaried position, 
for I will not hire). I might say my desire 
was to do so, but now I conclude 
to remain a while yet. My reasons are 
these: Your late work, "The plan of the 
ages," The Fire of Judgment, I call it- 
is in season to accomplish a great work 
here. It is the wedge which will separate 
the true from the false; and I shall 
see that it is driven into our congregation, 
but I shall be wary in my work. 
When all the wheat has been reached, 
then we will forsake the old nominal 
threshing floor and go out into the broad, 
white wheat fields and glean. 

I have delivered three lectures here 
in my native village, which are not in 
the least in taste with nominal religion. 
My themes were: 1. God— His attributes 
—His Plan, and Purpose in Creation. 2. 



Man— His Origin and Destination. 3. 
Life and Death— The Wages of Sin and 
the Gift of God. My next will be the 
new race— Christ. By the time I have 
these all fixed in their minds I will be 
ready to preach any Bible subject to 
them, having their minds prepared to 
receive it. I am now ready to advertise 
Z.W.T. from the pulpit, as people are 
wondering where I get this strange doctrine. 
Verily God has been leading me; 
I have no purpose of my own. 

Some of the brethren in , are arranging 

to have me come and preach 
for them. If it is God's will, I expect to 
go there in a few weeks, but I do hope 
the Lord will not permit Satan to exalt 
me, for I am heart sick of worldly praise. 
I think we are in the midst of a great 
trouble in the nominal church, and M. 
Dawn is destined to take a prominent 
position in this coming storm. It is the 
panacea that will open the blind eyes 
and unstop the deaf ear, and unloose 
the dumb tongue in the nominal Babylon. 
What a confusion I anticipate! 
"Come out of her my people." I would 
send you some money, but I can't just 
now. I am no financier, I am more of a 
Bible student. I remain your brother in 
Christ, and ask for your prayers in my 
behalf. J. P . 

DEAR BROTHER: Your letter of the 
13th rejoices me greatly. May God bless 
you dear brother, giving you grace according 
to your day, and upholding you 
with the word of truth. 

I am glad that you are seeing clearly, 
I am glad too that you have a fervent 
zeal which permits you to become warm 
and excited over a matter worthy of excitement 
and warmth— the great prize— 
the inheritance— a pearl of great value. 
I pity those who become deeply absorbed 
muck-raking for earthly treasures, 
but are cold and lifeless and do less in 
regard to the heavenly prize of our high 
calling. My prayer is that you may not 
be moved when you find others lukewarm. 
Do not conclude that you are 
too hot, our Lord and the chief apostles 
were enthusiasts, and burned with zeal 
and love for their work. 

Go on, dear brother; your plan is 
good, carry it out thoroughly. Being 



unbound by oath of office or covenant 
with any denomination to preach only 
their doctrines, you are at perfect liberty 
to preach God's Word as it opens. 

It is well to understand what we must 
expect that we may not be disappointed 
but strengthened as we see the harvest 
separation progress. In this as in 
many other respects the "harvest" of 
the gospel age closely resembles its 
type, the "harvest" of the Jewish age. 
Now as then "they shall cast you out of 
the synagogues," and "shall say all 
manner of evil against you falsely," and 
shall "hate you." Rejoice, however, 
and be exceeding glad, for this is an 
evidence or "witness of the Spirit" that 
you are in the "narrow way" as voiced 
by the word of sure testimony. 

For this reason you must be on your 
guard that your opponents may find no 
real cause for their evil speaking. Guard 
weak places. If you are "no financier" 
that would be a very assailable point. 
Guard it well. Live within your income, 
if it cuts off all luxuries and reduces you 
to potatoes and salt. Owe no man anything 
but love. 

You will want to arrange your affairs 
on a business basis at once, because as 
soon as you begin to scratch instead of 
tickle the ears you will find purses begin 
to close, and, generally speaking, you 
may expect the truth to separate you 
from the more wealthy of your friends 
and leave you in company mainly with 
the poor, rich only in faith and the 
coming inheritance. 

As an ambassador of the Great King, 
yet as a follower of him who was a servant 
of servants, be both noble and fearless, 
as well as humble and condescending. 
Be careful for nothing, but in 
everything and in every condition give 
thanks always and make full proof of 
your ministry. Such fruitage will honor 
the Lord and stand the test of the present 
trial— "so as by fire." Let me hear 
from you often. Grace, mercy and 
peace. 

Yours in fellowship and service, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 

page 7 

Howells Depot, N.Y., Jan. 2, 1887. 



MR. C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR SIR: I was 

very much surprised, and so much 
pleased, to receive the Dawn. I was 
eagerly watching for the special paper, 
but never dreamed I was to get the 
much wished for Dawn. I had hoped 
to be able to pay up the two years arrearages, 
renew my subscription and 
send for the Dawn, which I have 
greatly desired ever since you announced 
it ready, but owing to recent sickness, a 
light form of diphtheria, including husband, 
self, and our four children, which 
caused us great anxiety and some expense, 
I abandoned my purpose, concluding 
to wait awhile. But through 
your kind consideration I have to-day 
had the pleasure of perusing some of 
the contents. It is valuable to me, and 
I shall try to do what good I can by 
loaning it to others. 
Humbly and sincerely yours in Christ, 
A. B . 

Nottingham, England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: Accept 
my tribute of thanks for the Dawn. I 
concur most emphatically in all Brother 
Adamson has said respecting it. Notwithstanding 
some of the chapters are 
old friends, they add to the book's value. 
I esteem its price, next to the grand 
text-book of our faith, above rubies. I 
have read the book through and some 
chapters several times, and I am amazed 
at the light it sheds upon God's word. 
Truly the Lord is with you and your 
dear wife, may he grant you all needful 
grace to sustain you. You are willing 
to be accounted "fools" for Christ's 
sake now and seek only for "glory, 
honor and immortality hereafter." You 
will be glad to know that I received my 
copies safely and have six of them loaned 
out at work. I cannot tell you yet what 
effect they are having on the readers, 
but will report in my next. I want 
seven more copies to send to friends in 
different parts of the country. I feel 
that this is just a sort of work I can do. 

Praying that the blessing of the Master 
of the harvest may continually 
abide upon you, I remain in loving fellowship 
and service, yours affectionally, 
A. P. R 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I am 
slowly improving in health. I am usually 
quite comfortable, and am able to 
take a walk of a few rods each day— 
usually about the yard. I have not 
strength for more than this. I cough 
considerable at times, though by no 
means as much as I did. Have not finished 
Millennial Dawn yet, as I cannot 
read much without getting too tired. 

I am thankful to our dear Father in 
heaven for giving you light and ability 
to write this volume, and trust it will be 
a very effective agency in disseminating 
the truth. I am aware that to have it 
so, the book must be brought to the attention 
of the people, and were I able it 
would be a great pleasure to me to add 
my mite in this direction. Perhaps the 
Lord may yet give me the strength. 
His will be done. Permit me to express 
my hearty approval of "A Word of 
Warning" in last number. I am thankful 
that all through the struggle you hold 
the readers of Z.W.T. to the Scripture 
teaching, and that while there is so general 
a tendency to looseness on Bible 
teaching, the WATCH TOWER has held 
up Christ and him crucified as the only 
foundation. 

Mrs. T. joins me in Christian love to 
yourself and Sister Russell. 

Yours in Christ, S. T. TACKABURY. 

Brooklyn, Jan. 9, 1887. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: Both your 
letters were received in due time and 
suggestions considered. I am afraid 
you over-estimate my service; or is it 
possible that there are so few willing to 
do much of anything that what I rejoice 
to do appears to be more than it is? 
Well, I feel that I am doing but little to 
what I would do, and so do that little 
gladly. 

The package arrived in due time. I 
was surprised at its size, but glad that I 
could get so many to distribute. Have 
sold one book to a Methodist brother in 
business, who has been considering these 
views for some time. 

On Friday evening I went down to 
Talmage's church with about 100 copies 
of Z.W.T. About eight hundred or 
more were present. The first half hour 
was devoted to lecture; then, while singing, 



all who do not wish to remain longer 
go out. Then about three-quarters of 
an hour are given to devotional meeting. 
Six hundred were present. I sat near 
the door, and was out nearly first; pulled 
wrapper off papers instantly and commenced 
handing out rapidly, saying, 
"New Christian work, new book," &c. 
By the time all were out my papers were 
gone. Many go there from other 
churches, so the paper must be pretty 
widely spread. Then I went into the 
church, and, seeing a couple of young 
men looking at a copy, I handed them 
two, with the request that they should be 
handed to Dr. Talmage. 

I am profiting by the perusal of Millennial 
Dawn. Your statements are 
clear, backed by Scripture proof, and 
advance step by step in so orderly and 
connected a manner that the learner is 
led gradually up to the view of these 
great truths, instead of being overwhelmed 
at once, and thus turned away 
from them. I do wish every earnest 
Christian could be induced to read the 
book. 

I shall go to another large church 
next Friday evening, and also mail 
copies to different places. To many 
places in the United States, and to Canada, 
England, Scotland, Germany, Switzerland, 
and even Russia, has the October 
number WATCH TOWER gone. You 
may think I have done some mailing 
when I tell you that almost all that large 
package of TOWERS have gone by mail. 
The five Millennial Dawns came safely 
to hand, and I sold two and mailed the 
other three, one to Mr. Moody, one to 
Major Whittle and one to Rev. Geo. E. 
Needham, Secretary and originator of 
the Proph. Conf., with letter to each, and 
asking a reply; and I sent a bound copy 
of Millennial Dawn to Canon F. W. 
Farrar, of England, with a longer letter, 
which I am almost certain will bring an 
answer. I have been very busy during 
December, but now am sitting down to 
go a second time studiously through Millennial 
Dawn. I desire to fasten many 
things therein upon my memory. 

I mailed you yesterday a money order 
for $10, which I expected to send you 
last month. Wish it were greater. I rejoice, 
even though not without trials. 



Yours in service, B. P_ 
R907 : page 8 



Kansas 
C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR SIR: Find enclosed 
$1.25, for which please send one 
copy of Millennial Dawn and the TOWER 
one year. I never was interested in religious 
writings till I read Food. I am 
not a Christian; it is so hard to do right; 
but I just love to read this teaching, it is 
so reasonable. I was on the "Poor 
List" last year, and am not really able 
to subscribe. I live in a "dug-out," 
with only a dirt floor, with a large family; 
but I do not feel like taking so much for 
nothing, so will send this much in spite 
of all. Will also send some names for 
samples. 

Yours sincerely, E. W . 

IN REPLY. 

DEAR FRIEND: You probably are 
more acceptable in the sight of our Lord 
than many who profess much more. Your 
willingness to sacrifice for the truth proves 
this. The fact that you love the truth 
proves that you have an "ear to hear." 
The fact that God has sent it to you at 
all, proves that he has some blessing in it 
for your heart and life. In fact, you are 
already a believer, and now you are experiencing 
some of the "joy and peace" 
promised to such as believe. Grasp a 
firmer hold of the Lord; realize him not 
only as the Saviour of all from death, 
but as your Redeemer. Trust him for 
the future and learn to trust him for the 
present also. Serve him by serving the 
truth and daily seek to be more like him 
in your thoughts and deeds. "She hath 
done what she could," is the highest 
praise any disciple can expect.— EDITOR. 

page 8 

Brother Brown, writing from Chicago, 
says: "I called yesterday to see Brother 
C. (an attorney-at-law) and passed about 
three-quarters of an hour very pleasantly 
with him. I found him to be a Scotch, 
"dyed in the wool" Presbyterian, but 
by accident a year or so ago his attention 
was called to Food. On Sunday 



last he sat down immediately after breakfast 

and began to read Millennial Dawn, 

Vol. I. He read without stopping even 

to eat until 10 o'clock that night, and the 

first half of the book looks as my own 

copy did, only more so, for he had underscored 

fully half of it. 

Veedersburg, Ind. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL: Enclosed find 
one dollar for the paper. 

Educated by a Methodist father and 
Presbyterian mother, even as a child 
my inquisitive mind detected the inconsistency 
of accepting the tenets of both 
denominations, and also of rejecting 
them. When I grew older and ventured 
to express my doubts, my father 
replied, "It does seem illogical and inharmonious; 
but, my child, I am sure 
the Bible is true and logical if it were 
clearly understood. Do not try to 
comprehend what you cannot understand, 
but believe in Christ." Even 
then the thought crossed my mind, if 
Christ died to restore what Adam lost, 
why not make every man just as Adam 
was? That would be restoring. However, 
I tried to follow the advice given, 
tried earnestly and sincerely to exercise 
faith, but after a time fell into skepticism 
—stayed away from church, and had 
for my friends worldly people, scientists 
and infidels. My home was then in a 
beautiful city, but my mind kept at 
times reverting to the old subject. I 
finally concluded there must be, there 
is, one true church, and it must be the 
Catholic Church, since so many of the 
Protestants whom I knew were so insincere; 
and as the Episcopalians claimed 
the same origin, I would try that. 

Just as the change to this little town was 
talked of, your tract fell into my hands. 
I glanced over it, thinking it odd; said 
something to the pastor about it, who 
laughed at me for thinking it something 
new. The little book was packed 
amongst my effects, and while in a 
doubting mood one day fell into my 
hands again, seeming to answer every 
troubled question. I believe now my 
faith is established; and it seems odd to 
me that other people— cultured, Christian 
people— cannot see it as I do. 

Pardon my long letter, unless it interests 



you to hear details. I am in the 
"Wilderness condition," have consecrated, 
and dare not turn back. Remember 
me in your prayers. 
Kindly and respectfully, MRS. E. W. R. 

Brother MacMillan, of Latrobe, says: 
"We don't express our praise as does 
the Salvation Army, but if any of God's 
people can feel and live a Hallelujah life, 
we ought to. I sometimes wonder what 
those Salvation Army people would do 
if the light from God's word would 
shine upon them and illumine their understanding 
as it has done ours; for the 
little they have makes them so noisy. 

An aged brother here wishes me to 
say that the Dawn is the best prepared 
table of food that ever he sat down to, 
and that he cannot get done eating. 
He keeps right on partaking, and, 
strange as it may seem, his hunger has 
not yet diminished." 

San Joaquin Co., Cal. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I have 
now given Millennial Dawn a thorough 
examination, and like the book. I took 
one day last week trying to get subscribers 
for it, and have got twelve for 
my first day's work, and as I intend to 
place one in each family who attend my 
Sabbath school (I say my school because 
for the last eighteen months I have had 
no connection with any denomination of 
Christians), and as I wish to send some 
to distant parts, I send you enclosed a 
P.O. Order for fifteen dollars, for which 
send the value in Millennial Dawn, 
Vol. I. Yours, etc., D. K . 

Bear Lake, Michigan. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I have 
not done as much as I should like for 
the advancement of the truth, and the 
setting up of Christ's Kingdom, but I 
desire to do more. I long to give all my 
time to the glorious work of spreading 
the truth. To open the blind eyes, and 
to turn men from darkness to light, from 
the power of Satan unto God, that they 
may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance 
among them which are sanctified 
by faith that is in Christ Jesus. 

I had an opportunity last summer to 
symbolize my baptism, I was baptised 



by immersion by a Baptist minister, we 
had a talk together and I found his idea 
of baptism was according to scripture. 
He could not accept all of our views, 
although he was the most liberal Baptist 
I ever met, acknowledging the evils of 
sectarianism but fearing to come out. 
He baptised me on my confession of 
faith, but not into the Baptist church as 
is generally the custom. 

I have been approached by two Congregational 
ministers, one of them a 
great scholar, bearing the title D.D., 
trying to persuade me to unite with 
them in a Congregational church which 
they are trying to organize in this place. 
They made use of all manner of nice 
speeches, saying my influence would be 
a great help; and it mattered not what 
I believed if I would accept their creed. 
They even went so far as to write out 
what they called articles of faith, separate 
and apart from their regular 
church creed, leaving out some articles 
which they thought I and some others 
who have accepted the TOWER views, 
would object to. But they found we 
were not for sale: we told them that we 
would take nothing less than the Word 
of God itself for our creed, with Christ 
for our only foundation and hope; and 
with firm faith in him as our only Saviour, 
we claimed the right to search the 
Scripture for ourselves and to believe 
whatever it teaches. 

The TOWER is a great help in the 
search for truth, we would not do without 
it. There is always some new light 
received from the Scriptures by reading 
it and comparing it with the Bible. 

The Millennial Dawn which I am 
reading through the second time, is indeed 
a most wonderful book, it seems 
impossible for any one to read it and 
not be convinced of the truthfulness of 
its position. It is a great feast to my 
hungry soul. I find too, that the Diaglott 
is a wonderful help in clearing up 
many seemingly dark passages. I 
thank our dear Father in Heaven for all 
these helps. 

Will you please send me about a dozen 
of the October number of the TOWER? 
I think I can make good use of 
about that number. I intend loaning 
them instead of giving them away. I 



intend sending for some packets in order 
to do some colporteur work as soon 
as the way opens. 

Below are the names of two ministers 
(Baptist and Methodist) to whom please 
send the TOWER, October number. 

With love to yourself and the church 
at Pittsburgh, I am yours in Christ, 
J. N. L . 

Buffalo, Jan. 2, 1887. 

DEAR SIRS: I have just received the 
first volume of Millennial Dawn, I was 
about to send for one bound in cloth, as 
it would stand rougher usage, as I intend 
to lend it to all inquirers after truth. 
A priest here desires to read it, and I 
am more than pleased to loan it to him, 
as I believe it to be the essence of the 
word of God. ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
has been distributed to a great many of 
the members of the church of which I 
am a member. At first it was not received 
very warmly, but now many are 
anxious to read it and are seeing the 
Bible as a new book through its teachings, 
especially the priest to whom I allude. 

Yours in Christ, O. E . 

Helsingborg, Sweden, Dec. 19, 1886. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: It is now 
some months since I had the pleasure of 
receiving your letter and papers (Swedish 
as well as English), for which I 
thank you much. I will use them so 
that they will do the most good. People 
in general are averse to hear of salvation 
for any after this life, just as in 
America. Here the Lutheran faith predominates, 
but many have been led to 
abandon the idea of an atonement, and, 
as I have seen in the TOWER, you are 
fully acquainted with their way of mixing 
things. At one meeting, where I was 
defending the atonement, and claimed 
that Christ purchased us with his blood, 
one speaker said, "The average of Christian 
teachers allow that something great 
took place at the crucifixion of Christ, 
but of what and how, there seems to be 
no clearness." An odd one is desirous 
of perusing the TOWER, and they have 
nothing to say but that light and truth 
are shown through them. Thanks be to 
God, when I see through all God is showing 
me, that my efforts are not in vain, 



and people are getting more prepared to 
hear the glad tidings of great joy which 
shall be to all people. Thank God that 
light is shining; thank God that I am 
privileged to help to spread it. Some 
years ago, when I sacrificed myself to 
God, I had no idea that I should be distrusted 
and rebuked of any that trust 
God, but in entire reliance on God and 
his Son, my Redeemer, I shall be able to 
overcome. Yours, in hope of glory, 
N. M. O . 

Fort Dodge, Iowa, Jan. 17, 1887. 
DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST: I had 

just finished reading your book, lent by 
a friend, when the cheaper edition came. 
I thank God that he has given you such 
a work to do for his children, and now I 
have a great desire to persuade as many 
as possible to purchase and read the 
book. I had thought to get as many 
copies as I could and lend them, but that 
does not satisfy me. I could not reach 
enough, and I believe the way is open 
for me to visit the Christian and thinking 
people of this place, and perhaps of 
others, and my brother proposes to do 
the same in other cities and towns, if we 
meet with success sufficient to cover our 
necessary expenses. My hopes are very 
buoyant, because I want everybody to 
read it, yet I know that I must not expect 
too much. 

I enclose fifteen dollars, send me of 
the cloth and paper bound Dawn, Vol. 
I., half each. 

In Christian fellowship. Sue B . 



New Orleans, La., Dec. 17, 1886. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: Inclosed please 
find P.O. Order for ten dollars, for which 
please renew my subscription for the 
WATCH TOWER (three copies), and send 
another copy of Millennial Dawn. What 
is over use where most needed. The 
money I send I received in answer to 
prayer. I have been desirous to send 
my subscription and something for the 
Lord's work, but somehow was not able 
to spare it out of my wages. Yesterday 
I asked the Lord to help me get it. Today 
my employer handed me twenty 
dollars as a present, which seems to me 
a direct answer to my prayer. 

I have been since asking the Lord to 



make plain his will to me regarding it, 
which I believe to be this, to give ten 
dollars for the clothing and feeding of 
the spiritual man, the other ten I give 
to my wife for her part of the work, 
namely, supplying the physical necessities 
of the Lord's poor around us. Still 
trusting in God, who gives us richly all 
things to enjoy, I remain as ever your 
fellow-laborer in the harvest field. 
C. S . 

Oceana Co., Mich., Dec. 6, 1886. 
C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR BROTHER: 

The first volume of Millennial Dawn, 

so kindly sent came safe to hand, may 

the Lord richly bless the unselfish love 

bestowed on the poor of the Lord's 

flock. I have not read it all through 

yet, but have been greatly blessed from 

the perusal so far. I thank God every 

hour of my life that I am enabled to understand 

so much of his grand loving 

plan for the blessing of all the families 

of the earth. I am sorry I am unable 

to forward you any money with this, the 

great drouth here the past summer has 

deprived me of that happiness. I am 

compelled this winter (with poor health) 

to labor in the lumber woods for means 

to supply self and family with bread, 

and food for my stock. However, I expect 

some money before long and part 

of it shall be appropriated in renewing 

my subscription for the TOWER and the 

volume of Millennial Dawn, and I trust 

something for the Tract Fund. 

I shall want one of the cloth bound 
volumes for my library, and intend to use 
the present volume for lending to those 
whom I have reason to believe are hungering 
for the truth. 

Your brother in fellowship and service. 
T. B 


