2006 “Deliverance at Hand” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
 1. How did God’s people demonstrate their appreciation for true worship in ancient times, and what similar opportunity do we have today?
1 King Hezekiah of ancient Judah used runners to hand deliver letters summoning the people to assemble together in Jerusalem. (2 Chron. 30:6, 13) The response of the people revealed their attitude toward true worship. (2 Chron. 30:10-12) In the coming months, servants of Jehovah today will have a similar opportunity to demonstrate their heartfelt appreciation for the privilege of gathering together to worship Jehovah. A letter has been delivered to your congregation inviting you to attend the “Deliverance at Hand” District Convention. How will you respond to that invitation?
 2. What can we do now so as to benefit fully from the convention?
2 Make Arrangements Now: To benefit fully from the spiritual program that is being lovingly prepared, we need to be present for the entire program. Wisely start now to make whatever arrangements are needed for you and your family to attend all three days. (Prov. 21:5) Such preparations may include asking your employer for time off, discussing your plans with a non-Witness mate, making hotel reservations, and assisting Bible students to be in attendance each day. Do not leave these important matters to the last minute. Rather, make them a matter of prayer to Jehovah, trusting that “he himself will act.”​—Ps. 37:5.
 3. Why should we cooperate with the arrangements that have been made for our accommodations?
3 Jehovah’s organization has gone to great lengths to ensure that sufficient accommodations are available in each convention city. Appreciation for the self-sacrificing efforts of the hardworking brothers who assisted in making these arrangements, consideration for our fellow convention delegates, and respect for theocratic order should move us to cooperate fully with the guidelines provided in this article.​—1 Cor. 13:5; 1 Thess. 5:12, 13; Heb. 13:17.
4-6. What important points should we keep in mind when making hotel reservations, and why? (Include box on page 4.)
4 Hotel Reservations: A Recommended Lodging List of available hotels will be posted on the information board after this article is considered at the Service Meeting. Using the instructions in the box on page 4, please reserve rooms only at hotels on the list and agree to pay only the rates shown. Please do not call hotels that are not on the list and ask if they have a rate for your convention. Such hotels will often say that they have a rate for Jehovah’s Witnesses. Your cooperation will help toward the goal of obtaining high-quality hotels near the convention site at the best rates possible each year.​—1 Cor. 14:40.
5 It is important to reserve only the hotel rooms you will actually use during the convention. Unless you have agreed to do so beforehand and submit definite names, please do not reserve rooms for other delegates. This artificially inflates the number of rooms reserved for the convention and makes it harder for other delegates to make a reservation. Each room should be reserved in the name of one of the persons who will occupy it.
6 To guarantee your reservation, you must make a deposit to the hotel for each room reserved. Otherwise, the hotel can offer your room to someone else. If no rooms are available after you have called all the hotels on the list or if you have a problem with a hotel, inform your congregation secretary. He should contact your convention’s Rooming Department, not the branch office, using the information at the top of the list. Please wait for a revised list to be received for your convention rather than calling a hotel not on the list.
7, 8. How can those with special needs be cared for?
7 Special Needs: Proverbs 3:27 says: “Do not hold back good from those to whom it is owing, when it happens to be in the power of your hand to do it.” How can you do good to others in connection with the convention? Elderly publishers, the infirm, those in full-time service, and others may require practical assistance with transportation or accommodations. Relatives have the primary responsibility to care for the needs of such ones. (1 Tim. 5:4) If they cannot do so, fellow believers may be able to help. (Gal. 6:10) Book study overseers should check with those in their group who have special needs to be sure that their plans are in order well in advance of the convention.
8 Special Needs Room Request forms are available only for publishers whose accommodation needs cannot be cared for by family members or by their congregation. The Congregation Service Committee should consider the publisher’s qualifications, using the guidelines on the form as well as the letter dated December 14, 2005, addressed to all bodies of elders. This provision is only for publishers in good standing, along with their well-behaved children.
 9. (a) Why should we attend our assigned convention? (b) What steps should be followed if circumstances require that you attend a different convention?
9 Attending Another Convention: To ensure that there will be sufficient seating, literature, rooming accommodations, and so forth, you are encouraged to attend the convention to which your congregation is assigned. If circumstances require that you attend a different convention, please see your congregation secretary for the mailing address of the convention you will attend, which is printed on the back of the Special Needs Room Request form. Be sure to include a self-addressed, stamped envelope with your request for the Recommended Lodging List or any additional information. If there is more than one convention being held in the city, indicate the dates of the convention that you will attend.
10. What is one way we can contribute to the joy of the upcoming convention?
10 Willing Volunteers: There is no question that much joy will come to all who attend the convention and benefit from the spiritual food and opportunities for upbuilding association. Our happiness will be even greater if we volunteer to assist with the work that must be done to make the convention a success. (Acts 20:35) Local Convention Committees will soon be inviting others to share in this work. Can you make yourself available?​—Ps. 110:3.
11. What do you appreciate about the annual district convention, and what should be your determination?
11 While attending a district convention, a five-year-old boy said: “The district convention is my favorite part of worshipping Jehovah.” That heartfelt comment helps all of us to appreciate how much we enjoy attending our annual district convention. It is truly as the psalmist sang: “A day in your courtyards is better than a thousand elsewhere.” (Ps. 84:10) David expressed in song his desire to ‘dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of his life so as to look with appreciation upon Jehovah’s temple.’ (Ps. 27:4) It pleased David greatly to be among Jehovah’s worshippers. May we imitate his appreciation for true worship by being in attendance for all three days of the “Deliverance at Hand” District Convention.
[Box on page 3]
Program Times
Friday and Saturday
9:30 a.m. - 5:05 p.m.
      Sunday
9:30 a.m. - 4:10 p.m.
[Box on page 4]
How to Make Your Hotel Reservation
 1. Call hotels during regular business hours, using the telephone numbers on the Recommended Lodging List.
 2. Inform the hotel that you are attending the convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
 3. Specify the dates you will check in and check out of the hotel.
 4. If no more rooms are available, call another hotel on the list.
 5. Do not accept a higher rate than what is shown on the list.
 6. Make your reservation, and ask for a confirmation number.
 7. Make your deposit by credit card, check, or money order within ten days. Never send cash. If a deposit is made by check or money order, write the confirmation number on the front.
Please
▪ Stay only in hotels on the Recommended Lodging List.
▪ Reserve only the rooms that you will actually use.
▪ Keep your first reservation.​—Matt. 5:37.
▪ Plan on having no more than four persons per room, including children, unless the list indicates otherwise.

