A School That Helps Us Make Practical Application
1 As we consider the material listed in the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 2006, we strive to benefit from Scriptural teachings by relating them to our sacred service and everyday life. We make it a point to practice the things we learn.​—John 13:17; Phil. 4:9.
2 Offering Comments: The schedule for this year allocates an additional minute to audience participation in Bible highlights. This means that the brother assigned to present the highlights should be careful to complete his portion in five minutes instead of six. Those offering comments from their seats should also be mindful of their timing. With careful forethought, the one commenting can express helpful information in 30 seconds or less. Approximately ten individuals should be able to make meaningful comments during the five minutes allotted for audience participation.
3 Talks That Teach: The Bible highlights and the instruction talk should focus on the value of the material as it applies to our ministry and other aspects of our daily lives. A speaker should do more than simply awaken in his listeners a desire to act. He should specify what action is needed, show how it can be accomplished, and draw attention to the benefits of taking such action. It should be possible to say, “This is how this text provides guidance for us,” or “This is how we might use these verses in the ministry.” Elders and ministerial servants who are aware of local circumstances should strive to make the practical application of the material as specific as possible.
4 Citing Biblical examples can be particularly effective in making practical application. After referring to a Scriptural example, a speaker could say, “You too may find yourself in a situation similar to this.” He should make sure that any application of the Biblical example is in harmony with the context, with the Bible as a whole, and with what has been published by “the faithful and discreet slave.”​—Matt. 24:45.
5 Wisdom is the ability to use knowledge and understanding successfully. “Wisdom is the prime thing.” (Prov. 4:7) As we go on acquiring practical wisdom through our studies in the Theocratic Ministry School, may we also hone the art of imparting it to others.

