Could Your Child Make a Mature Decision?
 1. What stand have Witness youths taken regarding the use of blood? Give an example.
1 A mature decision about what? Blood transfusions. As shown in the article entitled “Walk as Instructed by Jehovah” in the June 15, 1991, issue of The Watchtower, children of Jehovah’s Witnesses have had to take a mature stand to prove that their desire to obey God’s law on blood is as important to them as it is to their parents. Could that also be required of your minor child?
 2. What legal standard did one court apply to a minor who refused blood transfusions, and what do Christian parents and their minor children learn from this?
2 What Does the Law Say? In the United States, the highest court that has ruled on a mature minor’s right to refuse blood transfusions is the Illinois Supreme Court. In reviewing the case of a 17-year-old sister, the court decreed: “If the evidence is clear and convincing that the minor is mature enough to appreciate the consequences of her actions [and] to exercise the judgment of an adult, then the mature minor doctrine affords her the common law right to consent to or refuse medical treatment.” Thus, in assessing whether a child is mature enough to make his own decision, doctors or officials may interview the patient to hear him express his personal objection to taking blood. The youth would need to understand reasonably the gravity of his medical condition and the consequences of his options for treatment and clearly and firmly express his own religious belief about God’s law on blood.
 3. What questions should parents seriously consider, and why?
3 What Would Your Child Say? Are your children able to express themselves on this issue? Do they believe with all their heart that it is a divine command to ‘abstain from blood’? (Acts 15:29; 21:25) Can they explain their belief from the Scriptures? Would they courageously defend their firm decision about blood if doctors believed that their life was in jeopardy, even if their parents were not present? Since “time and unforeseen occurrence befall [us] all,” how can you prepare your children for any unexpected challenge to their integrity?​—Eccl. 9:11; Eph. 6:4.
4, 5. (a) What responsibility do parents have, and how can they fulfill it? (b) What provisions are available to assist parents?
4 Parents, What Can You Do? You have the responsibility to teach your children God’s view of blood. (2 Tim. 3:14, 15) A clear explanation is found in the Reasoning book, pages 70-4. Study it carefully with your family. Using the feature “If Someone Says—” on pages 74-6, conduct practice sessions with your children to help them gain experience in explaining what they believe and why. (1 Pet. 3:15) Other provisions for educating us about the blood issue include the brochure How Can Blood Save Your Life? and The Watchtower of June 15, 2004, pages 14-24. In addition, the video programs Transfusion-Alternative Health Care​—Meeting Patient Needs and Rights and No Blood—​Medicine Meets the Challenge, which are currently available on the DVD entitled Transfusion Alternatives​—Documentary Series, give convincing information about the reasonableness and effectiveness of bloodless medicine and surgery. Has your family watched and discussed these presentations recently?
5 Help your children ‘prove to themselves what the good, acceptable, and perfect will of God’ is regarding blood. Then they can make a mature decision that has Jehovah’s blessing.​—Rom. 12:2.

