Education That Leads to Life
1 How rewarding it is to see people’s eyes light up as they come to understand the truth from God’s Word! Sharing with others the knowledge of God and his purpose for mankind truly is satisfying. Such education can lead a person to everlasting life.​—John 17:3.
2 Why Superior: Education is offered today by almost every means possible and on every subject imaginable. (Eccl. 12:12) But such knowledge cannot compare in value to “the magnificent things of God.” (Acts 2:11) Has the education offered in the world been able to draw mankind any closer to the Creator and to knowing his purpose? Has it helped people to understand what happens when we die or why there is so much suffering? Has it given people hope? Has it helped to improve the family arrangement? No. Only through divine education can we find real answers to life’s most important questions.
3 Divine education provides something that is sorely lacking in today’s world​—moral development. God’s Word uproots racism, tribalism, and nationalism from the hearts of those who accept and apply its teachings. (Heb. 4:12) It has moved people to renounce every kind of violence and to ‘clothe themselves with the new personality.’ (Col. 3:9-11; Mic. 4:1-3) Moreover, divine education has given millions the strength to overcome deeply embedded practices and traits that displease God.​—1 Cor. 6:9-11.
4 Why Urgent Now: Our Grand Instructor alerts us to the meaning of the times in which we live. His prophetic judgments contain up-to-date information that must be proclaimed earth wide. (Rev. 14:6, 7) Christ is ruling in the heavens, the world empire of false religion will soon be devastated, and God’s Kingdom is poised to destroy all earthly governments. (Dan. 2:44; Rev. 11:15; 17:16) Hence, it is urgent for people to recognize God’s now-reigning King, to get out of Babylon the Great, and to call upon the name of Jehovah in faith. (Ps. 2:11, 12; Rom. 10:13; Rev. 18:4) May we have the fullest share possible in imparting to others the education that leads to life.

