Martinique
AMONG people in many parts of the earth, the name Martinique rings a bell. It may call up a mental picture of sun, white-sand beaches, and azure seas. It may make a person think of such sweet things of life as sugarcane and bananas, also of rum. The picture may include black- or brown-skinned natives with broad smiles, offering trays of exotic fruits to visitors as a token of welcome. For others, Martinique calls to mind the eruption of Mount Pelée in 1902 and the complete destruction of the town of Saint Pierre, which was then the economic and cultural capital of the region.
This island is, relatively speaking, only an insignificant speck of dust. It measures just 50 miles [80 km] in length and 22 miles [35 km] in width. Yet it has occupied a disproportionately large role in international affairs. Between the 17th and the 19th centuries, the colonial empires battled here mercilessly for supremacy in the Americas and the Caribbean. Saint Domingue (Haiti), Guadeloupe, Martinique, and other islands of the West Indies changed owners according to the outcome of battles.
For many decades Martinique, although but a tiny island, was a central point for slave trading in the Caribbean. One cannot speak about the Martinican population without referring to the chains of slavery that shaped its past and that explain a great deal as to the present conditions of the people.
We are speaking of a people who, having been enslaved for a long time, are proud to be free. These are a people marked by strange paradoxes. They are jealous of their emancipation and want to make this known. At the same time, they conform to the French culture, which was imposed by colonization—a culture whose values and wealth are in most respects appreciated by the majority. The people claim as their own a religion—Roman Catholicism—that was imposed on them by oppressive masters. Coupled with this is the fact that they have been taught to worship a God about whom they know very little. He is presented to them as a God who advocates Negro slavery because it is claimed that he cursed their race. He is said to have attributes of love and justice, but these qualities seem to be strangely masked. Theirs is a religion based essentially on rites and traditions wherein precise beliefs and theological analyses are of little importance. (In a similar way, it might be noted, the neighboring island of Barbados claims the Anglican religion because it was colonized by Britain.)
As this century nears its close, the majority of people in Martinique, though liking to view themselves as free, labor under the shackles of slavery to two demanding masters. On the one hand, they are burdened by a religious system of rites and traditions that fail to satisfy real spiritual hunger. On the other hand, they labor without success to satisfy the endless cravings cultivated by the overwhelming influence of the materialistic way of life of Western civilization.—Eccl. 5:10.
Message of Priceless Freedom
It is on this tropical island that a message of freedom has been announced with increasing intensity during the past half century. This is the freedom to which Jesus Christ referred when he said: “You will know the truth and the truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) This is a freedom from enslavement to falsehood, freedom from bondage to an economic system that cruelly exploits people, and freedom from sin and death.
The seeds of this truth started to be sown in 1946 when Georges Moustache, from Guadeloupe, spent two weeks witnessing in Fort-de-France and in Saint Pierre. Three years later, on August 9, 1949, four missionaries (a couple and two young sisters), graduates of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead, landed on the island. They were David and Celia Homer, Mary Lolos, and Frances Bailey. They were from the United States and spoke French, though not very well. In a year and a half, however, they managed to place 631 books and more than 200 booklets explaining the Bible, and they started 32 Bible studies with individuals and family groups. But the Catholic clergy, still very influential at that time and not at all willing to have their authority questioned, used their influence to have the missionaries expelled from the island in January 1951. For more than three years, all preaching of the good news in Martinique ceased.
Getting the Work Started Again
On July 10, 1954, Xavier and Sara Noll arrived from Marseilles, France. Both of them were full-time ministers, and Xavier had been serving as a congregation overseer in Marseilles.
They can still remember their arrival on this island at what seemed to them to be the other end of the world, 4,400 miles [7,000 km] from their homeland. They have not forgotten their first impressions of the heat and the humidity, nor have they forgotten the conviviality, hospitality, and good-natured manner of the people.
From the very first days, they learned how to live with a minimum of conveniences. After lodging for a few days with a man who was kindly disposed toward Jehovah’s Witnesses, they found a new wooden house, but that simply means that it was a structure made with wooden walls and a wooden floor. Sheets of corrugated iron constituted the roof. There was no ceiling, and there were no toilet facilities. At dusk it was Brother Noll’s chore to empty the “sanitary” pail in a ravine. His first trip with the pail was on July 14, the French national holiday. He had to cross a public square called Stalingrad, which was bubbling with activities connected with the holiday. As he walked through the square, with his pail exposed to the amused view of groups of people who had come out to relax and breathe some fresh air, they split their sides with laughter. It was a premiere! Never before had they seen a white man performing such a task!
A Surprising Welcome
Earlier that day Brother Noll had spent hours sorting out the books and booklets that the missionaries had left behind when they were expelled. Many of these had been damaged by insects, but there was a sufficient supply in suitable condition for the Nolls to use in their public witnessing when they started the next morning.
Here are a few of Brother Noll’s recollections of that first day in service: “Going out in the preaching work for the first time here, my wife and I were anxious to come in contact with the people, to know them, to know what kind of welcome we would receive. The reality was beyond our expectations. We started witnessing in the center of the town, which at the time had a population of 60,000. That morning, my wife and I met twice as we were returning home to refill our witnessing bags with the books ‘The Truth Shall Make You Free’ and ‘The Kingdom Is at Hand’ as well as with booklets such as ‘The Prince of Peace.’”
Householders would often say: “I’ll take your book as a record of your passing,” or, “If this speaks about God, I’ll take it.” During the first two weeks, almost 200 books and hundreds of booklets were placed. It was easy to start conversations because the people were curious and were willing to welcome strangers. What encouragement it was to be received so hospitably!
Brother and Sister Noll wondered whether they would be able to study with so many people! But they learned quickly that they had to differentiate between those merely showing natural hospitality and those with a real desire to know and put into practice the truth coming from God. There were some who wanted to learn. Brother Noll recalls: “The person who met us on arrival in Martinique introduced us to some workmen and apprentices in his cabinetmaking workshop. We started a study that same night and two more during the first week.”
One of those studies was with a young couple, Paul and Nicole Jacquelin. They were studying three times a week and making good progress. Soon they were sharing with the Nolls in witnessing from house to house. With these new publishers, the preaching work started to take on local color.
“To-To-To”
On arriving at a house, one had to shout, “To-to-to, anybody home?” From inside, often enough, a voice answered: “What for?” After the publisher shouted out again to introduce himself, the householder would reply, “Come in and sit down.” Interesting conversations ensued.
Most of the time, people were willing to converse. Stress was unknown in Martinique in those days. Rare were those who said what we hear constantly today: “I have no time.” However, the conclusion frequently was: “I understand all that you’re saying, but I’m not going to leave the religion of my parents and my grandparents.” Even where there seemed to be some interest, so that the publishers asked, “Could we see you again soon?” the answer was often: “If it’s God’s will.”
In general, the people expressed great respect for the Bible. Yet very few of them had one. The Catholic clergy tried hard to prevent people from having any contact with the Bible. Nevertheless, a few people had been able to get the Protestant French translation by Louis Segond. Some had obtained it from peddlers, others from neighbors who were Seventh-Day Adventists, and still others, more rarely, from the Evangelicals.
The Clergy Manifest Alarm
Five months after Jehovah’s Witnesses resumed their preaching activity in Fort-de-France, a newspaper put out by the Catholic Church featured the question “Who Are Jehovah’s Witnesses?” It set out a dialogue between a priest and a parishioner: “Do you know Jehovah, Father?” “Indeed! You speak Hebrew now?” And then followed a litany of slander against Jehovah’s Witnesses and a malicious misrepresentation of their teachings. A caricature of Sister Noll even appeared in a church pamphlet.
Sometime afterward, although there were but a handful of Witnesses on the island, a priest, who was obviously distressed by the zeal of these Kingdom preachers, declared: “Thousands of good people are in the process of becoming Jehovah’s Witnesses because they are not well acquainted with their own religion.” It was as Jesus Christ had illustrated in his parable of the rich man and Lazarus. The common people were longing for spiritual crumbs from the table of the prosperous clergy.—See Luke 16:19-31.
The Visit of Notre Dame du Grand Retour
A few years before, in 1948, the faith of many Catholics had been shaken. A grand hoax had been organized by the bishopric. A statue of Mary was brought over from France amid much ceremony. It was driven throughout Martinique and was extolled by the population to an extent unequaled even to this day. The image of the “Virgin” was placed in a small boat mounted on wheels, and this was moved through the streets. Along the way, the people filled that boat with money and jewelry for the “Madonna.” At that time Martinicans, whether rich or poor, wore only gold jewelry. As a result, what was collected represented a large sum of money.
There are many who still vividly remember what occurred. Marthe Laurent, who is now one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, recalls the arrival of the “Madonna.” “It was on a Saturday night early in March 1948, in the public square surrounding the Savannah in Fort-de-France,” she says. “The square was full of people when suddenly we saw a small light appear on the sea, at the tip of La Pointe des Nègres. The immense crowd was seething with excitement; the ‘Virgin’ was arriving by boat!” Pierrette Hantoni went again and again to deposit offerings. She and her husband decorated their house with flowers and hung a banner with the inscription Chez Nous Soyez Reine (Be the Queen at Our Home). In such an atmosphere, people got carried away and were very openhanded, thinking that the “Virgin” would perform miracles. For example, there was a man whose daughter was suffering from myopathy. On his knees he followed the small boat-on-wheels, hoping that the “Virgin” would cure his daughter.
In time it was reported that the statue had returned to France, but that was a deception. It was discovered later that the image had been hidden in a warehouse. According to local rumor, a plane that disappeared at sea some time later was transporting the money and other possessions collected as well as the organizers of the hoax. In the minds of the majority, that was their punishment from God. Even today, when people speak about this event, Jehovah’s Witnesses have an opening to show them what the Bible says about idolatry.—Ex. 20:4, 5; Ps. 115:4-8; 1 John 5:21.
Marriage, Not Simply Cohabitation
Some African customs survived slavery and were accepted by the Catholic Church as long as the participants also performed Catholic rites. In this atmosphere, cohabitation between people not married to each other was the order of the day. As Sister Noll shared in the ministry, people would ask her: “Do you have children?” When she replied, “No,” they would ask, “And your husband?” It was not uncommon to find men who had children by women other than their legal wife. Those who wanted to become true Christians had to abandon such unscriptural practices.—Heb. 13:4.
The first one in Martinique who faced up to this need was a woman who had six children from three different men and was living with the father of her last child when she started to study the Bible. Marguerite Lislet quickly realized the enormous changes that she had to make if she was to be pleasing to Jehovah. (1 Cor. 6:9-11) She asked her common-law husband to leave, and despite having health problems, she courageously stood up to financial difficulties in order to take care of her six children. She got baptized in 1956. Later on, she became the first Martinican special pioneer.
Jeanne Maximin, who had borne children for her common-law husband, also wanted to get baptized. He had promised her many times that before the next assembly he would legalize their relationship, but he never kept that promise. Finally, in 1959, when another assembly was approaching, she took advantage of his absence to move out of the house. On his return, what a surprise it was for him to see that she was gone and much of the furniture was missing! The neighbors did not hesitate to tell him where she was. He insisted that she return home and promised that they would get married in two weeks, during which time he would make the necessary arrangements. Her answer was clear: “The day we get married, I’ll return, but not before.” The necessary arrangements were made, and they were legally married within ten days. Many of our sisters have gone through similar experiences.
Jehovah’s Witnesses have acquired the reputation of practicing a religion in which marriage is treated as a divine institution. A civil service officer of the village of Le Vauclin was surprised to see that in a short space of time, Jacques and Pierrette Nelson, local special pioneers, served as witnesses at the weddings of two couples who had been living together for many years without the benefit of marriage. That officer already had the book Making Your Family Life Happy, but now she promised to read it again because her situation was the same as had been the case with the ones that she had just married. Before concluding their discussion, she said in a relaxed tone to our two witnesses: “Jamais deux sans trois” (“Never two without three”). That proved true in this case, for not too long afterward, the pioneers were again before her, serving as witnesses for a third couple with whom they had studied.
Freed From Alcohol Abuse
Martinique is well-known for its rum. This alcoholic beverage made from sugarcane can be found everywhere on the island. It is enjoyed by many, but it can be so harmful if used to an excess. In the 1950’s a person could go into a bar and get a brimful glass of rum for only 50 centimes (about 10 cents, U.S.). A bottle of rum, a bottle of syrup, and a few slices of local green lemon were placed before the customer, and he was allowed to help himself.
Could Bible truth help people who regularly overindulged in rum? Yes, indeed! (1 Pet. 4:3) The first was a woman who regularly drank to the point that it was extremely unpleasant to sit opposite her and speak to her. In addition, she was living with a man to whom she was not married and who was enslaved to alcohol as much as she was. In a few months, as a result of what she learned in a home Bible study, she stopped drinking and left her common-law husband. All those who knew her noticed the changes. Her health got better. Her professional life improved, and her position as a civil servant was made permanent. When she received a sum of money as retroactive pay, she used it to attend the Divine Will International Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses in New York in 1958. To this day, although Elisa Lafine is 90 years of age, she shares regularly in the preaching of the good news of the Kingdom. She also is an example of fine Christian conduct. God’s Word can truly free a person from enslavement to alcohol.
Fruitage From the Heart of the Land
On a map of Martinique, the island seems to curl around the bay of Fort-de-France. Without any doubt, it is here that the heart of the territory is situated. Along the north side of the bay, there are three overlapping urban agglomerations—Fort-de-France, Schoelcher, and Le Lamentin. Close to half the population of Martinique lives in this region. With the exception of agriculture, most of the island’s activities are concentrated here. It was in this area that the preaching of the good news was done first, and with just a few exceptions, the first publishers came from here.
As early as 1955, Brother and Sister Noll began to make trips outside the capital to spread the Kingdom message. They would spend the whole day preaching and return home in the evening. One week, on Friday, they would go to Le Lamentin. The next week, it would be the village of Le François, near the east coast. Little by little, people began to accept the truth. Among the first ones in Le Lamentin were Jeanne Marie-Annaïs, Suzanne Guiteaud, Liliane Néral, and Paulette Jean-Louis. In Le François, there were the Godard and Cadasse families and Pierre Loiseau. Some time later, special pioneers were sent to Le Lamentin. Among these were Valentin Carel and Nicolas Rénel. (Brother Carel later became a member of the Branch Committee.) There are now seven congregations in those communities and nearby to the south.
Certain ones seemed to start out well but later left the narrow road. They were overreached by the anxieties of life, materialism, and immorality. Many others received the word of the Kingdom into hearts that proved to be like good soil, which would yield fruitage for many years. (Matt. 13:18-23) The large majority of those who embraced true worship at an early date are still loyally serving Jehovah. Among these are brothers who got baptized in Martinique over 30 years ago: Leon and Christian Bellay, Jules Nubul, Germain Bertholo, Vincent Muller, Roger Rosamond, Albert Nelson, Vincent Zébo, and Philippe Dordonne. They all showed great love for Jehovah as they gave their youth in his service. They are no longer young, but all of them continue to serve as elders in the congregations. Others have died—among them, Toussaint Lada, who is remembered by old-timers for his calm temperament and warm smile. There are many others who could be added to the list of veterans who were or who still are fine examples of faith and zeal. The younger generation is following in their footsteps, and for the older ones, this is a source of great joy.
Women Loyally Tell the Good News
In those early days, a number of sisters who were teachers with the Ministry of National Education were also doing excellent work as teachers of God’s Word. Among them was Stella Nelzy. She was the first one of the group to be baptized, and she continued to be zealous in the ministry even while caring for her aged mother, who died at 102 years of age. There were also Andrée Zozor, who was a headmistress and who also effectively defended the truth of God’s Word, and Sister Victor Fousse (now Lasimant), who remained steadfast in spite of strong family opposition. Sister Fousse’s fine example had a good influence on her children. As a result, one of her sons has been serving as an elder for many years, and her daughter, Marlène, is a missionary in Mali.
Others have finished their Christian race because of age or illness. That was true of Léonide Popincourt, who had taken an early retirement and pioneered for 16 years. Though Sister Popincourt died in 1990, her daughter Jacqueline serves as a missionary in French Guiana. Emma Ursulet too set a fine example in defending Bible truth, and she especially endeavored to help her children walk in Jehovah’s ways. Three of her daughters entered the pioneer service, and her son Henri serves as a member of the Branch Committee in Martinique.
Sara Noll, who came to Martinique as a special pioneer 43 years ago, is still zealous in full-time service at 82 years of age. Though the territory is worked often, she continues to have outstanding success in distributing The Watchtower and Awake! Applying the Society’s suggestions with regard to working in business territories, she has been able to gain access to most of the government offices. She has a magazine route that includes the town hall, police headquarters, Department of Public Works, and many others. Some months she has placed as many as 500 magazines. During her years in Martinique, she has placed more than 111,000 magazines.
Water Climbs Mountains
Martinique has many mountains. It is said that an English admiral who wanted to give King George II an idea of the appearance of the country took a sheet of paper, crumpled it, and threw it on the table. “Sir,” he said, “this is Martinique.” There is a Creole proverb that says, “D’lo pa ka monté morne” (“Water can’t climb mountains”). But in Martinique, there is water that does go up mountains. The old town of Fort-de-France is situated at sea level but lies at the foot of many hills. The water of Bible truth has gone up those hills.—Rev. 22:17.
In 1956, though there were only seven publishers and three pioneers on the island, 5,000 books, over 9,000 magazines, and many booklets were placed. Much of that literature was distributed at bus terminals to passengers who were arriving from and departing to all parts of the island. Brother and Sister Noll would also go to the fish and vegetable markets to offer magazines, and they preached in the numerous bars located close to the marketplaces. In this way villagers returned to their homes up in the hills and beyond with precious Bible literature in their bags.
‘Not Forsaking the Gathering Together’
Only a few weeks after their arrival in Martinique, Brother and Sister Noll began to encourage those who were studying to attend meetings. (Heb. 10:23-25) As a result, a few of them met in the living room of a simple wooden house at Morne Pichevin in Fort-de-France. The room could accommodate only about ten persons. As the Nolls shared in the ministry, people would often ask whether there was a meeting place to which they could come. The missionaries longed for something more suitable.
Then a hotel manager in Fort-de-France, who still remembered the first Witness missionaries (who had stayed at his inn for a while), offered the use of the dining hall of his restaurant for Sunday afternoons, since the restaurant was closed that day. It was located on Schoelcher Street—named after the French politician who prepared the decree of April 27, 1848, which defined the conditions for the abolition of slavery. The cathedral was on the same street. Now that they had a better meeting place, the Witnesses thought that scores of people would come. Yet for some time, just 5 to 10 assembled there, in a hall that could hold more than 100 persons. When they invited others to come, the answer usually was: “I’ll come, God willing.” But it was rare indeed when anyone really thought seriously about what the Bible says God’s will in this matter is.
However, Mrs. Marceau, a retired schoolteacher, would first attend church services at the cathedral and then regularly come to listen to the Bible’s message. Alice Lassus, who did cleaning at the cathedral, also attended these meetings. They both became loyal Witnesses of Jehovah. But really the Witnesses needed a meeting place that was better suited to the size of the group.
After a few months, they moved their meetings to Villa Ma Fleur de Mai (Villa My Mayflower), at Clairière in Fort-de-France, which was then being used as a missionary home. Stella Nelzy, who began to attend meetings, was startled by a remark made there on one occasion. She later recalled: “The chairman said: ‘This is the most important house in all Martinique!’” But she added: “I soon afterward understood that he was right. The house was of humble appearance and was furnished with benches made of boards that had previously been used for framing, on which pads made of cardboard were put. However, in that house one learned about the marvelous purpose, the will, and the incomparable personality of Jehovah God and of his Son, Jesus Christ. Yes, it was truly the most important house!”
In 1960 the number of publishers had risen to 47. It was again necessary to find another meeting place with sufficient space. Adrienne Rudier offered us two rooms on the ground floor of her house at Bellevue. Two years later she proposed that we remove the remaining wall to widen our meeting place and that she move upstairs. The number of publishers had doubled in just two years. Now there were 94, and 177 home Bible studies were being conducted. Since some of the publishers were from the other side of Fort-de-France, it seemed wise to form a second group. This one met in Inoër Puisy’s home at Sainte Thérèse, a small community in the southern part of Fort-de-France.
Expansion continued. By 1964 we had an average of 157 publishers. To accommodate those who attended meetings, a house in the Bellevue area of Fort-de-France was purchased and was converted into a Kingdom Hall. Five years later a new Kingdom Hall was built in another part of town. Cesaire and Elvíre Quasima had kindly made available the flat concrete rooftop of their house, and the Kingdom Hall was built on that.
When Assemblies Were Small
The first assembly was held in 1955. It convened in the home of Brother and Sister Noll. To encourage the 5 Witnesses in Martinique, 27 made the journey from Guadeloupe. The total attendance did not reach 40. But the assembly program provided an abundance of spiritual food. What a joy it was to be together in a spiritual and fraternal atmosphere!
In those days it was difficult to get meetings started on time. When people arrived late, comical situations sometimes resulted. During an assembly in 1956, a demonstration showed a priest, in typical fashion, going to someone’s home to discourage him from reading the literature of Jehovah’s Witnesses. A brother who normally wore a beard at that time put on a cassock to play the role of the priest. An interested person who arrived late did not realize that it was just a demonstration. After the meeting, he said with some feeling: ‘I disagree with what that priest did. Jehovah’s Witnesses don’t go to the cathedral to cause a disturbance, and the priest shouldn’t come here to do so!’
Message of Freedom to the Northeast Coast
In time, more attention needed to be given to the parts of the island away from the capital. The west coast of Martinique is bathed by the Caribbean Sea, and its east coast by the Atlantic Ocean. As a result, the east coast is hit directly by the trade winds, causing heavy rains and high humidity. In the well-watered hills and plateaus of that region, everything grows—sugarcane, green vegetables, bananas, and other fruits. The large villages, which for the most part are aligned along the coast, depend on fishing as well.
This is also an area whose history tells of the slave trade and of the emancipation of the slaves. In the village of Le Lorrain, the names of certain areas call to mind that era, for example, Fond-Gens-Libre (Freed People’s Valley) and Fond-Massacre (Valley of Massacre). Despite the abolition of slavery, when Jehovah’s Witnesses took the message of God’s Kingdom into this area, they found people still in need of liberation. The people needed the freedom from false religion and superstition that is possible only by embracing Bible truth.
Images Smashed and Thrown Into the Street
The missionaries’ first excursion to Basse Pointe, on the north coast, 30 miles [50 km] from Fort-de-France, was on November 1, 1954. The road to this fishing and agricultural village was precipitous. It was in a bad state, especially after the rainy season, and at certain places the missionaries had to get off their small motorized bicycles and push them.
They were hoping to pay a visit to a school headmistress in the village. Earlier, she had been in touch with Jehovah’s Witnesses in France and had a subscription for Awake!, but now her subscription had expired. The visit proved to be very beneficial. The lady explained that, although she had been a catechist, she had stopped attending church after the priest had spoken disrespectfully about the institution of marriage. She showed interest in what the Bible says about the soul and about eternal life in an earthly paradise. Shortly afterward, she returned to France, and there she dedicated herself to Jehovah and got baptized.
Back in Martinique, she was viewed as a prominent person in the community and was known as a devout Catholic. Imagine the commotion, then, after she returned to Martinique, when she smashed all her idols, small and big, and threw the bits in front of her house to be picked up by the garbage collection service. (Compare Deuteronomy 9:16, 21.) The priest was furious, so he prepared and delivered some hot sermons to scourge the behavior of this ex-Catholic. As a result, everybody was speaking about what they called the religion of Mrs. Cressan. For 42 years now, as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Gabrielle Cressan, who is 88 years of age, has applied herself to fulfill her dearest wish: “May each one of my heartbeats be to the praise of Jehovah.”
Another Catholic woman, a neighbor who heard the priest speak out in such a virulent manner against Sister Cressan, decided to ask her what it was all about. This was Leónie Ducteil, mother of 11 children and wife of a local postman. Convinced that what she was learning from Sister Cressan was indeed the truth, she started studying the Bible with her children. During the years that followed, she as well as nine of her children became dedicated and baptized Witnesses. A number of years later, one of her daughters, Edgard, married Gérard Trivini, who in time became a member of the Branch Committee.
Ten years before Leónie Ducteil learned the truth with the help of Sister Cressan, one of their neighbors, Georgette Josephe, had heard the name Jehovah in a hymn, sung during a ceremony at the Adventist church. The name had attracted her attention, and now a neighbor, Mrs. Ducteil, was telling her that some lady had just explained to her Jehovah’s Word. Right away she wanted to know more. She, her eight children, and later on her husband all became Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Those few families formed the nucleus of true worshipers on the north shore of the Atlantic side of the island. From Basse Pointe, in the following years, the seeds of truth were sown throughout the towns and villages on the Atlantic Coast. These grew and flowered in Le Lorrain, Marigot, Sainte Marie, Trinité, and Le Robert, as well as in Ajoupa Bouillon, Vert Pré, and Gros Morne, in the interior of the island.
Zealous pioneers contributed to the spread of the truth along the eastern coast. Osman Léandre, a widow, moved to Sainte Marie in 1965 and made her home available for meetings. Arcade Bellevue and Maryse Mansuéla, special pioneers from Guadeloupe, arrived in Le Robert in December 1967 and persevered in spite of opposition from the local Catholic priest. In 1970, Aline Adélaïde and Jacqueline Popincourt started witnessing in Le Lorrain, where Aline was able to use the Scriptures to help a former practicer of sorcery to get free from demon control. Three years later they were joined by three others, Michèle and Jeanne Ursulet and Josette Mérine. These pioneers in Le Lorrain had left employment as schoolteachers to share in a far more important work of education—teaching truth that leads to eternal life.
Why Did the Priest Want the Truth Book?
Jeanne Ursulet relates: “In 1974 the Society sent us a letter from someone living at Le Lorrain. The man showed a keen interest in receiving literature of Jehovah’s Witnesses and in particular the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, which he had seen at someone’s home. The following morning, we set out to find the man. His name wasn’t familiar to us, and we had to ask a postman who it was. How surprised we were to find out that the letter had been sent to the Society by the parish priest!
“Wondering what sort of welcome we would receive, we went to the presbytery. The man introduced himself and told us coldly that he did not wish to speak with us, that he was only interested in the literature. We were perplexed. Some time after that visit, however, people of the community often told us that the priest had explained certain things to them in the same way we did. So we concluded that he was no doubt using our literature to prepare his sermons.”
Groping for God and Really Finding Him
In 1967, four more special pioneers—Octave Thélise, his wife Alvina, and Elie and Lucette Régalade—started what became the Trinité Congregation. The day after Elie Régalade arrived, he went out preaching. Where did he begin? Passing over houses on the left and on the right, he went straight up to the door of a Mrs. Moutoussamy and knocked on it. He had never met her before, and no one had given him her name. But let her relate her story:
“From childhood, I was very much attached to my Catholic religion. I worked for many years in a day-care center that was managed by priests. But I was disappointed by the hypocrisy in the church. My attachment to it was weakening day by day. When the time came to enroll my two eldest sons for Catholic instruction, I was divided between the insistence of my Catholic in-laws, the opposition of my Communist husband, and the influence of my Adventist sister. I didn’t know what to do. I spent a great part of the night praying to God for help to find a solution. The following morning Brother Régalade knocked at my door, introducing himself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He had come directly to my home. I was the first person to whom he spoke in Trinité.”
Lisette Moutoussamy, as well as her ex-Communist husband, got baptized eight months later. Today, more than 30 years later, they are continuing to serve Jehovah with their entire family. Three of their sons serve as elders. Truly, when people earnestly grope for the true God, they will find him, just as the Bible says.—Acts 17:26, 27.
The territory proved to be fruitful, and congregations developed. One in Trinité, and from it six others—two in Le Robert, one in Sainte Marie, one in Gros Morne, one in Vert Pré, and another in Trinité. They all continue to grow, bringing honor to Jehovah.
Clergy Go on the Offensive
Everywhere in Martinique, the decrease of the clergy’s control over a population whom they had held in ignorance was a source of anger to them. One parish priest expressed his fury when he encountered two young girls who were visiting relatives of a deceased neighbor in Basse Pointe, in 1956. Aware that the girls were studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, he denounced the girls as apostates and threatened them with hellfire because they had stopped attending Mass. When one of the girls replied quite firmly, he slapped her with his full strength and, heated up with anger, jumped into his jeep and left.
In Le Robert, after the arrival of two pioneer sisters in 1967, the priest forbade his parishioners to open their doors to them. One day, mad with anger, he nearly ran them down with his car. In parish leaflets, bitter and angry warnings multiplied, and from the pulpits, priests issued stinging anathemas against those whom they described as ‘agents of Satan who had come to disturb the Roman peace.’
The other religious denominations joined in the attack. The Evangelical religions in particular falsely accused us of not believing in Jesus Christ. The Adventists denounced us for not respecting the Sabbath, whereas most of them only gave it lip service. For a time the brothers allowed themselves to be dragged into never-ending discussions with pastors of those religions. Often the discussions ended late at night and were to no avail. Gradually we learned, with the help of the faithful and discreet slave, to use our time to seek and find sheeplike ones who take real pleasure in listening to the voice of the Fine Shepherd.
Yet, those discussions did open the eyes of a few sheeplike ones. This was so in the case of Jules Nubul in Fort-de-France. He noticed that the pastor was merely pretending to quote the Bible—but was really making up the passages—in an effort to support the teaching that Christians must keep the Sabbath. (Compare Romans 10:4; Colossians 2:13-16.) Now Brother Nubul is an elder among Jehovah’s Witnesses. Gertrude Buval of Trinité, who was a Seventh-Day Adventist, saw the dishonesty of her pastor during a discussion with Octave Thélise, who was serving there as a special pioneer with his wife, Alvina. Years later, in spite of advanced age and poor health, Sister Buval remains loyally attached to Jehovah’s organization.
At the Foot of the Volcano—Would They Listen?
In the northwestern part of the island, the towns of Saint Pierre, Le Prêcheur, Le Carbet, and Le Morne Rouge are all situated right around Mount Pelée, which was made sorrowfully famous by its destruction of Saint Pierre and its 30,000 inhabitants in 1902.
Regarding the eruption on May 8 of that year, people remember primarily that the inhabitants of Saint Pierre ignored warnings and refused to flee. For a month the volcano had been belching forth smoke, ash, and bits of rock. Saint Pierre was covered with ashes. Twenty-five people had been killed by a mudflow. The people were apprehensive, but still they did not flee. In part it was because of their own fatalistic attitude; in part it was because the leaders of the people, including the clergy, urged them to stay. Those same factors influence the reaction of many to the warning of the impending fear-inspiring day of Jehovah.—Joel 2:31, 32.
Many of the people of Martinique are fatalists, and when faced with difficulties, they shrug their shoulders and say: “It’s God’s will.” Often we try to help them reason on this matter by discussing what happened at the time of the eruption of Mount Pelée. “If such events are ‘God’s will,’” we ask them, “why was the only survivor of this catastrophe a habitual prisoner who was put in solitary confinement in an underground dungeon of the prison, whereas all the ‘good Christians’ and the churches with their ‘saints’ were destroyed?”
Early in the 1960’s, the publishers from Fort-de-France began to travel fairly regularly to the communities in the vicinity of the volcano to bring them the Kingdom message. However, people were strongly influenced by fear. They wondered, “What will people say?” Because of fear of being rejected by neighbors, nobody wanted to identify himself with Jehovah’s Witnesses. In 1962 the Charpentier family from France came to live at Le Morne Rouge, just northeast of Saint Pierre. The wife, Madeleine, was a special pioneer. For many years she and her husband, René, sowed the seeds of Kingdom truth in this area.
However, church influence is still strong in the northern part of the island. There are some large plantations managed by wealthy landowners, descendants of the first settlers, and they live hand in hand with the Catholic clergy. In all Martinique the number of these local whites who have accepted the truth can be counted on one’s fingers.
Freed From the Fear of Man
Although the general population was reluctant to be identified with Jehovah’s Witnesses, in the mid-1960’s a man and his wife, Yoland and Bernadette Hortance, began to be deeply moved by love for Jehovah and for his Word. What tests of faith did they face? They relate: “As we were the first to accept the ‘new religion,’ we found ourselves on the fringe of society. We went through a period of trialsome times. In the space of one year, we lost two children through accident, which led people to say that God was punishing us for having abandoned the Catholic religion. But what we had already learned about Jehovah helped us to keep steadfast.”
After all of that, Yoland’s employer, a béké (local white), under the influence of a priest, threatened to fire him if he did not return to the church. However, Yoland stood fast, and because our brother was a conscientious worker, his employer did not carry out his threat. Though they both have been through other difficult times, Brother and Sister Hortance continue to be loyal servants of Jehovah.
In 1968 the Palvair family moved from Fort-de-France to Le Morne Rouge. Gradually, others embraced true worship. Today there is a congregation of 60 publishers in Le Morne Rouge.
Additional Help Within Sight of the Volcano
Starting in 1972, two special pioneer sisters, Anne-Marie Birba and Arlette Girondin, worked courageously to help the people of Saint Pierre, Le Carbet, and Le Prêcheur. Although they brought a message of peace, at times the people threw stones at them and hit them with brooms. In that area many women who accepted the truth underwent severe opposition from their husbands, but as a result of the good conduct of the wives, little by little, the husbands generally became more tolerant.—1 Pet. 3:1, 2.
An elderly Witness, Jules Martinon, was an example of perseverance, serving in Saint Pierre for over 20 years. During the 1960’s and 1970’s, meetings in this area were held in facilities that were just tolerable. However, devoted brothers such as John Chavigny and then, later on, the Lemoine and Papaya families helped to develop a fine congregation in Saint Pierre. A beautiful Kingdom Hall able to hold 200 persons is evidence that Jehovah’s Witnesses are firmly established at the foot of the volcano.
A Night in the Mango Tree
The Kingdom message had reached Le Lamentin as early as 1955, but severe tests continued to face those there who sought to worship Jehovah God. This was not always because of the clergy. Martinican men are generally proud of their masculinity, and many of them are quite domineering toward their wives. When a woman wanted to worship Jehovah, she often had to face up to violence from her husband.
One of our sisters in Le Lamentin relates: “In 1972 when the Kingdom message was brought to my home, it was the answer to all I had longed for. But my husband forbade me to study. Nevertheless, I continued studying secretly. When he found out, he burned my Bible and my study book and beat me. He decided that we would move, hoping that this would put an end to my interest in the Bible.
“When I started attending meetings, he used to lock me out. I often had to sleep under the veranda. Then he destroyed everything that could serve as shelter to me, even the henhouse. He beat me often, and many times I had to go without food. Once, he chased after me in the middle of the night with a cutlass! To get away from him, I had to run through the bushes and climb a mango tree as quickly as possible. I escaped, but only because his flashlight had stopped working. He looked for me for hours, passing close to where I was hiding, curled up in the tree, praying. I spent that entire night in the mango tree.” Nevertheless, in 1977 she got baptized. Later, her daughter too took her stand for Jehovah.
Freedom From Superstition and Quimbois
As people study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses and apply what they learn, they experience freedom in a variety of ways. Many of the beliefs and customs of the Martinicans have roots in rituals and superstitions brought from Africa and later planted in the receptive soil of Roman Catholicism. Those who became Jehovah’s Witnesses years ago still remember the superstitions from which they were set free.
They remember that on Good Friday, before doing anything else, a person was expected to kiss the cross. On that day it was strictly forbidden to use nails or hammers, in remembrance of Christ. It was also forbidden to dig the soil with a shovel or a fork because according to what they had been taught, the “earth will bleed.” On the next day, Saturday morning, the ringing of the bells of the Catholic church was understood to result in a blessing to everyone. To benefit from it, after the bells rang, people were expected to plunge into water—the river or the sea. They would bathe their sick children, shaking those who were afflicted with rickets, to make sure that they too would benefit.
Others remember “the funeral ball” in which it was customary to participate when someone died. This was a very noisy wake, with drumming, dancing, and singing, as well as the relating of Creole tales. People believed that this would prevent the soul of the dead one from staying and wandering about in the house.
Although the people seldom read the Bible, many viewed it as a sacred object. They would keep it open in the house at a particular psalm, with a pair of scissors on it. This, it was expected, would protect the house from the spirits of evil.
They have not forgotten, either, the potions mixed by witch doctors. Quimbois is a Creole word that, according to some, comes from the French expression “Tiens, bois!” (“Here, drink this!”) This is an allusion to the fact that witch doctors often give their clients magical potions to drink. Though the potions have little in the way of magical powers, many witch doctors become rich by dispensing them. Taking up true worship has meant freedom from all such superstition.
Attention to the South of the Island
Around the southern tip of the island are the coastal villages of Le Marin, Sainte Anne, and Le Vauclin, and a short distance inland is Rivière Pilote. These are the places that have caused visitors to view Martinique as an island with white-sand beaches and azure coral seas. They are also areas that have yielded praisers of Jehovah.
The first of these villages to receive a witness was Rivière Pilote. How was that? Doctor Maguy Prudent had just finished her medical studies in France. Before her return to Martinique, Jehovah’s Witnesses spoke to her about God’s loving purpose for humankind. Thus, when she arrived in Martinique, she contacted the Witnesses, and Sara Noll conducted a Bible study with her. In 1959 she got baptized. In connection with her medical work, Sister Prudent came in contact with a large number of people, even those from surrounding villages, and she shared with them the truths that she had learned from God’s Word.
Publishers from Fort-de-France would also come into the area to give a witness. In those days very few Witnesses had cars, so they used to rent a “drum” (a small bus), so named because the shape reminded one of an oil drum. They started their full-day excursions by witnessing to people in the village and then went to those on the steep sides of the hills. The day’s activity ended with a Watchtower Study in the shade of a mango tree.
Later on, special pioneers were sent into this territory. Among them was Marie Démas, who was 70, from metropolitan France. Her courage and sense of humor left a fine example for younger ones to follow. In 1963, Séphora Martinon and Georgette Charles, special pioneers, came to help the few publishers. However, it was not until the 1970’s that the special pioneers in the neighboring villages of Le Vauclin, Le Marin, and Sainte Anne began to reap some fruits from their hard labor, and that was after years of sowing and cultivating. Among those pioneers were Stéphanie Victor and Monique and Eugènie Coutinard in Le Vauclin. Noteworthy is the courage shown by Eugènie, who remained physically disabled after extensive surgery. She walked with crutches and spoke with great difficulty, yet she continued to serve as a regular pioneer.
In 1966, two special pioneers were sent to Rivière Pilote—Anne-Marie Birba and Arlette Girondin—and a congregation was formed there within two years. In 1970, two others were sent to Le Marin—Hélène Pérasie and Thérèse Padra. Up till 1975 a handful of brothers and sisters from communities in this area had to go all the way to Rivière Pilote to attend meetings. With Jehovah blessing the work, congregations were thereafter formed at Le Marin in 1979, Le Vauclin in 1984, Sainte Luce in 1993, and Sainte Anne in 1997. The brothers in all these villages now meet in beautiful Kingdom Halls, and flourishing congregations care for spiritual needs of people in these areas.
Accommodations for Larger Assemblies
It soon became necessary to have a more suitable place for circuit assemblies and for district conventions. The large halls available then were dance halls called paillotes (straw huts) because they were surrounded by plaited coconut branches. The old-timers remember the dance halls at Kerlys and at Serge Rouch, where our district conventions were held for many years. But in time this type of hall was no longer adequate.
Our brothers built a mobile steel structure, and with this it was possible to hold assemblies in the four corners of the island. Each village has its soccer field. So for years, at circuit-assembly time, we would set up our mobile Assembly Hall on the various playing fields of the island. What a fine witness was given! And how encouraging for the Witnesses in whose villages the assemblies were held!
For district conventions we made use of the indoor sports complex of the Louis Achille Stadium in Fort-de-France. We can still remember the “Victorious Faith” International Convention of 1978, when we were honored by having as main speaker John C. Booth, a member of the Governing Body. In one of his talks, Brother Booth declared: “We have no reason at all to lose faith in Jehovah’s organization,” and he added: “Our unmovable faith will be rewarded when we will triumph victoriously. Jehovah will never disappoint his loyal servants.” The 2,886 persons in attendance were greatly encouraged by that program.
Bible Dramas Attract Attention
The first Bible drama, staged in 1966, made a lasting impression. There were no cassette players on which to run the drama tapes. The participants had to learn their parts by heart and speak them. That drama, about Jeremiah, lasted almost two hours! We had to synchronize the movements of the different characters with their use of the many microphones on their respective microphone stands. In addition to this, because of the limited number of Witnesses in Martinique at that time, some had to play various roles, changing costumes between the scenes according to the character to be represented. What work! But the audience was carried away with enthusiasm.
Then there were the sound effects. Backstage, a brother struck a sheet of corrugated iron to imitate thunder. From above the stage, while the lights in the hall were turned off, another brother used a flash camera to simulate lightning. On an island, news spreads quickly. When the public learned about the Bible dramas that we were having, the television station sent out representatives to film our rehearsals. Their broadcasting these gave fine publicity to the assemblies.
Tearing Down but Also Building
Beyond any doubt, the truth of Jehovah’s Word tore down many citadels of falsehood and superstition in Martinique. Jehovah’s anointed servants, like the prophet Jeremiah, are commissioned by God “to uproot and to pull down and to destroy and to tear down,” and also “to build and to plant.” (Jer. 1:10) Thus, in addition to exposing what God’s Word condemns, Jehovah’s Witnesses use that Word to help humble ones “put on the new personality which was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.”—Eph. 4:24.
As the number of people who responded appreciatively to God’s Word grew, other building work was also required. The number of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Martinique was growing—from 1,000 in 1975 to 1,500 in 1984, and then to 2,000 by 1986. Attendance at congregation meetings is frequently double the number of publishers, and more than that for the annual Memorial. To provide space for those who were attending the meetings, more Kingdom Halls were needed. Twenty have been constructed, each having a seating capacity of between 250 and 300. Suitable facilities for the branch office were also needed.
An Important Step
After years of diligent searching, the brothers found property on one of the hills overlooking the town center of Fort-de-France and providing a splendid view of the bay. An extraordinary experience was starting for Martinique.
The number of qualified workmen among the local brothers who could be available full-time was very limited. So the Governing Body authorized an arrangement for qualified Witnesses from overseas to assist. The first one to arrive, in February 1982, was Robert Weinzaepflen, an architect from France. A few days later, Sylvain Théberge came from Canada to supervise the construction site. The team was completed a few weeks later with the arrival of about 20 more brothers and sisters from Canada and some volunteers from Martinique. The local brothers supported this construction project not only by their devoted work but also by their generous donations, according to each one’s ability, some even offering their gold jewelry. What a fine witness was given as a result of the zeal, unity, and love shown in connection with this project!
Did all the effort that was being directed toward construction detract from the public preaching of the good news in Martinique at that time? On the contrary, there was notable increase. In March 1982, there were 1,267 publishers active in the field ministry, 19 of whom were regular pioneers, and an additional 190 were auxiliary pioneers. As the project drew to a close, in 1984, the number of publishers had risen to 1,635, with 491 auxiliary pioneers in April. It was evident that Jehovah was blessing our efforts.
But progress has not stopped. At the dedication program, on August 22, 1984, John Barr, a member of the Governing Body, spoke on the subject “Moving Ahead With Jehovah’s Organization.” He described the new four-story branch office and Bethel Home as being “a magnificent tool to face up to the increase and better serve Jehovah’s sheep.” Among those in the international audience present for the program were the four missionaries who had been expelled nearly 34 years before and who rejoiced at the evidence of Jehovah’s blessings on his servants on this small Caribbean island.
Valuable Help From Spiritual Men
Of course, the help provided involved more than buildings. Loving oversight was also given. For many years, up till 1977, the preaching work in Martinique had been under the supervision of the Guadeloupe branch. During this time traveling overseers, spiritual shepherds, were sent over from that sister island. The older heads remember Pierre Jahnke and Nicolas Brisart. Then, starting in 1963, it was Armand Faustini who regularly visited the congregations.
Following them, other traveling overseers, with varying styles and personalities, contributed to the spiritual upbuilding of the congregations. Xavier Noll shared in this service for many years. There was also Jean-Pierre Wiecek with his wife, Jeanine. David Moreau with his wife, Marylène, also visited congregations here as well as in French Guiana, which at the time was under the Martinique branch. When a branch was established in French Guiana, Brother Moreau, who had received training at the Martinique branch, was appointed coordinator of the Branch Committee in French Guiana. Claude Lavigne and his wife, Rose Marie, were serving as missionaries at Kourou in French Guiana when he received an appointment to do circuit work in Martinique, and now they are serving as missionaries in the Republic of Guinea. Others also served for shorter periods in the circuit work, but all of them are remembered fondly because of their hard work and loyal spirit. For those who were married, their wives were precious companions and were good examples for the sisters in the congregations. Presently, Alain Castelneau and Moïse Bellay, accompanied by their wives, are visiting congregations in the two circuits, which congregations have, on an average, about five elders and seven ministerial servants.
Though Martinique is just a small island, loving oversight has been provided to Jehovah’s servants here by members of the Governing Body. Ewart C. Chitty, Daniel Sydlik, Karl Klein, William K. Jackson, Lloyd Barry, and Milton Henschel, along with other zone overseers, have come. The 12 brothers and sisters who live in and work at the Bethel Home, as well as the rest of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Martinique, highly appreciate those visits.
‘Jehovah Sees the Humble Ones’
The psalmist David wrote: “Jehovah is high, and yet the humble one he sees.” (Ps. 138:6) And the disciple James added that God “gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.” (Jas. 4:6) There is abundant evidence of that among those whom Jehovah has drawn to himself in Martinique.
Christian Bellay and his wife, Laurette, who were then living in Fort-de-France, have experienced such undeserved kindness. They were confused by the presence of various religions in Martinique. Which one was approved by God? When Christian Bellay read Revelation 22:18, 19, he felt that he had found a key to answering that question. Which religion neither adds to God’s Word nor takes anything away from it? After examining the facts, he became convinced that it is Jehovah’s Witnesses. He also realized that he had to apply the same rule in his own life—neither adding to God’s Word nor taking away, discarding or rejecting, any of it. Up till that time, he had been cohabiting without legal marriage, but in 1956 he legalized his relationship with Laurette. The wedding talk given on that occasion was the first one in Martinique to be delivered by a Witness. The following year, they got baptized in the Madame River in Fort-de-France. His brother Leon, his father, and his mother, also Laurette’s brother Alexandre, all accepted the truth. Moïse Bellay, one of the sons of Christian and Laurette, presently serves as a circuit overseer. What an abundance of undeserved kindness from Jehovah that family has experienced!
Simple acts of kindness toward Jehovah’s servants may open the way for blessings to the kindhearted one. (Matt. 10:42) That was true of Ernest Lassus, who had a jewelry workshop in Fort-de-France. He accepted the Awake! magazine regularly, not because he was personally interested, but more as a gesture of kindness. One day the Witness who delivered the magazines explained that only Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace, will be able to make justice prevail on the earth. This is what Ernest Lassus wanted. He agreed to have the Witness visit his home. A Bible study was started. “Now,” he says, “I have everything I could wish for. Most of my children are in the truth; one of my daughters is in the pioneer work, a son who is a pioneer is also an elder, and an older son is a member of the Martinique Bethel family.”
Determined to Serve Jehovah
It is encouraging to see younger ones turning to Jehovah and manifesting their appreciation for his loving guidance. Many of these were distraught as a result of lack of sound guidance in the world. But God’s Word is helping them to learn the real purpose of life. (Eccl. 12:13) As they get to know what the Bible contains, they begin to discern that real benefit comes from heeding the counsel recorded at Isaiah 30:21, namely: “Your own ears will hear a word behind you saying: ‘This is the way. Walk in it, you people.’”
One of these, a ten-year-old girl named Claudia, asked numerous questions of the Witness who was calling on her family. Because of her father’s illness, the study with her mother became irregular, but the girl continued to study and to apply Bible counsel that she had learned. She burned her catechism and her missal, and she destroyed her religious images. After her father’s death, she refused to wear black mourning clothes, and she witnessed to those who wanted to pray for her father’s soul. Showing a spirit like that of the Israelite girl who was a servant to the wife of Naaman, she encouraged her mother to attend congregation meetings. (2 Ki. 5:2-4) At the Kingdom Hall, the girl enrolled in the Theocratic Ministry School. She was soon sharing in the field service, and in 1985, at the age of 12, she got baptized, together with her mother. The mother freely acknowledged that her daughter had contributed greatly to her own spiritual progress.
Some young ones fearlessly seize opportunities to give a witness in school. A French teacher in Le François assigned her students to do research on the various religions in Martinique. Roselaine, then 18 years old, and a fellow student had the opportunity to give a good witness, making use of the book Mankind’s Search for God. They placed about 20 books with students and teacher alike.
Even though the issues being discussed at school are viewed as highly controversial, young Witnesses here in Martinique have spoken up to make clear the high principles of Jehovah’s Word. Mary-Suzon Monginy relates her experience: “One day, while dealing with the problems linked to overpopulation, the teacher mentioned the modern methods of birth control. The question of abortion arose and immediately gave rise to a heated dispute. I asked the teacher to allow me to present some material the following day to set out my viewpoint on the subject. He accepted, and for almost two hours, we had a discussion with the entire class.” Material was drawn from the Awake! magazine, including its “Diary of an Unborn Child,” in the August 22, 1980, issue in French. The result was an improved attitude on the part of the class toward Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Martinique has a young population. The youths in general are sucked hopelessly into the vacuum of an economic system that places unreasonable emphasis on material possessions. But Witness youths have come to appreciate spiritual values. It is heartwarming to see the Kingdom Halls in Martinique filled with young people who want to know Jehovah and his ways.
Freed From Enslavement to Drugs
As is true in other lands where materialism has suppressed spiritual values, many of the youths in Martinique have ruined their health and spoiled their lives by the use of crack and other addictive drugs. True Christianity, however, has freed some from these ruinous practices. Paul-Henri and Daniel, of Fort-de-France, used to be part of the Rastafarian community, where free use was made of marijuana. The Rastafarians had their own explanation of what the Apocalypse says about ‘leaves for the curing of the nations.’ But they did not even try to explain most of the rest of that Bible book. But Paul-Henri and Daniel wanted to understand it, and Jehovah’s Witnesses offered to help them.
Paul-Henri and Daniel say: “We used to hesitate to attend the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses, fearing an unfriendly welcome because of our physical appearance, which was rather repugnant.” But when they did go, they were surprised by the kindness, the warmth, and the freedom from pretense among those they met at the Kingdom Hall. The following week they cut their hair and began to dress in a more presentable manner. Within a short time, they also stopped smoking. Soon they too were sharing the good news with others.
Paul-Henri adds: “One day while I was doing street witnessing, an inspector of police, with whom I had previously had problems because of my use of drugs, shouted in stupefaction: ‘But that’s Grosdésormaux!’ I took out of my bag, not drugs, but my Bible and magazines, which he accepted with joy, congratulating me and encouraging me to continue. That’s what I did. I got baptized in 1984 and joined the ranks of regular pioneers in 1985. Today, married and a family head, I serve as an elder in the local congregation. My friend Daniel also made similar progress in the truth.”
It is not only youths who want answers to the problems of life. Adults do too. With a view to helping all whose hearts were open to learn, between April and May 1995, the branch made available for distribution 250,000 copies of the Kingdom News entitled “Why Is Life So Full of Problems?” Since the island population was only 330,000, that meant that every adult, and many younger ones too, would be able to benefit from that important message. It opened the way for many fruitful discussions.
A circuit overseer reported that a woman from the countryside, after having read the leaflet, endeavored to telephone the Society’s branch. In her haste she dialed the wrong number, but that number still proved to be a good one. The phone rang in a Kingdom Hall in Fort-de-France. Just then, publishers were preparing to go out in service with the circuit overseer. She asked: “Please, send me one of Jehovah’s Witnesses as soon as possible. I want to study the Bible.” The next day, she was receiving the help she wanted.
Our Assembly Hall at Last
Finding accommodations for our conventions was becoming a serious problem. The number who attended kept growing. Furthermore, the sports hall in the stadium that we had been using for conventions was no longer suitable. What could be done?
At this time an elder from the Rivière Salée Congregation was searching for land on which to build a Kingdom Hall. Surprisingly, he was offered a site of about 15 acres [6 ha]—far more than was needed for a Kingdom Hall! Providentially, this was in the central part of the island. On the property, there was an old steel shed, which, though it had deteriorated, could be used as a temporary convention facility. In 1985 we held our first convention there. The attendance was 4,653, which was 600 more than the previous year.
Work on a new building got under way in 1992. A number of brothers and sisters from Italy came, at their own expense, to help with the construction. Local Witnesses contributed generously of their time and finances. The project has now been completed. This beautiful Assembly Hall can seat 5,000. It is, in fact, the largest auditorium in Martinique.
No longer do we have to postpone our assemblies—often at the last moment—because of deferred soccer matches. Furthermore, the hard work of putting up, taking down, transporting, and storing the mobile steel structures has also ended. Our Assembly Hall, located in surroundings of flowers, royal palms, and flamboyant trees, brings honor to Jehovah.
An Organization That Praises Jehovah
Jehovah has seen to it that over the past half century, true worship has taken root and flourished in Martinique. Through his organization, he has provided training for those who would be entrusted with oversight. Xavier Noll, along with his wife, received missionary training as part of the 31st class of Gilead. Later, Brother Noll was given further training in a ten-month Gilead course in 1964. This training proved to be most beneficial when the Governing Body decided to establish a branch office of the Watch Tower Society in Martinique in February 1977.
The first members of the Branch Committee were Xavier Noll, the coordinator, Valentin Carel, and Gérard Trivini. Later on, Armand Faustini, who has spent many years as a traveling overseer, was appointed. After Brother Trivini died and Brother Carel moved to France, Henri Ursulet was appointed, in September 1989, to be the third member of the Branch Committee. He was born in 1954, the year that Xavier and Sara Noll arrived from France to devote themselves to the ministry in Martinique. From infancy, Henri had benefited from his mother’s example of faith, just as was true of Timothy, an associate of the apostle Paul.—2 Tim. 1:5.
In 1975, there were 1,000 publishers and a total of 15 congregations on the island. During 1997 a peak of over 4,000 publishers was reached. All of these serve in association with 46 congregations. During the last 20 years, we have attained an average yearly increase of 7 percent.
Already there is 1 Witness to every 90 inhabitants in Martinique. Thousands of Bible studies are being conducted with interested ones. Jehovah’s work is known throughout the island. His Witnesses are also well-known. It is becoming more and more difficult for others to say bad things about the Witnesses because there is always someone nearby to rebuke the slanderers. Witnessing done on the streets, in public squares, at marketplaces, and in car parks of hospitals and of large shopping centers is keeping the Kingdom message prominently before the people. And when people at home hear someone call out “To-to-to, il y a du monde?” (“Hello, anybody home?”) they know immediately that Jehovah’s Witnesses have come to speak about God’s Kingdom.
In some parts of the island, it is not rare for territories to be worked every week now. When publishers go out in the field service, they may have just 10 or 15 houses assigned as their territory. In such areas, they witness to people who have heard the message time and again. This requires that the publishers vary their introductions and the themes that they discuss with householders. They need to make effective use of all the resources and suggestions made available by the faithful and discreet slave. Until recently, street witnessing was done quite sparingly in French territories, but now it is becoming an interesting and productive aspect of the ministry.
“Si Bon Dié Lé”
Martinicans regularly punctuate their sentences with the expression “Si bon Dié lé” (“God willing”). God’s will is, of course, clearly stated in the Bible. Psalm 97:1 declares: “Jehovah himself has become king! Let the earth be joyful. Let the many islands rejoice.” Psalm 148:13 adds: “Let them praise the name of Jehovah.” And through his prophet Isaiah, Jehovah extends the appealing invitation: “O if only you would actually pay attention to my commandments . . . your peace would become just like a river.” (Isa. 48:18) In his goodness, God’s will is that “all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) God’s will also is to free his creation, break its chains, and make the entire earth become a paradise inhabited by humans of all races and colors who are united in worship of their Creator. (Rom. 8:19-21) The opportunity to benefit from that loving purpose is still open for the people of Martinique.
Martinique has changed greatly in the past ten years, as has most of the planet. Drugs, materialism, and moral decay have transformed what used to be an idyllic paradise. God’s Word foretold the changes in human attitudes that have resulted in these conditions. (2 Tim. 3:1-5) But such conditions are not God’s will. Instead, Jehovah is continuing to draw out from among the people those whom he describes as “desirable things” and to prepare them for life as part of a global society of his people who will inhabit Paradise. (Hag. 2:7) These are not people who indifferently take no action because they believe that if it is God’s will it will happen anyway. Rather, they are people who carefully examine the Scriptures to find out what God’s will is and then, motivated by love, zealously do the things that will please him.—Acts 17:11; Titus 2:13, 14.
[Map on page 192]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Forty-six congregations are distributed among the locations named
SAINT PIERRE
CASE PILOTE
SCHOELCHER (2)
FORT-DE-FRANCE (14)
LES TROIS ÎLETS
AJOUPA BOUILLON
LE MORNE ROUGE
GROS MORNE
VERT PRÉ
SAINT JOSEPH (2)
LE LAMENTIN (3)
DUCOS
SAINT ESPRIT
RIVIÈRE SALÉE
RIVIÈRE PILOTE
SAINTE LUCE
BASSE POINTE
LE LORRAIN
MARIGOT
SAINTE MARIE
TRINITÉ (2)
LE ROBERT (2)
LE FRANÇOIS (2)
LE VAUCLIN
LE MARIN
SAINTE ANNE
[Full-page picture on page 162]
[Picture on page 167]
Xavier and Sara Noll, the year they arrived in Martinique
[Pictures on page 175]
Loyal, longtime servants of Jehovah: (1) Leon Bellay, (2) Jules Nubul, (3) Germain Bertholo, (4) Philippe Dordonne, (5) Roger Rosamond, (6) Christian Bellay, (7) Albert Nelson, (8) Vincent Zébo, (9) Vincent Muller
[Pictures on page 177]
Women who set fine examples as teachers of God’s Word: (1) Stella Nelzy, (2) Victor Fousse (now Lasimant), (3) Léonide Popincourt, (4) Andrée Zozor, (5) Emma Ursulet
[Picture on page 183]
First Kingdom Hall that was their own (in Fort-de-France)
[Picture on page 186]
Moutoussamy family, all of whom are associated with the Christian congregation
[Picture on page 191]
Mount Pelée, with Saint Pierre along the water
[Picture on page 199]
Bethel family in Martinique
[Pictures on page 207]
An Assembly Hall at last—in Rivière Salée

