Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● How should we understand the words of Ephesians 1:9, 10 about God’s purposing ‘an administration to gather all things together in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the things on the earth’?
This “administration” is God’s managing, stewarding or particular way of handling matters with a view to unifying disciples destined for the heavens under Christ as Head and to bring the rest of mankind on the earth into harmony again with himself through Christ.​—Pp. 616, 622.a
● What did Jesus Christ mean when he said, “There are many invited, but few chosen”?​—Matt. 22:14.
The whole nation of Israel under the Law covenant constituted the “many” invited ones, but only “few” of these, a mere remnant of the Jews, were chosen as worthy of the “kingdom of the heavens.”​—P. 698.
● In modern times, what experience of God’s servants has corresponded to the words of Psalm 91:7, “A thousand will fall at your very side and ten thousand at your right hand; to you it will not come near”?
God’s servants have continued in their place of spiritual security, whereas the people of Christendom and Jewry have fallen in spiritual death, becoming victims to such things as materialism, nationalism, the idolizing of science, and the like.​—Pp. 733, 734, 756-758.
● What feelings would show that a person has not necessarily gone to the point of committing the unforgivable sin?
If he has a sincere desire to repent and really wants to do what is right.​—P. 39.
● Though men can kill the body, what is the “soul” that they cannot destroy?​—Matt. 10:28.
They cannot destroy a person’s God-given title to be a living being.​—P. 53.
● Why was there no need in the early period of man’s history for laws about marrying close relatives?
Being closer to perfection, humans faced little danger of thereby bringing forth children with marked deformities.​—P. 75.
● What about “godly devotion” was a “sacred secret”?​—1 Tim. 3:16.
After the rebellion of Adam, the question arose as to what man would be able to maintain godly devotion perfectly. Until Jesus Christ appeared on the earthly scene the answer to that question remained a secret known only to God.​—Pp. 119, 120.
● Why is the Bible as a whole God’s “word” or message?
Everything contained therein was recorded under the direction of God’s spirit and therefore serves God’s purpose and presents matters factually.​—P. 146.
● “Who is Jehovah,” so that all should worship him?
Jehovah is the God of the Lord Jesus Christ, the one into whose hands he has put the Messianic kingdom. So if we desire to benefit from the rule of that kingdom, we should worship the universal Sovereign, our Maker.​—P. 240.
[Footnotes]
Only references to page numbers above 600 are to The Watchtower for 1974; all others are to The Watchtower for 1975.

