Friendly Conversations Can Reach the Heart
1 Conversation can be defined as an “oral exchange of ideas.” Starting friendly conversations on a topic that concerns others may capture their interest and can aid us in reaching their hearts with the Kingdom message. Experience has shown that it is far more effective to engage people in a friendly and relaxed conversation than to give them a sermon.
2 How to Start a Friendly Conversation: Our being able to converse with others does not mean that we have to present some striking lineup of thoughts and scriptures. It simply involves getting the other party to talk with us. For example, when we have a friendly conversation with our next-door neighbor, it is not rigid but relaxed. We are not thinking about our next words but are responding naturally to the ideas he expresses. Showing genuine interest in what he says may encourage him to continue conversing with us. The same should be true when witnessing to others.
3 Topics such as crime, the problems of youth, local issues, world conditions, or even the weather can be used to start friendly conversations. Subjects that directly affect the lives of people are very effective in arousing their interest. Once a conversation has been started, we can gently turn it toward the Kingdom message.
4 Having a relaxed conversation does not mean that advance preparation is not necessary. It is. However, there is no need to formulate a rigid outline or to memorize a sermon, which would result in a conversation that is not flexible or adaptable to the circumstances at hand. (Compare 1 Corinthians 9:20-23.) An excellent way of preparing is to select one or two Scriptural themes, with a view to building conversations around them. Reviewing subjects found in the Reasoning book will prove helpful for this.
5 Essential Qualities for a Friendly Conversation: When we converse with others, we should be warm and sincere. A smile and a cheerful appearance help to reflect these qualities. We have the best message in the world; it is most appealing to honesthearted ones. If they feel that our interest in them is motivated by a sincere desire to share some good news with them, then they may be moved to listen.—2 Cor. 2:17.
6 Engaging in conversation ought to be a pleasant experience. Therefore, we should be kind and tactful in presenting the Kingdom message. (Gal. 5:22; Col. 4:6) Strive to leave the other party with a favorable impression. This way, even if we are not successful initially in reaching his heart, he may be more receptive the next time a Witness converses with him.
7 Starting a friendly conversation is not the result of mastering a complex sermon. It is simply a matter of arousing interest in a subject that is of concern to a person. Once we have prepared in advance, we will then be ready to engage people in friendly conversations. Let us endeavor to reach the hearts of those whom we meet by sharing with them the best news to be found, that of everlasting Kingdom blessings.—2 Pet. 3:13.

