Help Them to Serve Again
1 Recognizing a potential spiritual danger for his fellow Christians, the apostle Paul wrote: “It is already the hour for you to awake from sleep, for now our salvation is nearer than at the time when we became believers.” (Rom. 13:11) Paul was concerned about his brothers who had become spiritually drowsy; he was anxious to revive them to renewed activity.
2 It can truly be said that the night of this old world is well along and the dawn of the new world is just ahead. (Rom. 13:12) We have good reason to be concerned about our brothers who have ceased to associate with us as preachers of the good news. Last service year, in the United States alone, over 27,000 publishers were reactivated. How can we help other inactive ones to serve Jehovah once again?
3 What Elders Can Do: Most who are inactive have not abandoned the truth; they have simply stopped preaching because of discouragement, personal problems, materialism, or other anxieties of life. (Luke 21:34-36) If possible, it is far better to help them before they become inactive. The congregation secretary should alert the Congregation Book Study conductor when a publisher becomes irregular in reporting service activity. Arrangements can be made for a shepherding visit. They should try to determine the underlying cause of the problem and how assistance can be given.—See September 15, 1993, Watchtower, pages 20-3.
4 How Others Can Help: Most of us know someone who has become inactive. It might be a person who was quite close to us in the past. What can we do to help? Why not stop in for a brief visit. Tell him you miss his company. Be cheerful and positive. Express your concern without implying he is spiritually sick. Relate upbuilding experiences or other good things being accomplished by the congregation. Enthusiastically tell him about the “Messengers of Godly Peace” District Convention, and encourage him to attend. Associating again with the congregation may help him more than anything else. Offer to accompany him to the meetings. Let the elders know of the response you received.
5 When a person who has become inactive returns to the meetings, likely he will feel awkward when encountering others he has known in the past. Don’t ask, “Where have you been?” Instead, make him feel welcome. Involve him in conversation. Introduce him to those he does not know. Sit with him during the meeting, making sure he has a songbook and the material being studied. Encourage him to come back, and offer your assistance if there is a need.
6 Having warm affection for those who have strayed, Jehovah and Jesus rejoice when such ones make a spiritual recovery. (Mal. 3:7; Matt. 18:12-14) We can experience that same joy if we succeed in helping others to serve Jehovah again.

