Service Meetings for June
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the “Messengers of Godly Peace” District Convention and then for a 30-minute review of the program highlights at the Service Meeting the following week. The day-by-day review of the district convention program should be assigned in advance to two or three qualified brothers who will be able to focus on outstanding points. This well-prepared review will help the congregation remember key points for personal application and for use in the field. Comments from the audience and experiences related should be brief and to the point.
Week Starting June 3
Song 181
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Comment on monthly field service report for both the country and the local congregation.
15 min: “Imitate Their Faith.” Questions and answers. Review evidences of faith, covered in box on page 13 in the September 15, 1991, Watchtower. Interview one or two publishers to find out what has helped them to maintain their regular Kingdom activity for many years.
20 min: “Spreading the Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life.” (Paragraphs 1-3) Cover paragraph 1. (Include comments from January 15, 1996, Watchtower, pages 12-13, paragraphs 11-12.) Explain that the new format for the back page of Our Kingdom Ministry is designed to help us to be better prepared to follow up initial calls. Since it is often wise to make the return visit within a day or two, instead of waiting longer, we will consider suggested presentations for both the house-to-house call and the return visit on the same Service Meeting. Briefly review paragraphs 2 and 3, followed by a demonstration of each. The initial presentation should include brief comments on how a donation can be made to the worldwide work. The remaining presentations in the article will be covered on the next two Service Meetings.
Song 143 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 10
Song 63
 7 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
 8 min: Training Children in Field Service. A talk by an elder. From an early age, our children should be active with us in service. The training and experience they acquire will provide a strong basis for their faith and zeal in later years. It is important that they appreciate the need to take the ministry seriously and conduct themselves properly. Children must avoid rowdy conduct; service is not a time for playing. It is best for them to work with adults. They should be helped to share in giving presentations according to their abilities. (See August 1, 1988, Watchtower, page 15, paragraph 20.) Parents are responsible to provide oversight; they should not send children to meetings for service without an older person to supervise them. Commend children when they do well.
10 min: “Spreading the Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life.” (Paragraphs 4-5) After a brief introduction, demonstrate the presentations for the initial call and return visit in paragraphs 4 and 5. Encourage publishers to follow up all placements of the Knowledge book promptly.
20 min: “How to Make Disciples With the Knowledge Book.” Make brief opening comments based on paragraphs 1-2. Cover paragraphs 3-11 with questions and answers. Explain that the remainder of the insert will be considered on Service Meetings in July and August. Encourage all to save it.
Song 92 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 17
Song 157
10 min: Local announcements. Question Box.
15 min: “Friendly Conversations Can Reach the Heart.” Questions and answers. Invite one or two publishers to relate encouraging experiences showing how they got good response with friendly approach.
20 min: “Spreading the Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life.” (Paragraphs 6-7) Emphasize goals in making a return visit: Cultivate interest, start a study, make specific arrangements to return. After briefly reviewing the presentations in paragraphs 6 and 7, have each one demonstrated, showing how to start a study. Read paragraph 17 on page 14 in the January 15, 1996, Watchtower.
Song 211 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 24
Song 6
10 min: Local announcements. Outline special field service arrangements for July 4.
15 min: Local needs. (Or give a talk on “Handling the Word of the Truth Aright,” based on January 1, 1996, Watchtower, pages 29-31.)
20 min: “Help Them to Serve Again.” Talk and discussion by an elder. Suggest using the August 1, 1992, Watchtower article “Return to Me, and I Will Return to You” to encourage inactive ones. Mention some of the main points.
Song 71 and concluding prayer.

