Everlasting Praise Due the New World’s Sovereign
“Every day will I bless you, and I will praise your name forever and ever.”—Ps. 145:2, CB.
 1. Who is the new world’s Sovereign, and why?
JEHOVAH is the Sovereign, because he is chief or supreme over all others, including his Christ. “The head of the Christ is God.” (1 Cor. 11:3, NW) No one else could possibly be sovereign over the new world but its Creator, Jehovah God. Yet he will carry out his covenant or solemn contract to rule the new world by means of his Christ, his royal Son Jesus.—Acts 4:24-26, NW.
 2. At Psalm 145:1 what recognition does the Greater David make, and for what must we now work respecting God’s name?
2 It is really something when a mighty king recognizes he is not absolute in power but is subject to a superior, a sovereign over him. That was what King David of ancient Jerusalem recognized when he said: “I will extol thee, my God, O King; and I will bless thy name for ever and ever.” (Ps. 145:1, AS) There is today a Greater David, the Lord Jesus Christ, and he now reigns in the heavenly Mount Zion. Since A.D. 1914 he reigns as king of the new world in God’s name. The main purpose of his reigning is to extol his God and Sovereign King, for never in the history of all the universe has there been so much reproach heaped upon God’s name by man and demon. With such a king reigning, who is devoted to God’s praise and exaltation, his reproach cannot now go on for much longer. In harmony with Jehovah’s King we must now work to remove the reproach upon God’s name. Primarily, those who are the anointed remnant of his joint heirs should do so, and now, too, the great crowd of his prospective subjects.—Rev. 7:9-15, NW.
 3. How is Jehovah a Theocrat, and, like Christ’s apostles, to what extent must we show recognition of this fact?
3 Jesus recognizes God as King. We also, if copying Jesus, will recognize the divine kingship, Jehovah’s kingship. Jehovah’s being both God and King makes him a divine King, a Theocrat or God-Ruler. In all the universe, visible and invisible, there is room for only one such God-King. This fact obliges us to take an uncompromising stand when there comes a clash between God’s rulership and man’s rulership, between God’s royal law and man’s political law. Nineteen centuries ago the Jewish Sánhedrin, or Supreme Court at Jerusalem, composed of priests and other religious leaders, claimed to represent God, yet rejected his Christ. When they tried to make laws to keep Christ’s apostles from teaching upon the basis of his name, the apostles Peter and John said: “Whether it is righteous in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, make your decision. But as for us, we cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.” They confessed they had to be witnesses in obedience to God’s sovereign command. Up once more before the same judicial body on a charge of violating the anti-Christian legislation, Peter and his fellow apostles united in answering: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men. . . . And we are witnesses of these matters, and so is the holy spirit which God has given to those obeying him as ruler.”—Acts 4:19, 20; 5:29-32, NW.
 4. How does such a decision for Jehovah’s kingship settle us, and how and where must we extol him?
4 A Christian witness of Jehovah may suffer for such a stand as this, but it does steady and settle us when we make the Christlike decision to have Jehovah as God and King. In the strength of this decision we can courageously face the future, despite all the political changes due to occur on earth. There remains no change for us to make. The main rulership in our lives is permanently fixed upon. We need never waver. We must keep extolling Jehovah as our God and King in our lives. That means, first of all, we must exalt him, set him on high in our own lives. Then we must seek to do so in the lives of others, by everywhere advertising His Sovereignty and Kingship to others.
 5. What does the determination to bless God’s name forever show, and how will this be made possible?
5 When you say you are determined to do something forever and ever, it shows you have a firm hope of everlasting life. This is what we must have if we join Jehovah’s King, Jesus Christ, in saying: “And I will bless thy name for ever and ever.” The decision to bless Jehovah’s name is worthy of our making for all time to come, for if we decide to do this we cannot go wrong, and only those who decide to do this will be favored with endless life. There is no allowance here for halfheartedness or indecisiveness, for there must never be any quitting of this right course. Anyone that determines to bless Jehovah as God and King evermore has a motive worthy of being crowned with everlasting life, enabling him to carry out this determination. The anointed remnant of Christ’s joint heirs have hope of life beyond this earthly life, which will make their carrying out this determination possible in the Kingdom above. The great crowd of their loyal companions today look forward to endless life on earth, in order to bless the new world’s Sovereign forever and ever.
 6. What does blessing his name mean, and who is our leading example in this?
6 To bless his name means to speak well of it and to its credit and exaltation, always to keep one’s integrity toward him and never to be induced or coerced by Satan the Devil to curse and renounce God. Satan tried to make Job curse God in renunciation of Him, but he failed to make Job break his integrity and curse God to his face. By divine help we can do what Job did, never having a bad word to say about God, never complaining and finding fault with him, never putting his goodness in doubt either in our own hearts or in the hearts of others. In blessing God, Jehovah’s anointed King Jesus Christ is our leading example, never breaking integrity toward Him. He is a godly King, a King inflexibly loyal to God, and he helps us to keep on blessing our God while we hold to our integrity.
 7. Blessing him is what kind of service as to time, and what evidently is even Christ doing in his kingdom?
7 Every day of our existence it is proper for us to do this. How empty, barren, purposeless, even one day would be without doing this! We must therefore watch every day. “Every day will I bless you, and I will praise your name forever and ever.” (Ps. 145:2, CB) Determining to do this puts us in line for the full-time service of God, or at least trying to make our works all count toward God, doing them “whole-souled as to Jehovah, and not to men.” (Col. 3:23, NW) “Do all things for God’s glory.” (1 Cor. 10:31, NW) Blessing him is an everyday service, a day-long service, a lifelong service, without retiring for old age. Always we try to find some way to testify in Jehovah’s favor before others. On earth Jesus especially took this step when he left his carpenter shop at Nazareth and got immersed and went preaching, to keep that up till he died. On his resurrection day he resumed it and on his day of ascension he was doing it. This gives us an inkling of what he must be doing now in his kingdom: Daily ruling and working in God’s interests and aiming to train all subjects of the Kingdom to bless God, the new world’s Sovereign.
 8. When does praising Jehovah’s name begin, and why will it go on endlessly in the new world?
8 Just now Jehovah has a bad name with his enemies, even among the vast majority of those who pretend to be Christians. Satan, the false god, is primarily responsible for this. But just for that, should we be ashamed of His name and leave him nameless? By doing so how could we imitate the new world’s King and have his approval? We must identify our God by name, bring that name to the greatest prominence, and clear it of all besmirchments by God’s foes as well as by his professed friends. Our everlasting life depends on it, because praising Jehovah’s name forever and ever begins right here and now. No matter if life in the new world will go on endlessly, there will always be cause for us to praise God’s name. What wrong, what discreditable thing could Jehovah ever do? None in the slightest! He will ever cover his worthy name with glory. It is for us to cover it with praise and blessing.
 9. To what degree should we praise him, and why is it beneficial for us to praise him?
9 “Great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness is unsearchable.” (Ps. 145:3, AS) He is “to be praised exceedingly,” “highly to be praised,” “very worthy of praise.” (RoPss; AT; CB; Crampon) Such is no stinted praise, but is praise to the limit. It should exceed that of all others. Every day adds up reasons to praise him. This is so in our personal life, but is specially so in God’s dealings with his people with whom we are privileged to be associated. Read his Bible and take note of what he has done for his prominent servants and for his people as a whole. Today, too, he has his people, who are called by his name, and his dealings with his modern people run parallel with those of the ancient prototypes who performed many prophetic dramas. What we are today as his people, as a New World society, is due to what He, not any man or men, has done for us. It is good and spiritually healthful for us to praise Him, for our expressing of his praises deepens our appreciation of him.
10. How are the proportions of Jehovah’s greatness shown, and why will he always be found interesting?
10 How big Jehovah God is as to his body we do not know. His real greatness is in being what kind of God he is. This is beyond our power to search or fathom. In his ability to do things he is of such boundless proportions. We just cannot get to the bottom of his creation that is visible to us, not to mention his invisible creation. But, besides his creative works, how grandly he conducts himself! How like a real God he treats his creations! What perfect qualities he displays: his faithfulness to his purposes, his promises, his covenants, his keeping his word faultlessly, his surprising us by his wisdom, by his foreknowledge, by his way of clearing up the temporary mysteries of his purpose! What a book among books his Bible is! Throughout its sixty-six books, which were over sixteen centuries in being written in final form, it is expertly consistent. Throughout the seven thousand years of human history that his Bible covers, it discloses the divine purpose for vindicating his sovereignty and for everlastingly blessing mankind to be unchanged. Now we see the vindication and the blessing coming to glorious realization. Because of such unsearchable greatness, Jehovah God will always be found interesting. Never will saved mankind on earth get to the bottom of him or his works.
“GENERATION TO GENERATION”
11. What kind of race are the anointed remnant, and how have they been formed and kept up numerically?
11 Whether any particular individual acts on the privilege or not, one thing is certain as to Jehovah: “One generation shall laud thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.” “Generation to generation will laud thy works.” (Ps. 145:4, AS; RoPss) We are in the last generation in this old world! Think of that! It shakes one’s composure a bit to think so, but it is true. (Matt. 24:34) But there are also two other generations that will survive this world’s end. How so? Reason it out: The anointed remnant of Christ’s kingdom joint heirs are a spiritual race, not trying to raise up a new generation by literal fleshly descent. The membership of that remnant has not been formed or kept up by the rearing of children in the flesh, but it has been kept up by spiritual means, the power of the Kingdom tidings and the begetting power of God’s holy spirit. The remnant are limited in number, being now just numerous enough to complete the full membership of the “body of Christ,” of 144,000 members under Jesus the Head. The remnant, when completed numerically here on earth, may not concentrate on themselves as a spiritual generation of God and laud his works only to themselves. Some have selfishly tried to do this, but have become an “evil slave” class toward their Master Jesus Christ.
12. By God’s use now of his remnant, what is being raised up?
12 Jehovah’s greatness again stands out in what he is now using the anointed remnant to do in this “time of the end” of the old world! As a result a new generation is rising, for Jehovah is now using the remnant to raise up an earthly society that will pass through Armageddon alive. The remnant is a spiritual generation. Compared with them, these who respond to the Kingdom preaching and dedicate themselves to God as the new world’s Sovereign form an earthly generation by God’s life-giving power through Christ.
13. How, then, does one generation now laud Jehovah’s works to another generation and declare his mighty acts?
13 Marriage will not cease with Armageddon. These Armageddon survivors will have offspring to maybe grandsons and great-grandsons, to fill the earth. These Armageddon survivors will not pass off the scene and leave the new-world stage to their offspring as successors, according to the long-time rule of Ecclesiastes 1:4. No, these survivors will be an abiding generation on earth. Their sons, grandsons and great-grandsons will simply merge into that everlasting generation now begun. Those of the spiritual remnant who survive Armageddon will finally pass off the earthly stage, never to return, and they will leave behind this totally earthly New World society. Till then the remnant will laud and celebrate Jehovah’s works and declare his mighty acts to this generation already begun. To do this the remnant must go out preaching. They have notably done so since 1931, and with still more gusto since 1935, when the “great crowd” of Revelation 7:9-17 were identified to be the present members of the earthly generation. They acquaint this rising generation with God and his works and mighty acts. They use the Bible record of such and also bring God’s works and mighty acts up to date by showing how he has fulfilled his purpose and his prophecies toward his kingdom and toward his people in the very times in which we live, especially since A.D. 1914.
14. On what must we meditate, and how and why?
14 Oftentimes, before endeavoring to talk to others about God and his qualities and deeds, we have to talk to ourselves, or soliloquize, to impress things first upon our minds for the guidance of our tongues. Such meditation and self-preparation is good and serves a fine purpose. This is true of our King Jesus Christ, the Greater David: “Of the glorious splendor of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous works, I will meditate,” or, “soliloquize.” (Ps. 145:5, RS; RoPss) When we set our minds to meditating about Jehovah God as Sovereign, our eyes begin to open to discern the glorious splendor of his majesty. To meditate on such, we must do some private, personal study. We need to do so for our own information and for deepening our own impression and self-conviction, so as to be able to talk to others properly. During Jesus’ forty-day fast and isolation in the wilderness after his baptism he meditated and endeavored to take in the full meaning of the things that the opened heavens had bared to his view. It fortified him against the Tempter and his assaults. After that he talked publicly, and he got others to talking.
15. Who is it that should be got to talking, and on what?
15 “And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts; and I will declare thy greatness.” (Ps. 145:6, AS) Emphasis is here put on speaking about God and what he has done and now does. The idea is to get men of the spiritual generation to talking, speaking about Jehovah, building up one another on our most holy faith in God, also informing and instructing the rising generation, a never-dying generation. This very information and instruction operates toward their never dying. (John 17:3) So the main theme of our conversation should be the great Life-giver and Wonder-worker. The works he does are wondrous, not to mystify his friends, but to deliver, save and bless them. It is the business of the spiritual generation to help the earthly generation to recognize God’s works and to understand them.
16. What is the first thing for a theocratic king to do toward his subjects, and how did Jehovah’s King do so even down to 1953?
16 On earth Jesus Christ did not hold back from declaring his heavenly Father’s greatness. The remnant of his joint heirs will not do so, either. Hence the king-psalmist said: “And I will declare thy greatness.” The first thing for a king is not to blow himself up in the estimation of his subjects, but to magnify the God whom the king worships. The King, the Greater David, sits as a subordinate King on the throne of Jehovah. He has to impress upon his subjects who their real Ruler is and how worthy Jehovah is to rule and to have their willing subjection. The subordinate King does not magnify himself against God, the way Satan did and the way Nebuchadnezzar did just before being struck mad. The godly King is like a shepherd to lead his subjects in right ways, in paths of righteousness. He would call for meetings to address his subjects. He would not except himself from the meetings God appoints for his people but would attend and take part in them, contributing his part to the meeting. That is one place where he could declare Jehovah’s greatness. Jesus Christ our King promised that where even a small group, two or three, would meet together in his name, there he would be in the midst. How his presence was manifest at the New World Society Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses at Yankee Stadium, New York city, N. Y., July 19-26, 1953, where the remnant of his “little flock” and a “great crowd” of his other sheep met together for the mightiest witness in Christian history! How they did speak there of the might of Jehovah’s terrible acts! They are still speaking of it!
17. What should we do about the fame of Jehovah’s abundant goodness, and how may we avoid the mistakes of ancient Israel?
17 “They shall pour forth the fame of thy abundant goodness, and shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.” (Ps. 145:7, RS) Jehovah has made a reputation for his goodness and it has made him famous with his people. It is so abundant that they must just let the fame or remembrance of it pour forth, gush forth in a strong stream of grateful expression, that others may learn how good God is toward those who dedicate themselves to him. All who long to know, worship and live in relation with such a good God are attracted to him by his fame as such. But those who worship false gods, that is, the vicious demons, are moved to envy at the goodness that Jehovah showers upon his people and they try to cut it off from them. We as Jehovah’s people should keep his abundant goodness in memory, always bringing it to mind and talking about it with appreciation. It was this kindly quality of God that led us to repentance toward him in the first place, and it can lead others to repentance also when they learn about it. (Rom. 2:4, NW) It is hurtful to forget it. When Israel let God’s goodness fade from memory, they lost their sense of gratitude, found fault and began desiring to experiment with other gods. So they went wrong and got into serious trouble. (Ps. 106:13-43) We want to avoid their mistakes. We can do so by remembering and then pouring out the fame of his abundant goodness in great volume and thus keep humble, trembling lest we become unworthy of his further goodness.
18. What grounds do we have for singing aloud of Jehovah’s righteousness, and how do we do so?
18 How right our God is! Whenever he is judged, he always wins and comes off vindicated as to what he said and did. So it is always good to let God be found true, although it proves every man a liar. Not only when compared with men but also when compared with those whom men worship as gods, how righteous Jehovah is! The false gods, as these are reflected in the thoughts, deeds, words and religions of their worshipers, are so unrighteous, so repulsive. But Jehovah never oversteps righteousness. Even when he justifies or declares sinners righteous he still remains righteous. He has made the arrangement through the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ whereby he can cancel the sins of those who repent and turn from their sins and dedicate themselves to him through Christ. That way he does not deny his own righteousness. (Rom. 3:4, 22-26, NW) This justice or righteousness of his is a grand theme for us to sing about. The Bible is our complete Songbook. From its pages we loudly sing of his justice, his rightness, his righteousness. That is, we joyously proclaim it to others, that they may know there is no iniquity in our God.—Deut. 32:4.
PATIENT FOR THE SALVATION OF CREATURES
19. How have Jehovah’s qualities mentioned at Psalm 145:8 been expressed toward the spiritual remnant of today?
19 We now live in the “time of the end” when Jehovah will destroy all unrighteousness of this old world. How dangerously near we were to being destroyed with it! Truly Jehovah has proved himself to be just as the Greater David, our King, now describes him to be: “Jehovah is gracious, and merciful; slow to anger, and of great loving-kindness.” (Ps. 145:8, AS) When we first came into the divine favor and under the divine mercy through Christ, we benefited by Jehovah’s display of these excellent qualities. While we were yet sinners, look at what he did for us, in sending his beloved Son from heaven to die for us that we might be reconciled to God and taste of his graciousness. (Rom. 5:6-11, NW) Thus he commended his love to us. But, in addition to that general goodness, what mercy he has exercised toward his anointed remnant in this “time of the end,” for when World War I closed in 1918 it found them in a state of delinquency toward him through fear of man and through being stained with this Babylonish world! But, instead of destroying them with the world, Jehovah cut short the days of tribulation upon Satan’s organization by interrupting it with a period of undeserved kindness before the battle of Armageddon is allowed to break out. He saved his remnant who were yet in the flesh and afforded them an opportunity to work out their own salvation by taking up bold service as his witnesses and Kingdom ambassadors in this postwar era. His mercy to them in cutting short the days of tribulation and reinstating them in his witness work has resulted in mercy to others, namely, to a “great crowd” of other sheep of his Right Shepherd, Jesus Christ.—Matt. 24:21, 22; Rev. 7:1-17.
20. How has Jehovah been “slow to anger” toward the generation of mankind down till now?
20 “Slow to anger!” Jehovah has certainly been that toward the generation of mankind that he has had to deal with since the global inundation of Noah’s day. He has held up Armageddon, the terrific trouble that was foreshadowed by the Flood. He did not bring Armageddon in 1918 or right after the “war in heaven” by which Satan was cast out of heaven and down to the earth. It is now thirty-five years since then, and these years have added to Jehovah’s record as being “slow to anger, and of great loving-kindness.” We have done well in taking Peter’s advice and considering such patience of our God as salvation, as an opportunity for gaining salvation for ourselves and for assisting other sheep to do so. (2 Pet. 3:15, NW) Knowing as we do that this old world is doomed and its destruction is a deserved one, we see in Jehovah’s dealing thus with us a great expression of his loving-kindness.
21. Why is there no reason to complain that God is slow, that is, apparently slow?
21 We are wise to take advantage of this according to its purpose. We do not know how much farther this loving-kindness will last toward this generation and when his pent-up anger will blaze. Men ought to be glad God is slow about this, at least apparently slow, whereas they incline to complain that he is slow about fulfilling his good promises. When Armageddon comes, it will be soon enough, too soon for men who selfishly postpone taking the divine advice and acting. Then they will know what they were asking for, when they tauntingly asked us witnesses where this universal war was with its demonstration of God’s power and greatness. Jehovah knows what he is doing. He takes his own time to do it. He does not hurry up just to give scoffers a sign and satisfy their foolish defiance. He has in mind saving men of good will who long to know God’s grace, mercy and loving-kindness.
22. How have Jehovah’s tender mercies been over all his works, and how has his goodness widened out since 1931-1935?
22 The true God has a big heart. “Jehovah is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works.” (Ps. 145:9, AS) Most men do not appreciate this, just as Jesus said in his sermon on the mount. (Matt. 5:45, 48) Tender mercies, compassions—Jehovah has exercised these for thousands of years. When Satan forced a challenging situation upon God by rebelling and then leading mankind’s first parents into rebelling, God was not thrown into unbalance so as to destroy all three rebels at one time. Not only did he allow time for Satan to try to prove his boast against the Most High God, but by this he also allowed time for the human family to grow and for us to come alive, that He might show his tender mercies to those who wish to take their stand on his side and prove Satan a rebellious liar. And in this “time of the end” Jehovah’s goodness has widened out to all kinds of men, markedly so since 1931-1935, when the salvation of a “great crowd” of other sheep was revealed to be part of the divine program for this “time of the end” and when Revelation 22:17 took on a wider application: “And let anyone hearing say, ‘Come!’ And let anyone thirsting come; let anyone that wishes take life’s water free.”—NW.
23. The time has come for all Jehovah’s works to give what to him, and with what result to them?
23 The marvelous works of creation give credit to the Creator. The inanimate creation gives silent credit to him, but it is the greater privilege for the animate, and particularly for the intelligent creation, to give deliberate credit, thanks and blessing to God. We know the time will come when this will be everywhere the case. “All thy works shall give thanks unto thee, O Jehovah; and thy saints shall bless thee.” (Ps. 145:10, AS) The time has come for all his intelligent works to give him thanks from a sincere heart. All kinds of men may now find cause to thank him. Those of good will do so, and for it salvation will result to them.
24. Who are Jehovah’s “saints” or “men of loving-kindness,” and of what, therefore, must they speak, and why now?
24 Jehovah’s “saints” are his “men of loving-kindness.” Today they are the spiritual remnant who are in the new covenant, the ‘covenant by sacrifice’ as it is called because of being based on Jesus’ sacrifice. Since 1919 Jehovah the great Judge has been gathering such men of loving-kindness who are in this covenant, and now unitedly they must and do bless him. (Ps. 50:5, Ro; AS) They partake also of his loving-kindness through the Kingdom covenant that he made with King David. Through Jesus Christ, the Greater David, he brings them into this Kingdom covenant, that they may reign with Christ in the heavenly kingdom and be a blessing to all obedient mankind. (Acts 13:34; Isa. 55:3; Luke 22:28-30) They must make known this Kingdom covenant, this divine expression of loving-kindness. In this way they make known that God’s kingdom by Christ is something he covenanted for and it is therefore a certainty, and that it will have as its King the One who earned the right to it by Jehovah’s favor. At Psalm 110:1 (AS) King David called this one his “Lord,” to show how much higher this Kingdom Heir of the line of David would be in his royal position. Those who are highly favored with being made his joint heirs have extraordinary reason for blessing the great Arranger of it all, Jehovah; and this earth over which they will reign is the proper place for them to begin blessing him. Doing this now has a powerful effect upon the great crowd of other sheep for their salvation, because, through the remnant, they learn of the Kingdom and assemble to it.
25, 26. When was the glory of Jehovah’s kingdom to be spoken of, and how has the “glory of the majesty of his kingdom” been made known?
25 “They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power; to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glory of the majesty of his kingdom.” (Ps. 145:11, 12, AS) Jesus made God’s kingdom the foremost doctrine of his teaching. What did he say his disciples should preach down here at the consummation of the system of things? He prophesied that it should be “this good news of the kingdom.” (Matt. 4:23; 10:7; 24:14, NW) In the glory light of this good news of God’s kingdom that was brought to birth in 1914 the glory of the kingdoms of this world becomes deathly pale. Moreover, the record that they have made for themselves during this “time of the end” has been very inglorious.
26 The glory of Jehovah’s kingdom is a superior glory, it being heavenly, not earthly. But its invisible glory will be visibly reflected in the captivating beauty with which it will fill this earthly realm, transforming it into a paradise of perfectly happy creatures, human and animal. No monarch can compare with the King, the Greater David, whom Jehovah has anointed to office. Jehovah has done with him just as he said: “I also will make him my firstborn, the highest of the kings of the earth.” (Ps. 89:27, AS) The Kingdom has already made a record for itself, winning the first war ever reported in heaven and humiliating the losers, Satan and his angels, down to the level of the King’s feet, this earthly footstool. Having made that conquest in heaven, the King rides on to complete his conquest at Armageddon in the greatest fight of all time. In setting up the Kingdom in 1914 Jehovah’s power was manifested. Since 1919 further divine power has been manifested in having the Kingdom’s establishment proclaimed in the face of world opposition. Divine power has stiffened Jehovah’s witnesses to stand loyal to the Kingdom, and in loving devotion these talk of its power that is to be fully manifested at Armageddon for Jehovah’s vindication.
27. What definite purpose does their speaking of the glory of Jehovah’s kingdom have, and why must we assemble to it?
27 Their speaking of the glory of his kingdom and talking of his power has a definite purpose: “to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glory of the majesty of his kingdom.” That kingdom must be described and explained to men, that those who hunger for a righteous, God-fearing government may know that this is IT and may tender their unconditional allegiance to it. According to the prophecies God’s kingdom by Christ has a prodigious program to fulfill, but it will be adequate for it. The prophecies of what God’s kingdom is doing and must yet do clothe it with a glory of majesty that no other kingdom has ever had or could display. This is the worth-while government for us to assemble to in unqualified support. The kingdoms of this world that are in opposition to it must be abandoned to their destruction at Armageddon. We must make God’s kingdom our only hope. It is our only hope.
28. How do Jehovah’s kingdom and human governments compare as to duration, and why are the latter doomed?
28 The kingdoms of this world had their death warrant sealed when the “appointed times of the nations” expired in 1914. They cannot stand up against the kingdom that was then born in the heavens. “Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.” (Ps. 145:13, AS) “Your kingdom is a kingdom for all ages, and your dominion endures through all generations.” (CB) Alongside such an enduring government of God all governments of human origin would eventually have to perish. To avoid trouble with it the governments of men would have to recognize it and peacefully yield over their sovereignty to it. Their not doing so dooms them to pass away amid the greatest trouble mankind will ever have known.
29. Why will the enemies never be able now to stop all mouths’ talking about Jehovah’s kingdom?
29 The issue today is Jehovah’s kingdom and dominion, his universal sovereignty. Satan wants to rule co-existently with God or to the total exclusion of Jehovah God, but he will not succeed. God’s government will persist without a rival in heaven or on earth. By his help we have made his kingdom known to many sons of men, and we have so many sons of good will talking about his kingdom of glorious majesty that the enemies will never be able to stop all their mouths. We are determined to keep preaching the Kingdom in order to move countless more sons of men of good will to talk about it as witnesses of Jehovah.
A FAITHFUL PROVIDER
30. What kind of psalm is Psalm 145 in construction, and what verse is missing from most extant Hebrew manuscripts?
30 Psalm 145, on which we are meditating, is an acrostic or alphabetic psalm. That is, each Ps 145 verse 1-21 in its order begins with a letter of the Hebrew alphabet of 22 characters, in their regular order from aleph to taw. Not all translations of the Hebrew Scriptures show this fact, but some do, such as An American Translation, Crampon, etc. In the majority of extant manuscripts of the Hebrew text a verse to match the Hebrew letter nūn (=n) is missing, but in at least one Hebrew manuscript the missing alphabetic verse is found and it is confirmed by the appearance of this verse in the Greek Septuagint, Jerome’s Latin translation, the Syriac, the Arabic and the Ethiopic Versions. The Revised Standard Version admits the verse into its main text and reads: “The LORD is faithful in all his words, and gracious in all his deeds.” The Catholic Confraternity Bible renders it also: “The LORD is faithful in all his words, and holy in all his works.”
31. Why do we do right in sticking strictly to Jehovah’s Word, and why need we never fear for the future of his intelligent creation?
31 In view of Jehovah’s faithfulness in his every word, the New World society does right in sticking strictly to the Bible. Never shall we be disappointed about his Word, even if we do have to wait longer for some things than we used to think. There is no possibility that anything that Jehovah has promised will fail. Covenants, promises, stated purposes, truths, statements of fact—time will only add to the truthfulness of these and will verify Jehovah’s dependability in all his words. He is also holy, kind, gracious, toward all his creatures who appreciate his goodness, and we need never fear for the future of any of his intelligent creation. There is no basis for doubting him or suspecting him of cruelty. The full vindication of his Word is getting nearer, and those who will live forever will witness it or know it.
32. How did Jehovah act in accord with Psalm 145:14 toward the spiritual remnant and afterward toward the “great crowd”?
32 The anointed remnant of Kingdom heirs do not have to look back to the past for examples—to Job, to Israel in Egypt, to the shepherd David, to Israel captive in Babylon, but have to look just at themselves. In their own experiences recently they can appreciate what the psalmist next says of our God: “Jehovah is ready to uphold all who are falling—and to raise up all who are bowed down.” “The LORD lifts up all who are falling and raises up all who are bowed down.” (Ps. 145:14, RoPss; CB) He acted in accord with this rule in 1919 when he raised up his remnant who had fallen into his disfavor during World War I and who were bowed down therefore under their Babylonish enemies by the time that war ended. Particularly since 1935 he has done the same thing for the many captive “other sheep,” prisoners in the same Babylonish world. By bringing them out Jehovah began having the desirable ones of all nations come in, that thus his house of worship might be filled with glory. (Hag. 2:7, AS) He knew that the limited thousands of the remnant were not the only ones now on earth who wanted to worship God aright. Mankind, who are made of the earth, were originally made for worshiping the live, true God on earth forever. In tune with that original purpose, Jehovah will have such worshipers on earth forever, and so he starts right now with having such on earth for good. He starts with the hundreds of thousands of the “great crowd” of other sheep, who will survive Armageddon and, keeping integrity, will never die. We must bear in mind that Jesus Christ, “the Right Shepherd,” surrendered his human soul for these “other sheep” as well as for the “little flock.”
33. Why are those of the New World society spiritually the best-fed people on earth?
33 Spiritually speaking, those of the New World society are the best-fed people on earth. Why? It is because they look to the right source for food. “The eyes of all look to thee, and thou givest them their food in due season.” (Ps. 145:15, RS) “The eyes of all look hopefully to you, and you give them their food in due season.” (CB) Those who know Jehovah according to his Word look intelligently and hopefully to him, not to Christendom’s clergy. Those who give their full time and energy to Jehovah’s service especially trust in his care for them, for they know they are of more worth than the beasts and birds for whom he does not fail to show care. He has sent his royal Son, the Lord of the Christian household, to the temple of worship, and the Lord Jesus has designated the loyal remnant of his body a “faithful and discreet slave” class to “give them their food at the proper time.”—Matt. 6:25-34; 24:45-47, NW.
34. Why will Jehovah not discharge his “faithful and discreet slave” after the resurrection of the faithful ancient witnesses, and how will earth’s permanent inhabitants always be fed?
34 Jehovah has always given this slave class something to serve as seasonable food. Now not only the anointed domestics partake of it but also the other sheep who crave spiritual food that satisfies and leads to life. As long as this slave class remains on earth, be that also after Armageddon, Jehovah will not discharge them, even when he raises the faithful witnesses of ancient times from the dead. On what grounds would he discharge them? Those raised from the dead are not qualified for a superior position by a mere resurrection to life on earth, especially when the eyes and ears of the slave class have been blessed far beyond what those of the pre-Christian witnesses of Jehovah were. (Matt. 13:16, 17) Jehovah’s spirit and blessing are what qualify his slave class for superior service. But after this spiritual “slave” class departs from the earth to the heavenly kingdom, then the King, the “Everlasting Father,” will have his visible earthly organization of special servants, “princes in all the earth,” to minister for all those who abide on the earth forever.—Ps. 45:16; Isa. 9:6.
35. How are all our present desires satisfied now?
35 We who are now in the way of life are satisfied in all our present desires. We join the psalmist in saying to Jehovah: “You open your hand and satisfy the desire of every living thing.” (Ps. 145:16, CB) Everything is in Jehovah’s hand. He is the Giver, and a cheerful one at that, hence a most happy one. He is never made poorer by his generous giving. His stores never get exhausted. He knows living things desire to live—in happiness, even if they do not now recognize the Life-giver. He foreknew what they wanted and needed, and he got it ready for them and kept it in constant supply. But those in the enlightened, God-fearing New World society have a purpose in desiring to live. It is not just to enjoy existence like beasts, but to satisfy the craving of the heart and mind in their God and to praise him and serve his eternal purpose.
36. Why shall we not start off hungry and needy immediately after Armageddon?
36 Our spiritual need is what we mainly appreciate now. We look to Jehovah’s hand to satisfy our spiritual need no matter how many years we have yet to live to Armageddon and no matter what world conditions may arise to surround us then. After Armageddon we shall keep looking to him. After this world lies in ruins and we enter the new world, we shall not be on any relief. Jehovah through his King will open his hand and we shall not suffer while we may have to carry on for some time amid the ruins of the old world, till these are cleared away. We shall be supremely glad to be alive then and will continue to look to Jehovah’s hand. If the animals are to feed on the carcasses of their former oppressors and have a post-Armageddon feast, then certainly we of the New World society are not going to start off hungry and needy as soon as we step into the new world.—Ezek. 39:11-20; Rev. 19:17-21.
37. In the light of Psalm 145:17, why need not earth’s permanent inhabitants fear for the endless future ahead?
37 This divine openhandedness and satisfying of creature desires will carry on through all the new world, endlessly. So earth’s permanent inhabitants have no grounds for fear at any time, as if the universe were to run down and things were to go out of control, interfering with man’s continued happiness. In assurance of this we have the inspired statement: “Jehovah is righteous in all his ways, and gracious in all his works.” (Ps. 145:17, AS) So nothing will be subject to accident. No carelessness, no neglect, no oversight can possibly occur. Jehovah will do right and justly by us. His inherent graciousness and kindness will always come to the surface. What a God, what a King, to have like this always!
CALLING TO THE RIGHT SOURCE OF HELP
38. Upon whom is it now most urgent to call, and what obligation does this lay upon us?
38 At Armageddon the people are going to call upon their many false gods for deliverance, but to no avail. We want men of good will to call then upon a god who will save them, that they may live and survive. It is now most urgent to call upon Jehovah and make it our fixed, unchangeable practice. By doing so we shall be saved. (Joel 2:32; Acts 2:21, NW) That means making public declaration of him in fearless confession before everybody. For men to do this we preachers, whom God has sent, must let them hear about this only god who is able to save by Jesus Christ. Hence we must be an information bureau or society and must impart information, even though at first it may not be solicited. Jehovah, who sent us as preachers, did not say to wait upon solicitation. He told us to go out and give the information, whether they hear or refrain from hearing. A numberless “great crowd” will hear.—Rom. 10:12-15.
39. In what way must seekers of salvation now call upon Jehovah?
39 Anyone who calls upon Jehovah with salvation in view must “call upon him in truth.” The true way to call upon him is to do so through Christ, the now-reigning King. The natural Israelites of today, whose distant ancestors rejected the Messiah, cannot go to Jehovah direct. For salvation and in order to call in truth, according to truth, in the true way, they must do so through the Greater Moses, Jesus Christ the Mediator. To all doing so in sincerity Jehovah is nigh, near, close, easily within reach and consequently ready and quick to answer the call.
40. How will those who fear him have their desire completely fulfilled?
40 We want to remember his nearness when sore distress arises for us either individually or as a New World society. The psalmist says with inspired conviction: “He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and will save them.” (Ps. 145:19, AS) Our initial fear of him was what led to the divine wisdom we now possess. Our chief desire now is Jehovah’s vindication as the rightful Sovereign of the universe. His vindication will straighten out everything and put everything on a right basis. First of all, he must be accorded his rightful place and must be acknowledged according to what is right and true, and all that misrepresents him in any respect must be cleared away. Our desire for this we shall have completely fulfilled.
41. Why do we now cry to Jehovah, and why shall we yet do so, and with what result?
41 This is the time when Jehovah’s ability to save is being put to a crucial test. We cry to him now. But under enemy attack, especially Gog’s final attack, we are yet going to cry to Jehovah. (Ezek. 38:1 to 39:16) When we show we do not compromise or look to this world but look to Him as Savior, he will hear our cry for help and save us for his glory in the new world. He saved David his typical king in marvelous ways. He saved Jesus the King of kings, though it required resurrecting him from the dead on the third day; and he will now save his New World society. He is our fear; to him we shall cry.
42. Who will survive Armageddon, and what about some who may die faithful before Armageddon?
42 Do you know who will survive the battle of Armageddon? Here is the dependable inspired answer: “Jehovah preserveth all them that love him; but all the wicked [the lawless, RoPss] will he destroy.” (Ps. 145:20, AS) Knowing the answer, we must decide in which class we propose to be then. We know the destiny of each of the two classes. We do well to act now in order to be classified then as lovers of Jehovah, not as wicked, lawless toward him. The lawless do not love him; the law-abiding ones of the New World society do love him. (1 John 5:3) We know who are sure to survive Armageddon, and there is no excuse for deluding ourselves. The rule is simple, plain. Because of the “increasing of lawlessness” the love of many is cooling off, but the New World society must keep on loving Jehovah, doing so ever more fervently. (Matt. 24:12, NW) Those lovers of his who may die now before Armageddon Jehovah will preserve, because their worthiness of life in the new world continues on and will be rewarded in the right way or at his due time, whether by a spiritual resurrection to reign with Christ in the Kingdom or by an early resurrection to life in the earthly paradise.—John 5:28, 29; Rev. 2:10.
43. To what decision are we now moved, and what does such decision signify for us to do?
43 At the climax of this review of what Jehovah is and what he does, how could we be moved to any other decision than that which the psalmist expressed? “My mouth shall speak [or, better, May my mouth speak, CB; AT] the praise of Jehovah; and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.” (Ps. 145:21, AS) Such a personal decision signifies, first of all, a determination that each of us shall preach in praise of Jehovah, for praise is due the new world’s Sovereign now and for all eternity. Appreciating him now as we do, how could we ever withhold such praise from him? We could not!
44. If we want all flesh too to bless Jehovah’s name forever, what must we do, and how?
44 But if we want all flesh too to bless his holy name forever and ever, we simply must preach in order to make his holy name known to all flesh, people of all kinds, no matter what the color of the skin or the racial features in the flesh. We may not wait upon God himself to do this merely because of our wishing and praying for it to occur. We have within ourselves the God-given capacity and now so many other means to praise him to others. Let us unitedly use all in harmony with our wish and prayer. Let us get all kinds of flesh to bless the holy name of our God now.
45. Why will Armageddon not interrupt the blessing of His name, and what inspired wish of the psalmist are we determined to have a part in realizing?
45 Imagine it! That will mean the start of all flesh in blessing his beloved name forever and ever on earth. Even the battle of Armageddon will not interrupt their blessing his name, for only the blessers will be preserved clear through it. Then think of the sweet work after Armageddon, not just of acquainting the children of the Armageddon survivors, but also of acquainting all those resurrected ones with Jehovah’s name to incite them to join in blessing it until all earth resounds with his deserved blessing and praise. What a blessed prospect! In view of it are we determined to have a part in realizing the psalmist’s inspired wish as to the divine name now and after Armageddon? Our love for God will respond with a fervent yes, and as a New World society we will take the course expressed in the words: “Every day will I bless you, and I will praise your name forever and ever.”—Ps. 145:2, CB.

