From Our Readers
The Wild Kingdom
It was with pleasure that we read your article (in Portuguese) “Is the Wild Kingdom Vanishing?” (May 22, 1983) The precise, realistic way in which the article showed how rare specimens are vanishing and the quotations of well-known scientists demonstrated clearly that the one to blame is man himself. Along with the Association of Brazilian Biologists, we are striving to encourage conservation in all areas, in view of the constant erosion of the natural environment. As the article brought out, man is really destroying the earth with his unlimited industrialization and commercial greed. We hope that you will continue to publish information of such high standard and urgency.
Academic Center of Biological Sciences, Brazil
Breast-Feeding
Thank you for the lovely article on breast-feeding. (June 8, 1983) At the birth of our second child I informed the nurse that I intended to breast-feed him, and I continued to feed him that way after coming home from the hospital. Everything has worked out well. However, many around us have been skeptical. I was criticized and began to have doubts. I recalled all of this vividly while reading the article and it really touched my heart. I believe it will encourage other mothers who want to breast-feed their babies to go ahead and do so, not letting themselves be disconcerted by others.
I. K., Germany
Two of the letters appearing in the September 22, 1983, issue with reference to breast-feeding deeply disturbed me. Firstly, to submit a baby to a schedule of our own convenience is absurd. Children are young and so innocent, why do we want to force our clocks and routines on them? Children are to be loved even when housework and material demands must go on untouched. People before things. To me a baby who cries for his mother’s milk is much more important than any other activity that presents itself.
S. F., New York
We agree on the value of breast-feeding babies and also believe that the proper care and nurturing of children should receive very high priority from the parents. But we believe that, as significant as this is, there may be other factors that some parents will feel should be taken into consideration. Therefore, each couple will have to consider all factors and make the decision as to what will be in the best interests of their child, according to their individual circumstances.​—ED.
No More Fleas
Your issue of September 8, 1978, (page 30) had an item “Getting Rid of Fleas.” It cited a case reported in the Smithsonian in which two dogs and a cat got rid of fleas when they were given small doses of brewer’s yeast. I have three cats, and for the past year I have been mixing a little brewer’s yeast into their food at every meal. All three are now free from fleas. It really works! Thanks for the tip.
A. D., Canada

