‘It’s Not the Building but What Is in Your Heart’
“I don’t know what it is,” said the building inspector of a city in Colorado, U.S.A., “but if the world were like you Jehovah’s Witnesses, there wouldn’t be any problem that couldn’t be overcome.”
What prompted such a comment from this city official? He just witnessed a Kingdom Hall rising from a foundation to a completed house of worship in less than two days! Volunteer work crews made up of Jehovah’s Witnesses labored around the clock to build a meeting place for the local congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Now, 42 hours after the first sound of a hammer hitting a nail, ringing out the start of the construction, the congregation was gathered for its first meeting. Before the service got under way, the inspector, who was there to present the Certificate of Occupancy for signing, requested permission to say a few words to the congregation.
“You people amaze me!” he said. “I just want to say it’s been an honor to work with you. I’ve been all around the world with construction crews, but I’ve never seen the unity, drive, cooperation and camaraderie that you all have shown.” He stated this example: “I saw a carpenter come down off the roof, drop his apron and start shoveling rock. That’s not something normally done. You people have a drive I just don’t understand!”
In Canada and the United States at least 15 two-day Kingdom Halls per month are built by volunteer workers. These halls have an average floor space of 4,000 square feet (370 sq m) with seating for 200 people. And some are constructed in less than 24 hours! What would the inspector’s comments have been about that?
Finally the moment to sign the Certificate of Occupancy arrived. The inspector next told the congregation: “Your building will be called a church [official zoning designation], but the building is not what makes it a church​—it is what is in your hearts that will make it a church. I’ve inspected a lot of churches in this city, but this is by far the best built church of them all. It surpasses all the requirements of the city.
“The next time you are asked who you are, don’t tell them your name,” he continued. “Say you are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and be proud of who you are!”
In conclusion, the inspector said: “God bless this building. I’m sure he will!”

