“Autogenic Training”​—Is It the Answer?
AUTOGENIC TRAINING was developed half a century ago by a Berlin neurologist named Johannes Heinrich Schultz (1884-1970). In 1932 he wrote a book about his theory, explaining its name to be from the Greek autos, meaning “self,” and genesis, meaning “birth or origin.” Autogenic training, therefore, literally means a training originating from, or born of, oneself.
Autogenic training is divided into a lower and an upper stage. The lower stage is composed of a series of six exercises, or procedures, to be progressively learned and done for a few minutes several times a day. Each exercise includes a brief phrase upon which the patient is asked to concentrate as intensely as possible, mentally repeating this phrase while performing the exercise, or procedure. An autogenic manual instructs: “The student, however, should not ‘think’ in words but should simply ‘look’ inward, turning to the pictures of the inner self that correspond with the phrase.”
Therefore, when a person does the first exercise and imagines “the right arm is very heavy,” the arm actually does feel heavy. After performing this first procedure, the second follows: “The right arm is very warm.” As each such procedure is learned and followed through to a successful conclusion, additional ones are added. The last four exercises, or procedures, are directed toward gaining control over the heartbeat, the breathing apparatus, the inner organs and the mind. During the entire training session a person is always to concentrate on the thought: “I am completely relaxed.”
The object is to achieve complete physical relaxation, thereby gaining mastery over the body, forcing it to follow the dictates of the mind. Dr. Gisela Eberlein, who studied autogenic training under its founder, Dr. Schultz, says she introduces autogenic training to her students “as the method of concentrated self-relaxation that makes it possible, first of all, to achieve rest and relaxation any place, any time.”
But autogenic training is designed to accomplish even more, as Dr. Eberlein goes on to explain: “Additionally, one learns to influence the organs and the organic system, that is to say, to quiet the palpitating heart and the nervous stomach. The circulatory system, for example, can be influenced to prevent blushing.”
Does It Work?
Yes, it appears to work in many cases, at least to a certain extent. But why? First, because relaxation and a decrease in body tension can have physical benefits.a
Secondly, there is the “placebo effect.” One German doctor explained it this way: “Over half of all modern diseases are of psychosomatic origin, which means they are open to response from autosuggestive treatment. Some doctors feel that this even includes certain aspects of cancer. People who live in constant fear of cancer develop it more often than do others. . . . People who strongly believe in the effectiveness of certain medicines tend to get better.”
As an aid in making decisions or breaking habits, the power of positive thinking cannot be overlooked. When faced with major decisions, only a positive-thinking person will muster up enough courage to take difficult but nevertheless necessary steps. The I-can’t-do-it person very rarely succeeds; the I-will-do-it person generally does.
But despite these positive aspects, there are also negative aspects about autogenic training that should be considered.
Reasons for Caution
Dr. Schultz warned that the autogenic-training exercises should be learned only under the supervision of a qualified instructor. Why? Because, he said, each exercise could “possibly contain disadvantages along with the advantages.” Dr. Malcolm Carruthers, head of the Centre for Autogenic Training in London, also cautions against learning autogenic training by means of tape-recorded courses or under unskilled supervision. “It can be a very powerful technique and unless properly handled it can be dangerous,” warns Dr. Carruthers. “We know of people who have had untrained teachers and been left worse off than at the start. If an emotionally disturbed person tries the training and it fails to improve matters they may become even more depressed.”
There are other reasons for caution, especially when a person progresses to the upper stage of autogenic training. This upper stage of concentrated suggestions is designed “to produce the ‘new man,’ to develop new patterns of thought and of behavior,” according to B. Peter and W. Gerl in their book Entspannung (Relaxation).
Two autogenic training manuals point out the possibilities such training offers at its upper stage. These possibilities or objectives go beyond improving one’s physical health. One of the manuals says: “Even as a pupil can concentrate on the thought ‘the arm is warm’ he can just as well imagine that ‘being thrifty is joyful’ . . . or ‘the letter will be written.’”
The other manual observes: “Once a person has grasped the matter and senses he is on the right path, he can consciously direct further development . . . ‘I am discovering my abilities. I am putting them to use.’ ‘I am aware of life. I am doing the right thing.’ ‘I have a positive attitude.’ ‘I am striving for harmony and happiness.’ Such concentrated insertions, individually chosen and constantly developed through autogenic training​—never more than one every two weeks—​have their effect. They often enable the ‘new man’ to develop new patterns of thought and of behavior.”
Thus, according to certain practitioners, autogenic training can make you a ‘new person,’ make over your personality, yes, change your behavior. It is “a key to physical and mental health,” says Dr. Eberlein. Some practitioners even say that no problem is too large to tackle, not even physical handicaps and diseases. In effect, autogenic training is proclaimed by some as a cure-all. But is it?
No, answers autogenic training expert Dr. Malcolm Carruthers. “It is not a magic panacea,” he states. “It is simply medicine that the [medical] profession is increasingly taking up.” Thus, the view that autogenic training is a cure-all may lead to harmful consequences. How so? In that some practitioners may fail to seek out other needed treatment.
The upper stage of autogenic training is especially fraught with danger for the Christian. This is because Christians are admonished: “You should put away the old personality which conforms to your former course of conduct and . . . should put on the new personality which was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.”​—Ephesians 4:22-24.
The “new personality” that a Christian is striving to put on is not one that is developed by employing autogenic training. Rather, it is developed through meditation on God’s Word and by doing his revealed will.​—See Psalm 143:5; Philippians 4:8.
Another reason for caution is that the upper stage of autogenic training appears, in some ways, to be similar to Yoga. Yoga is defined as “the suppression of all activity of body, mind, and will.” In other words, the mind is to be completely emptied. Often a mantra (incantation) is constantly repeated to aid in clearing the mind of all thought. This is dangerous. A mind swept completely clean is easy prey to outside influence, either that of imperfect human instructors or, worse still, of superhuman demonic forces that, according to the Bible, are desirous of gaining mastery over man’s mind.​—1 Timothy 4:1; compare Luke 11:24-26.
But is autogenic training true Yoga? Although there are similarities, autogenic training does not appear to be the same as Yoga, at least not in its lower stage of exercises. No mantra is used, and neither is the mind to be emptied, according to some books on autogenic training. Nonetheless, Christians need to be cautious, for they do not want to see how close they can come to practices that can be spiritually damaging. They want to take a clear, firm stand for true worship.​—2 Corinthians 6:14-17.
Origin Linked With Hypnotism
Here is a reason for extreme caution. Dr. Schultz became interested in the subject while working with another doctor who was treating patients with hypnotism. His observations enabled him “to develop ‘autogenic training,’” as he himself wrote, “from hypnotism.” In fact, he even described it as “a daughter of hypnotism.” Autogenic training is acknowledged by some of its practitioners to be a form of “self-hypnotism.” Yet, not all practitioners of autogenic training use hypnotism. Instead they employ concentrated thought suggestions on one’s body parts or functions.
If self-hypnotism is used, then this can present a real danger for a Christian. Why? Although no one can really explain how hypnotism works, yet its background is well known. An Encyclopædia of Occultism says that “its history is inextricably interwoven with occultism, and even to-day much hypnotic phenomena is classed as ‘spiritualistic.’” The practice of any form of spiritism brings divine disapproval.​—Deuteronomy 18:10-12; Galatians 5:19-21.
A Christian cannot indulge in any practice or routine having to do with the occult. For example, what did some occultists of the first century in Ephesus, Asia Minor, do after hearing the Christian apostle Paul preach in their city? “Many of those who had become believers would come and confess and report their practices openly. Indeed, quite a number of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them up before everybody. And they calculated together the prices of them and found them worth fifty thousand pieces of silver.”​—Acts 19:18, 19.
Therefore, autogenic training is fraught with dangers for the Christian. Its origin is linked with hypnotism, some of its practitioners actually use a form of self-hypnotism, and its upper stage employs Yogalike meditation techniques.
Since meditation techniques do not provide the proper answer for mankind’s ills, then what is God’s answer?
[Footnotes]
For suggestions on physical relaxation and how to overcome stress, see Awake! of August 22, 1974, pages 16-19 and October 8, 1980, pages 3-15.
[Blurb on page 5]
Many of today’s diseases are related to stress and tension
[Blurb on page 6]
Autogenic training exercises should be learned only under the supervision of a qualified instructor​—Dr. J. H. Schultz
[Blurb on page 6]
“It can be a very powerful technique and unless properly handled it can be dangerous”​—Dr. M. Carruthers
[Blurb on page 8]
Christians need to be cautious or they may meditate on concepts out of harmony with Bible teachings, thus resulting in loss of faith
[Picture on page 7]
Relaxation and a decrease in body tension can have physical benefits
Brain
Heart
Stomach
Kidneys
Liver

