From Our Readers
School Harassment  The article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Make Him Leave Me Alone?” (May 22, 1991) was wonderfully worded. When I was in school, classmates were always pressuring me about dating. When they saw that I would not compromise, they quit pestering me. Right now I’m out of school and working. About a month ago, an older man (37 years old) on the job approached me and told me that I was beautiful and that he wanted to get to know me. I’m 18. I was speechless for a while. But then I explained that I was studying to become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and placed some literature with him. He also accepted my rejection of his advances.
M. L., United States
Washing Clothes  I am writing to express my appreciation for the article “This Is the Way We Wash Our Clothes . . .” (January 22, 1991) Being a special pioneer [a full-time evangelizer] serving in a rural area, I find myself having to wash my clothes by hand. Having read your article, I see no reason to envy those having automatic washing machines.
M. M., Dominican Republic
World Cup Soccer  Having read your report on the World Cup soccer championship (May 8, 1991), I cannot agree with your unfavorable portrayal of this sport. Worried mothers might try to stop their sons from playing soccer because of reading about the violence in the sports stadiums.
S. B., Germany
We did not paint an unfavorable picture of the sport itself, nor did we discourage youngsters from enjoying sports in a balanced way. We merely reported the ‘unfavorable picture’ the media have painted of the hooligan element among some of the fans of this sport. Christians are wise to be cautious about attending an event where there is a strong likelihood of violence.​—ED.
Suicide Mission  The experience of Yoshimi Aono (January 22, 1991) seemed to have been written just for my father. Like Yoshimi Aono, my father was on board a submarine during the war. He saw the deaths of several members of the Kaiten Special Attack Corps. His war experience made him believe that neither God nor Buddha exists. Since becoming one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I have hoped for an opportunity to tell my father about God’s love. The article has answered my prayer. I shall send it to him immediately.
A. S., Japan
“Awake!” Format  I would like to express my appreciation for the beautiful new format for Awake! that started with the January 8, 1991, issue. Since I work in a technical publications department, I immediately noticed the change in layout, fonts, and colors. I have watched for 20 years how this magazine has changed with the times to become a more colorful and appealing tool to draw people to Jehovah. I was able to place an issue with a workmate solely on the basis of these beautiful new changes!
D. A., United States
Animal Articles  Heartfelt thanks for the articles on animals and nature. At first I didn’t really pay much attention to those articles, though I always noticed that the pictures were beautiful and colorful. One day someone mentioned an article he had read about an antelope called the kudu. (February 22, 1991) This aroused my interest in reading the article. I also began reading other articles, such as the one on the mongoose. (March 8, 1991) These articles have helped me to “see” Jehovah through his creation.
B. T., United States

