Do You Remember?
Have you enjoyed the last several issues of The Watchtower? See if you can recall the following points:
□ What is involved in our ‘believing on the Lord Jesus Christ and getting saved’? (Acts 16:30, 31)
This is more than just a brief, emotional experience. It involves learning the truth of God’s Word, studying the Scriptures regularly and applying them in our life. (Acts 2:41, 42; 17:11) It also involves accepting Jesus Christ as our Ransomer and obeying him, recognizing him as Jehovah’s King and Vindicator. (1 Timothy 2:5, 6; Hebrews 5:9; Revelation 7:10)​—8/15, pages 6-8.
□ How can we show our heartfelt appreciation for the Creator?
Our love and gratitude for the Creator should motivate us to serve him voluntarily. This means more than living a clean life and not doing what is bad in God’s eyes. Godly conduct is essential, but serving Jehovah involves praising him actively and joyously, telling others about Jehovah’s great deeds and grand purposes. (Psalm 96:2-4)​—9/1, page 7.
□ Into how many religious groups is humanity divided?
It has been estimated that there are 10 main religions and 10,000 sects.​—9/15, page 3.
□ Why are Jehovah’s Witnesses not a sect?
Jehovah’s Witnesses are not disciples of a human leader or teacher. Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are their teachers. Hence, Jehovah’s Witnesses are not a sect.​—9/15, page 9.
□ What is the world for which Jesus would not pray? (John 17:9)
It is the organized human society that exists apart from God’s visible organization, or outside it. This is made up of three closely connected parts: false religions, political governments and commercial systems. (Revelation 17:3, 5; 13:1, 2; 18:11, 15)​—9/15, page 28.
□ What is needed for earth to become a Paradise?
Paradise requires far more than beautiful natural surroundings and all the animal creation living at peace with one another and with man. Paradise also involves people who have developed godlike personalities with peaceful dispositions, all getting along with one another in love.​—10/1, pages 3, 4.
□ In what sense does a paradise exist on earth today?
Compared to the strife, disunity and immorality in the world today, the love, peace of mind and unity among Jehovah’s Witnesses make a spiritual paradise for them. This is a foretaste of how humans will live together peacefully on this earth in a physical Paradise during the Thousand Year Reign of Christ Jesus. (Isaiah 11:6-9)​—10/1, pages 4-7.
□ What did Jesus mean when he said to the evildoer: “You will be with me in Paradise”? (Luke 23:43)
The evildoer was not a faithful Christian conqueror who qualified for life as a coruler in heaven with Christ. Therefore Jesus was not promising a heavenly paradise to the dying thief. Jesus’ words mean that he will be with the evildoer by raising him from the dead into Paradise on earth and then caring for his needs, both physical and spiritual.​—10/15, pages 4, 5.
□ What are some of the things we can learn from the book of Exodus?
Jehovah is depicted in the book of Exodus as one who sustains his people, as the incomparable Deliverer and as the God of theocratic organization. This strengthens the faith of Jehovah’s Witnesses today that he will act similarly toward them.​—10/15, page 31.
□ What is the real significance of the word “Har–Magedon”?
The meaning of the word is “mountain of assembly of troops.” Thus Har–Magedon, or Armageddon, is not literally a place on earth, but it is the state of the world rulers in being gathered together against God the Almighty in warfare. (Revelation 16:13-16)​—11/1, pages 3-6.
□ How can a Christian keep enjoyment of pleasure in its proper place?
Enjoyment of pleasure can be kept in its proper place by yielding to the guiding principles of the Bible regarding quality, quantity, timing and cost of things.​—11/1, page 25.
□ What is the re-creation spoken of by Jesus in Matthew 19:28?
Jehovah originally purposed for humans to live forever on earth enjoying true peace and security. This purpose will be realized during Christ’s Thousand Year Rule, resulting in a restoration of Edenic conditions. In other words, the theocratic system with which humankind began life on this earth will be re-created.​—11/15, pages 8, 9.
□ What advantages are there in following the Biblical example of using God’s personal name?
Doing so helps us to view God as a Person, not just a force. It helps us to draw closer to him, and it eliminates confusion, sharpening our thinking about him, bringing our thoughts closer to what the Bible really teaches.​—12/1, pages 10-13.

