God’s Word Is Alive
Do You Fear What Others Think?
“JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES aren’t Christians,” this schoolgirl is saying. “They don’t even celebrate Christmas.” Others in the classroom join in ridiculing Jehovah’s Witnesses for their beliefs.
Suppose that you are a Witness youth and that you are present while these things are being said. Those in the classroom do not realize that Christmas actually is a pagan celebration and that it was not celebrated by early Christians.a Nor do they know that the other things being said against the Witnesses are false also. What if one of your classmates then turns to you and says in a voice that others can hear: “You are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, aren’t you?” What will you say?
You will be in a situation similar to that faced by the apostle Peter the night before Jesus Christ was put to death. That night Jesus was led away to the house of the high priest where there was a meeting of the religious leaders. Peter followed along and waited outside in the courtyard. One of the servant girls of the high priest saw Peter and said: “This man also was with him.” But Peter denied it.
After a while another person saw Peter and said: “You also are one of them.” Peter answered: “I am not.” After about an hour, others began insisting: “Certainly you are one of them, for, in fact, you are a Galilean.” Then Peter, as you can see, responded: “I do not know this man of whom you speak.”​—Luke 22:54-60; Mark 14:53-71.
But this was not the truth. Peter definitely did know Jesus. In fact, a few short hours before, he had asserted to Jesus: “Lord, I am ready to go with you both into prison and into death.” (Luke 22:33) What caused this sudden change in Peter’s attitude? Fear. On this night the truth was being distorted. What was right was made to appear as wrong, and the innocent one as guilty. So, because of fear of what others might think and perhaps do, Peter did not tell the truth. He did not honor God or his Son, Jesus Christ.
Similar circumstances can arise today. It is true that Peter was deeply repentant over his denials and that he obtained the forgiveness he so earnestly sought. (Luke 22:61, 62) But how much better that an experience such as this be avoided! Are you prepared to meet situations similar to the one faced by Peter​—for example, during the Christmas season? Have you made a firm determination to stand up for the truth and to honor Jehovah God and his Son regardless of the circumstances that may arise?
[Footnotes]
See pages 6, 7.

