The Power of Christmas Music
CHRISTMASTIME is here again! Once again Christmas music fills the air. No doubt you have noticed how all other music fades into the background during this holiday season in Christendom. Yes, Christmas melodies have power. This is because they have qualities that play very much on human sentimentality, more so, it seems, than the music of any other holiday. Religion-oriented and very moving, these catchy tunes tug strongly at the heartstrings of many persons.
Why, just a short refrain from a familiar carol can stir emotions peculiar to Christmas! Yes, and depending on which land you live in, there are Christmas delights that appeal to the senses​—the pungent smell of fresh pine, the sweet taste of candy canes, the tinsel against the bright red and green that characterize this festival. And a simple Christmas tune that fills the ear can trigger an onslaught of nostalgia​—memories of the family coming together for the holidays, the sumptuous feast at the table, the gift-giving around the Christmas tree, the singing of carols together, visiting old friends and seeing old acquaintances again.
Naturally, what adds considerably to the power of this infectious music to conjure up such thoughts are the words​—a curious mixture based on Bible events, folklore, old customs and traditional practices. For example, verses in certain carols tell of Christ’s birth at Bethlehem, the angels announcing this to the shepherds and a call for all the faithful to come and adore him. Still others buoyantly urge decorating the house with boughs of holly or warn children to be good so that Santa Claus will bring them the toys they want.
Whether sung by one voice or many, played on an organ or by an orchestra, the emotion-charged music of Christmas tends to program people for its celebration. On the surface, the power inherent in this music may seem good and beneficial. After all, many verses of these Christmas songs deal with religious themes and encourage kindness, generosity, goodwill and peace. Nevertheless, when Christmas music and its words are examined in the light of God’s truth as revealed in the Holy Bible, some startling facts come into view.

