What Does Christmas Music Really Teach?
THERE is no denying the power of Christmas music and its lyrics. However, their impact on human emotions does not necessarily prove that they teach Jehovah God’s truths.
Much as we may feel moved by some pleasant things that touch our emotions, would you not agree that in religious matters involving Jesus, truth ought to be one’s foremost concern if one wants to please the God of the Bible? Actually, emotionalism would be a deterrent if it distracted a person from the facts. If people want to know what Christmas carols really teach and promote, then they must be objective and open-minded in their investigation.
Are They Truthful?
It might surprise you that anyone would raise questions about the truthfulness of popular Christmas songs. But as you will see, some oft-overlooked facts deserve our honest attention. ‘What facts?’ you may wonder.
For example, a number of carols declare that Jesus was born on Christmas Day, December 25. Is this true? To be frank, the facts answer no! Why do we say that, and why should it be of concern to you?
In his Holy Word, the Bible, God indicates that Jesus was born, not in cold winter, but in the fall of the year. Let us note the facts of the matter. The lyrics of some Christmas carols paraphrase Luke 2:8, where we read of “shepherds living out of doors and keeping watches in the night over their flocks.” But these tunes move this statement out of its time context in the early, warm fall of the year to a winter eve in December. Can we be sure of this? If so, then why is it significant, or why should it be important to singers of the words of these carols?
If you had opportunity to be in that area in late December, you would know that in this season the hills around Bethlehem are usually cold and rainy, and that sometimes the ground is covered with snow. In fact, you can find some clear Biblical evidence of this noteworthy point. If you consulted almost any Bible encyclopedia, you would find that our month of December corresponds to the latter part of the ninth month (Chislev) of the ancient Hebrew calendar and the early part of the tenth month (Tebeth). With this in mind, consider the account in Ezra 10:9 about something that happened just a few miles from Bethlehem:
“All the men of Judah and Benjamin collected themselves together at Jerusalem within three days, that is, in the ninth month on the twentieth day of the month, and all the people kept sitting in the open place of the house of the true God, shivering because of the matter and on account of the showers of rain.”
Do you appreciate the significance of this text? No sane Hebrew shepherd would endanger his flock in icy fields where there is little greenery on which to forage. Yet Bible writer Luke assures us that at the time of Jesus’ birth there were shepherds with their flocks in the fields around Bethlehem. This could not have been late, wintry December. Do not these musical verses about Christmas amount, then, to errors or distortions of truth? They might even be described as falsehood set to melody.
Obviously, these songs are not teaching the truth about the Christmas season. Could they be pleasing, therefore, to the One about whom the apostle Paul said, ‘God cannot lie’? (Titus 1:2) Further, is singing them the way to worship God “with spirit and truth,” which Jesus said is so important? (John 4:24) Actually, “Jehovah the God of truth,” and his Son, Jesus Christ, who is “the way and the truth and the life,” are honored by truth, not by melodic falsehoods. (Psalm 31:5; John 14:6) Furthermore, at Christmastime when these carols are sung, many clergymen quote Luke’s words about the shepherds as a basis for the December 25 celebration of Christmas. (Luke 2:8-14) However, neither this nor any other scripture gives support to the Christmas festive season. The Bible makes it clear that manipulating God’s Word to make it say something it is not saying leads to his adverse judgment. In the extreme case of the false prophets in Israel who “changed the words of the living God,” they paid with their lives.​—Jeremiah 23:16-22, 29-32, 36; Deuteronomy 12:32; 18:20; Proverbs 30:5, 6.
Hence, no matter how beautiful Christmas music may sound, we cannot ignore the seriousness of its lyrics that contradict God’s Word. Jehovah is repelled by untruth, especially when it runs directly counter to his revealed truth. (Psalm 5:4-6) Many humans may be so moved by glorious harmonies and delightful melodies that they ignore any falsehoods being sung, but we can be sure that that is not the case with God and with his Son, Jesus. They do not desire praise to the extent that they will approve of lyrics peppered with flattering falsehoods.
Should We Commemorate?
Here is another aspect to consider: Do you know of any Biblical evidence that Jehovah God and Jesus Christ want us to commemorate Jesus’ birth, even if we intended to do it at the time of year that corresponds to Biblical evidence?
Like the good Father that he is, Jehovah God is always very specific about what he requires of his worshipers. He carefully spells out what we must do to gain his favor and blessings. He often repeats things to avoid any misunderstanding on our part.a Why, then, do we find in God’s written Word no direct command or even a hint that we should commemorate his Son’s earthly birthday? Because Jehovah places emphasis on Jesus’ death and resurrection, requiring Christians to celebrate annually the Memorial of his death only. (Luke 22:19, 20; 1 Corinthians 5:7, 8; 11:23-26) Thus, Christmas carols that presumptuously call for the celebration of Christ’s birth “go beyond the things that are written” in the Bible. (1 Corinthians 4:6) So do you think that people who know this and yet sing these lines are pleasing Jehovah God? No matter how sincere a person may be, presumptuousness and disobedience never win God’s favor.​—1 Samuel 15:22, 23.
Customs and Beliefs
Jehovah God explicitly warns against mixing pagan practices and beliefs with his pure worship. (2 Corinthians 6:14-17) Pagan practices? Yes, as we shall now show, many pagan practices are tied in with Christmas. Such practices are repulsive to God, like the practices of the Canaanites of whom Moses said: “Everything detestable to Jehovah that he does hate they have done.” (Deuteronomy 12:31) Since ‘Jehovah does not change,’ how do you think he would view Christmas carols that, in the name of Christianity, encourage a mixture of pagan practices and pure worship?​—Malachi 3:6; Deuteronomy 12:1-3, 29-32.
For example, the musical call to “Deck the Halls With Boughs of Holly” is rooted in ancient pagan superstition. In the booklet Discovering Christmas Customs and Folklore, Margaret Baker pointed out that decorating homes with evergreens was a Roman and a Norse custom. She further observed:
“Greenery brought into the house at the winter solstice seemed to be a charm to ensure the return of vegetation to the earth. . . . Holly had many associations with good fortune. In Louisiana berries were kept for luck. . . . A piece kept back from church decorations was especially lucky. . . . And a tree planted outside the house protected it from thunder, lightning, fire and the evil eye.”​—Pages 29, 32.
If you study the lines of other Christmas carols, you will find that they endorse various superstitious customs.b Jehovah God cannot approve of these practices, for they enslave people to fear and ignorance, which keeps them from turning to him. Music that teaches or promotes superstitions is simply not fitting for Christians seeking his favor.
Christmas music that deals with Santa Claus touches a very sensitive area​—little children! Emotions may be stirred up, but the question must be asked, What do these tunes teach little ones? Misconceptions such as that a white-bearded mythological figure in a red suit is practically omniscient. He knows when all children are good or bad. And he brings toys to only good boys and girls, so they are encouraged to behave to get these materialistic gifts.
Here we must let our reason rule and not our deceptive hearts. (Jeremiah 17:9) Santa Claus is just another product of pagan tradition, and sparkling melodies with lyrics telling children that he is real do not change that fact. Furthermore, such music ascribes to Santa the all-knowing quality that only Jehovah God possesses. Should God-fearing parents teach their children to believe and sing such things? Should they pretend to their children that the pagan Santa Claus is linked to the Christianity of the Bible?
Wise parents do not bribe their children to be good. Yet Christmas music leads children to believe that if they behave an imaginary Santa Claus will leave them toys. The bribery is there​—subtle, but unmistakable. You can appreciate that such ideas can damage the moral fiber of children in their formative years. Jehovah declares that “foolishness is tied up with the heart of a boy; the rod of discipline [not bribery with Christmas toys] is what will remove it far from him.” (Proverbs 22:15) The conclusion should be clear​—Christmas songs about Santa Claus are a gross deception. They can only undermine respect for true Bible principles.
Idealistic, starry-eyed little children need to feed on the “bread” of God’s truth. Their inquisitive minds cannot be satisfied with ‘stones’ of falsehood.​—Matthew 7:9.
Who Is Behind It?
We all need to face up to the fact that Christmas and its music are not from Jehovah, the God of truth. Then what is their source? Reason should suggest that they are from someone whose sole aim now is to mislead as many people as possible. The Bible tells us that this is the goal of Satan the Devil. So you can appreciate why Christmas and its trappings can be perfect tools for his efforts. They tickle the senses while blinding the mind to Bible-based truth. (2 Corinthians 4:4) Satan knows the powerful effect music has on humans. In diverse churches and temples around the earth he cunningly camouflages his God-dishonoring teachings and customs with sweet melodies and lovely lyrics. So why should it be different with Christmas music?
Quite apropos here are Tertullian’s observations on pagan entertainment. This second-century professed Christian wrote:
“Grant that you have there things that are pleasant, things both agreeable and innocent in themselves; even some things that are excellent. Nobody dilutes poison with gall [something both distasteful and poisonous] . . . The accursed thing is put into condiments well seasoned and of sweetest taste. So, too, the devil puts into the deadly draught which he prepares, things of God most pleasant and most acceptable. Everything there, then, that is either brave, noble, loud-sounding, melodious, or exquisite in taste, hold it but as the honey drop of a poisoned cake.”​—The Shows (De Spectaculis), chapter 27.
Yes, Satan the Devil can ingeniously make Christmas music appear to be of God and the singing of it a Christian duty that honors Him and his Son. In reality, it does just the opposite.​—2 Corinthians 11:14.
Those seeking to gain Jehovah God’s favor that leads to eternal life will not let themselves be deluded by the deceptive power and beauty of Christmas music. They will shun it as “the honey drop of a poisoned cake.”
[Footnotes]
Note the details outlined by God on how the Israelites were to celebrate his festivals at Exodus 12:1-27; 23:14-17; Leviticus 23; Deuteronomy 16:1-16.
See “The Music of Christmas,” Awake!, December 22, 1969, pages 5-8.
[Pictures on page 5]
At Jesus’ birth, was it . . .
a warm season or cold winter?

