‘The Little One Has Become a Thousand’ in Italy
“THE little one himself will become a thousand, and the small one a mighty nation. I myself, Jehovah, shall speed it up in its own time.”​—Isaiah 60:22.
Jehovah’s Witnesses in Italy have indeed “become a thousand” in the years since World War II. As the second largest religious body in Catholic Italy today, the number of Witnesses there has multiplied more than a thousandfold in that period of time​—from 95 in 1946 to over 100,000 now.
The credit for this phenomenal growth clearly belongs to Jehovah. But instrumental also are the efforts of the zealous Italian Witnesses, their faithful endurance through difficult times and their willingness to use their time, strength and material resources in Jehovah’s service. To keep pace with all of this, and to provide the needed direction and support, the branch office of the Watch Tower Society in Italy has also undergone expansion through the years.
Expansion at the Branch
The very first branch office in Italy was established at Milan in 1946. After two years it was transferred to a small house purchased by the Society in Rome. By 1972 the number of Witnesses in Italy had grown to 25,000. So in that year, at a site that had been acquired at the northern periphery of Rome, the Society constructed a building that became the new branch and Bethel home.
Just four years after moving into that building, the number of Kingdom publishers in Italy increased to 60,000. Once again it became necessary to enlarge the branch facilities. Obtaining a building permit, however, proved to be a tedious process. Finally, in 1978 work was begun on a farm building and it was completed in 1980. In the autumn of 1979, construction began on a new Bethel residence building and a printing plant.
The New Buildings
The Bethel residence building is a four-story structure with a basement. On the ground level is a comfortable lounge with marble floor and olive-wood paneling. There are also a dining room and a fully equipped kitchen. The dining room can accommodate 200 persons. Its walls are decorated with pleasant landscape murals. A 350-seat Kingdom Hall is located on the first floor. A library is on the second floor. In the basement are the electric shop, the machine shop and some storage space.
The rest of the building consists of 70 comfortable rooms, each with a private bath and a terrace. Combined with the rooms in the existing building, there is now space for a total of 170 persons, thus comfortably accommodating the 158-member Bethel family.
The factory building is exceptionally bright and airy, thanks to its ample windows. It has a main floor and a basement, each measuring 12,500 square feet (1,161 sq m). Three M.A.N. presses have been installed. Two of these, along with an automatic book-binding line, are recent additions.
Each month this printing plant is turning out over 2,300,000 Watchtower and Awake! magazines. This certainly is progress, considering the fact that in 1946 the 95 Kingdom publishers distributed just 268 copies of these journals in Italy. The plant is also capable of producing 60,000 books a week.
The farm building is situated along a shady roadway a few hundred yards from the new buildings. All together the farm has 123.5 acres (50 ha) of land and produces meat, eggs, milk, vegetables and fruits for the Bethel family. Wholesome food is thus provided at a comparatively low cost. All the buildings are equipped with roof-top solar panels to operate the water-heating systems.
A Combined Effort
Construction work is commonplace nowadays. But what was different about putting up this new Bethel home and printery? All the work was done by about a thousand Witnesses who volunteered their services. Carpenters, designers, laborers, bricklayers, electricians, painters, plumbers and others came from all over Italy, including Sicily and Sardinia. Professionals and executives came and did hard manual work. Three carpenters​—a father and his two sons—​came and worked from time to time, even though they recently had suffered considerable financial loss due to a fire at their workshop. Another brother working at the construction site traveled about 62 miles (100 km) every weekend for several months so that he could also spend some time with his family.
Many brothers left their home and job, or took their annual vacation to come and work for extended periods of time. Much credit must go to the families they left behind for the sacrifices they made to enable one family member to come and work on this special project.
The fact that most brothers could stay for only a limited time meant that the personnel of the work force changed nearly every week. This presented quite a challenge to the brothers overseeing the work. Yet everyone was ready to adapt and to follow the instructions given. Their willingness to cooperate was truly a manifestation of “the fruitage of the spirit.”​—Galatians 5:22, 23.
Many brothers contributed by putting their private businesses at the Society’s disposal. For example, one firm owned by brothers made 300 doors for the new Bethel residence building. Those who could not come to work offered money, materials and equipment. Even children were eager to help. A small child donated his savings of five years​—the entire contents of his money box.
Reflecting on the fine spirit of the volunteers, one job overseer said: “It was encouraging and touching when it was time to say good-bye to these brothers. They would thank us for the privilege of contributing their work to the advancement of pure worship.” In this regard, the coordinator of the Branch Committee commented: “This building has not been brought about by the effort of a single person or a number of persons. It has been built because of the combined efforts of the whole of God’s people in Italy. It is an evidence of Jehovah’s blessing.”
Inauguration and Dedication
The completion of the new branch facilities brought great joy to the brothers. How clearly this was demonstrated on a special occasion​—the inauguration and dedication of the new buildings to Jehovah! This took place on April 24, 1982. But how could a greater number of Jehovah’s Witnesses share in the joy of this encouraging event? To make this possible, the special program in the Kingdom Hall at the new building was linked by wire with meeting places in Rome, Novara, Ascoli Piceno, Naples, Syracuse and Cagliari.
The appointed day turned out to be windy, cold and rainy. Despite this and although most of the groups met in open stadiums, an enthusiastic crowd of 27,372 enjoyed the program. Concerning those meeting in Novara, Corriere della Sera reported:
“The rain was pelting down in the cold, windswept streets. Most people were barricaded in their homes or at the bar, but they [Jehovah’s Witnesses] were the exception. They had traveled down from Trieste, Gorizia, Verona and Alessandria by train, buses and small cars. The children wrapped up in ski suits, old ladies padded like mattresses, and elderly couples sheltering under blankets as they perched in the small grandstand of the stadium. . . . There was not a sign of unruliness, murmuring or impatience.”
A national television channel gave the event some coverage in the evening news. It included parts of the meeting and showed scenes of the new branch facilities.
Present for the meeting at the branch itself was M. G. Henschel, the principal speaker and a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Also on hand were missionaries who have been serving in Italy for over 30 years. Present, too, were members of the Bethel family, some of whom have served at the branch for over 35 years.
In opening his dedication address, Brother Henschel quoted the statement, “the little one himself will become a thousand.” These words brought back special memories to the old-timers. But they also aroused in all those present heartfelt gratitude to Jehovah God, who has, indeed, ‘speeded it up in its own time.’​—Isaiah 60:22.
Further Expansion
Although “the little one” in Italy has already “become a thousand,” it is evident that there is still much work for Jehovah’s Witnesses to do there. With the new and enlarged branch facilities, they feel well equipped for the work ahead. Confidently they look to Jehovah to give the increase.
Indeed, Jehovah has continued to give the increase. Last March a total of 233,042 persons​—more than twice the number of Kingdom publishers in Italy—​attended the Memorial of the death of Jesus Christ. The brothers are happy that they have the privilege of helping these interested people to make spiritual advancement. Many of them have responded favorably. In May 1983 a new peak of 105,463 persons shared in proclaiming the Kingdom good news in the Italian field.
Jehovah’s Witnesses in Italy feel that God truly has made “all his undeserved kindness abound toward” them. In addition to numerical increases, they have enjoyed abundant spiritual riches. They are thankful for Jehovah’s generosity, and it is their resolve to go on sowing even more abundantly in the years to come.​—2 Corinthians 9:8-10.

