From Our Readers
Information Anxiety  I read the series “Information Anxiety—How Does It Affect You?” (January 8, 1998) You state that the glut of information may in part be due to the proliferation of news and magazines. I feel that your magazine may be contributing to this glut. Is this not a case of the pot calling the kettle black?
J. K., United States
Our series exposed the glut of “useless” information. “Awake!” certainly has not contributed to this, as its stated purpose is to ‘probe beneath the surface and point to the real meaning behind current events.’ Such information can hardly be called useless.—ED.
Mary and the Resurrected Christ  I am writing to complain about an article in “Watching the World,” namely, “Mary First to See the Risen Christ?” (January 8, 1998) You demonstrate your ignorance of Scripture, which also suggests a lack of interest in truth. There are many things that occurred and were said that are not included in the Bible. Read John 21:25.
J. G., United States
Our article merely reported what was stated in the official Vatican newspaper “L’Osservatore Romano.” Pope John Paul II was quoted therein as claiming that Mary “was probably the first person to whom the risen Jesus appeared.” While we respect the right of our readers to believe as they wish, there is simply no Biblical evidence for such an assertion.—ED.
Troubadours  The article “The Troubadours—More Than Singers of Love Songs” (February 8, 1998) was a skillful analysis of the role these singer-poets played in medieval society. As a literature teacher, I have studied the Portuguese troubadours, and your article helped me to see this artistic movement in its whole context. Articles of this quality give credibility to your magazine.
R. N. A., Brazil
I have to admit that it took effort to start reading this article, but once I began, it immediately caught my interest. In particular, I was glad to learn who probably introduced the custom of “ladies-first.” Japan does not have the “ladies-first” custom, but my husband, who was brought up as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses from the time he was young, has unfailingly followed the custom ever since we got engaged. (We are now in our fifth year of marriage.) I am very happy.
Y. N., Japan
Crossword Puzzles  I want to thank you with all my heart for the crossword puzzles. They encourage you to get out your Bible and find solutions in an easy and intelligent way.
N. C., Italy
Mother and Child Reunion  I was deeply moved by the article “A Unique Reconciliation.” (February 22, 1998) For me, knowing my roots made a big difference emotionally. My mother and father never married each other. I often wondered about my father, but I got only brief answers to my questions. Not long ago I asked my mother what my father’s full name was. Using a telephone directory, I was able to locate his sister, and to my surprise, I learned that she is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses! She explained that my father passed away in 1980, never having married. Even so, my mother and my aunt have been a real comfort in my time of need. Your articles have also become a part of my healing process.
L. D., United States

