Street Witnessing That Is Effective
 1. What is one way we can imitate Jesus?
1 During his earthly ministry, Jesus did not hesitate to speak with people he met on the road and in other public places. (Luke 9:57-61; John 4:7) He wanted to share his important message with as many people as possible. Today, street witnessing is an excellent way to help people obtain godly wisdom. (Prov. 1:20) Our success will be enhanced if we take the initiative and use discernment.
 2. How is initiative involved when doing street work?
2 Take the Initiative: It is generally better to approach individuals rather than to stand or sit in one place waiting for passersby to approach you. Smile, make eye contact, and have a calm, friendly manner. If you are working with other publishers, it is usually best to approach people separately. Initiative is also needed to follow up on the interest that you find. If appropriate, at the end of the conversation, kindly ask how you may contact the person again. Some publishers do street work regularly at the same location, enabling them to speak to the same people repeatedly and further their interest.
 3. How may we use discernment when doing street witnessing?
3 Use Discernment: Use good judgment in deciding where to stand on the street and whom to approach. It is not necessary to witness to every passerby. Be observant. If the person is in a hurry, for example, it may be best to let him pass. When witnessing in front of a business place, be discreet so as to avoid causing undue concern to the manager. It is often better to witness to people as they leave the business rather than as they enter. Approach people in a way that will not frighten or startle them. Also, be discerning when offering literature. If individuals display little interest, you may offer a tract instead of the magazines.
 4. Why is street witnessing a beneficial and enjoyable form of witnessing?
4 Street witnessing enables us to scatter many seeds of truth in a short period of time. (Eccl. 11:6) Some people we meet may even be those we are unable to find at home when working from house to house. Why not make arrangements to engage in street witnessing, an enjoyable and effective form of field service?

