R1089 : page 1 

VOL. X. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., 
JANUARY AND FEBRUARY, 1889. 

NO. 4. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

DOMESTIC, -Fifty cents a year, in advance, by Draft, P.O. 
Money Order, or Registered Letter. 

FOREIGN,-Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal 
Money Order. 

TO POOR SAINTS. 

This paper will be sent free to the interested of the Lord's poor, 
who will send a card yearly requesting it. "Ho, every one that 
thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, 
come ye buy and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price. " And you who have it- "Wherefore 
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor 
for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently— and eat ye that 
which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." - 
ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, 
at the P.O., Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

NEW POSTAL RULINGS require that our lists shall be 
composed of bona fide [actual] subscribers. We are obliged to 
be more strict than formerly, and all who wish to continue 
receiving the TOWER must send at least a request for it. 



R1089 : page 1 

MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
VOL. II. 

"THE TIME IS AT HAND." 

Cloth Bound Edition, 366 pages, now ready. Price $1.00--to 
TOWER subscribers 75 cents (TOWER one year and book 
$1.25). 

Back orders have all been filled; any who ordered and have not 
yet received it, should communicate at once. Any mistakes 
cheerfully corrected. 

A Paper Bound Edition will be published, as soon as we receive 
pledges for 5000 copies, at 35 cents per copy. Send no money 
for these now; merely say how many you desire, if published. 

A perfect deluge of letters and orders followed the 
announcement in our last issue, that DAWN VOL. II. in cloth 
binding was ready for mailing. Such an evidence of interest is 
very refreshing and encouraging to us; for though we labor not 
for the visible results, but for the Master's approval, whether 
men will hear or whether they will forbear, yet none are so 
strong that fruit of labor will not serve to still further strengthen 
them. All have need to remember, however, that their efforts 
accomplish more than appears on the surface, and to remember 
well the apostle's words, that "Our labor is not in vain in the 
Lord," lest we should become weary or faint in our minds. Seeds 
of truth like natural seeds germinate out of our sight. It is only 
when the sprouts and fruitage appear, that we can appreciate, 
"what God hath wrought" by our feeble efforts. 

The additional office work connected with VOL. II., coupled 
with the fact that many of you would be busy reading it, and the 
lateness of the December TOWER, led us to make but one issue 
for January and February. It will count, however, as only one 
number. As twelve papers constitute a year's subscription, this 
change will be of no financial loss to any one. 

We bespeak for VOL. II. very careful study. Some have written 
us, that they have read VOL. I. three and four, and some even 



eight and ten times, with increasing interest and profit. We 
assure such, that in our opinion VOL. II. will require no less 
study. 

The knowledge that eternal torment is not the wages of sin, and 
that because of Christ's sacrifice all men must sooner or later 
come to a full knowledge of the truth and a full opportunity of 
everlasting life, may have tended to decrease the zeal of some in 
the great present work of preaching the gospel— especially where 
they have met with great opposition, before they had caught the 
spirit of the plan of the ages, or seen that present opposition is 
permitted to test, develop and discipline us, and to prove our 
love of and faithfulness to the truth. Relieved from the false 
strain of error and from unholy sectarian zeal and rivalry, some 
sink into a spiritual lethargy and may readily become swallowed 
up in the maelstrom of business, etc., with the majority, and lose 
the very spirit of the truth which set them free. God has provided 
"meat in due season" to give needed strength to his saints, to 
enable them to withstand this tendency of the present day rush 
and ambition, in the knowledge he provides of the hour in which 
we are living. The evidences which God gives us of the time in 
connection with the plan, tend to redouble our zeal in his 
service, showing us clearly that the time is short, in which we 
may make our calling and election sure, by faithfulness to the 
light given us. In a word, the realization, that the Time is at 
Hand-that we are even now in the "harvest" of the Gospel age, 
will not only quicken to double service, but also diminish the 
burden. As we realize that we are now in the eleventh hour, and 
that soon the rewards will be given, we may cheerfully lift up 
our heads and rejoice, knowing that our redemption draweth 
nigh. The day is probably not far distant, when opposition to the 
truth will be so intense, that the trial will be too great to be 
withstood by any not strengthened by a clear understanding of 
the times and seasons of God's Word. Be assured, that no part of 
the Scriptures were prepared for us in vain. Give this subject, 
then, not only careful reading, but more— careful study. 

One brother wrote that he staid up all the first night after the 
arrival of VOL. II. and read it through. This, as an evidence of 
interest, is excellent; but it is not the best way. A more excellent 
way would have been to read one chapter carefully and 
critically. Cramming is as unprofitable with spiritual as with 
natural food. To obtain the greatest nutriment and richest flavors 
from either kind of meat requires careful and thorough 
mastication. 

Many have written expressing the hope that VOL. II. will be 
published in the cheaper, paper, binding. And a line 

page 1 

from Brother Adamson says:— 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is late at night and I must go 
to work in the morning and yet must acknowledge with joy and 
thanks, MILLENNIAL DAWN VOL. H.-The Time is at Hand. 

I have read but a few chapters yet, but I am carried away with 
you and John the Revelator, to a very high mountain— the 
Kingdom of God established and blessing mankind through Him 
(Christ), to whom all the prophets bear witness. 

I do hope and partly believe, it will have a large circulation- 
many times what you expect. 

I have from the first assumed that we must have a cheap paper 
edition-many of them I hope. And now that you call for 
pledges, I am sure some will expect me to take one fifth of the 
5000 to be pledged, but I think it best to make it 500, or one 
tenth of the amount. I will see what others do— or leave room for 
them to do— and endeavor to do many times what I have 
promised before Vol. III. is ready. I expect, strange as it may 
seem, three classes to want Vol. I., because of having bought or 
seen Vol. II. 

1st, Those who buy from curiosity; 

2nd, All classes of Adventists; 

3d, The mass of the groaning creation -the world, awaiting 
deliverance and expecting it in some way. 

Received the December TOWER also- another bomb in the 
centre of the besieged N.C.-a good number. If I did not have 
full confidence in the justice and love of God in casting off both 
the stumbling houses, I would shudder at the length of apostasy 
and rejection to which they will go, or indeed have already gone 
as a mass. Wait awhile, before you call me "an enthusiast," 
because I say Vol. II. will in some cases sell Vol. I. But directed 
by the spirit we shall all do the very best thing to be done-all 
things considered. In Love, Faith, and Hope, fellowship and 
service, 

J. B. ADAMSON. 

Brother Rogers, who has been doing a great work with DAWN 
Vol. I., in paper covers, in Michigan, writes, that if a 35 cent 
edition is gotten out, he will with the Master's aid become 
responsible for the sale of 1000 copies during the present year. 
These and other similar expressions, 

R1089 : page 1 

with pledges for smaller quantities, seem to indicate that the 
desired number will come to hand, and the cheaper edition 
become a fact. We strongly advise and urge, however, that 
Volume I. be considered the book for all new readers; and that 
Vol. n. be loaned and sold only to those who have read Vol. I. 
carefully. No one is really ready to know the time of the 



fulfillment of God's plans, but the consecrated; and they not 
until they first see clearly, what is to be fulfilled- in the plan. 

VOL. HI., the title of which will be "Thy Kingdom Come," is in 
course of preparation, as we have opportunity. You will need to 
have a clear understanding of Vol. II., before you will be ready 
for the next, which will be a continuation of the same subject. 
Therefore give diligence to make its arguments and proofs your 
own, by tracing every statement to its source— God's Word. 



R1090 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

THE CAUSE IN AFRICA. 

The following information on Missions is furnished by the 
Church Missionary Intelligencer: - 

"Forty additional missionaries bound for Eastern Equatorial 
Africa received their final dismissal in the Cathedral of Algiers, 
Africa. Cardinal Lavigene presided in person, and, after the 
usual addresses, each missionary knelt down at his Eminence's 
feet, and received the kiss of peace and Episcopal benediction. 
After this the missionaries took their position in front of the 
altar, and stood in a row. The Cardinal, the bishops present, and 
all the clergy and seminary students then knelt down and 
humbly kissed the feet of each missionary, in memory of the 
passage of the Scriptures, 'How beautiful are the feet of those 
who bring good tidings.' [A miserable exegesis. -Editor.] 

"Some ardent Protestants may see in all this nothing but 
opposition to Protestant missions, and a determination 'to fight a 
hand-to-hand battle with Protestant missionaries of all 
denominations.' But we think there need be no apprehensions of 
this sort, because even if there were any likelihood of an 
ecclesiastical fight between these good people, Bishop Taylor, 
the Methodist, is already on the ground with a large band of 
missionaries, and expects to establish a line of missions in the 
opposite direction, from the western to the eastern coast, across 
the continent. 

"Fortunately, as it would appear, there can be no such hand-to- 
hand battle with any of our Protestant missionaries, for Cardinal 
Lavigene informed the writer in the Intelligencer, as far back as 
1882, that his orders were that no Roman Catholic establishment 
was to be fixed within sixty kilometers of a Protestant one, and 
it seems that, up to this moment, this rule is still enforced. " 

Thus we see, that Protestants and Roman Catholics are 
recognizing each other in a practical manner; each thus 
recognizes the other as a good and proper teacher of religion; 



and each leaves the other in quiet possession of whatever part of 
the field it may enter upon first. How evident it is, that 
Protestants have lost sight of those doctrines, to which the 
"unchangeable" church was once so opposed, that she 
anathematized as heretics all such and burned many of them at 
the stake. She now calls these "separated brethren"-no longer 
separated much in doctrine, but chiefly now in name and forms. 
She waits to welcome them back to her communion, well 
pleased to hear some of their representative ministers declaring, 
"Every doctrine which we hold dear we received from Rome, 
our Mother." 

But now note the difference: While all denominations can and 
do respect each other's views, what is their attitude toward the 
free, unsectarian teachings of 

R1090 : page 2 

God's Word as presented in Zion's Watch Tower publications, 
without fear or favor except toward God? As the apostle foretold 
(2 Tim. 4:3), They cannot endure sound doctrine; though they 
are willing to make any sort of combination and union to oppose 
the truth. An illustration of this is furnished by recent reports 
from Liberia, on the West Coast of Africa, -the very land in 
which Protestants and Catholics, we are told above, so 
harmoniously co-operate. 

It is now about two years since Brother Seaton, under the Lord's 
providence, by some means unknown to us, receiving some of 
the Watch Tower publications, was led out of sectarian darkness 
into the Bible light. Too noble to attempt to preach covertly the 
Bible doctrines, while under pay to preach for an "ism," the 
doctrines of men, and anxious for the spread of the "good tidings 
of great joy," as well as for the great reward in heaven for those 
who suffer in its service, Bro. Seaton boldly renounced his 
pulpit, salary, etc., and explaining his reasons to his flock began 
to teach and preach the Bible only. As a result of his labors quite 
a number-natives and foreigners- received the truth and are 
rejoicing in it. 

The interest may be judged from the fact that upwards of two 
hundred copies of DAWN VOL. I. and thousands of copies of 
the Arp Tract have gone to two of these mission stations, and we 
now have over fifty regular subscribers to the Watch Tower 
there. 

As might be expected the Episcopal bishop there, Bp. Ferguson, 
was highly incensed against the Bible teacher and teachings 
which led men more directly to the fountain of truth-the Bible- 
and consequently exposed some of the absurdities, pretensions 
and false doctrines of sectarians. Forthwith the bishop formed a 
union of all the denominations represented there-Episcopalian, 
Methodists and Baptists, -to withstand the unsectarian Bible 
Teachings of Bro. Seaton and the TOWER. 



A meeting was held in the Baptist church, in which ministers 
and officers of five churches (three Episcopalian, one Baptist 
and one Methodist) were present to the number of forty-four. 
Here resolutions were passed unanimously, by men who 
probably had never read Millennial Dawn, denouncing it and the 
Watch Tower and the Arp Tracts, as the doctrines of Satan; and 
requesting the prayers of all Christians that the Lord would 
deliver them from their false teachings. A four paged tract 
embodying these resolutions and warnings, and bearing the 
signatures of the aforesaid forty-four ministers and officers was 
printed and scattered; a copy of which is before us. 

Truly, it is wonderful, how Satan does blindfold some of the 
Lord's children; for we have no doubt, that some of these are the 
Lord's, and that if prejudice could be removed long enough for 
them to get a glimpse of the questions really involved, some 
would gladly receive the truth. This union of all the sects against 
the truth reminds one of the union of the Pharisees, Sadducees, 
etc., against the truth in the early church. It reminds us too of the 
prophet's words, "Why do the heathen rage and the people 
imagine a vain thing. The mighty ones of the earth and the rulers 
set themselves in opposition to the Lord and his anointed. " 

Peter said to the Jews, who had crucified the Lord, "I wot that in 
ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers;" and our Lord 
declared of the same, "They know not what they do. " So 
ignorance, blindness, is still the real cause of most of the 
opposition to the truth. The time will come when those who now 
despitefully use and persecute the truth, and its advocates, will 
be brought to a knowledge of the truth, and be ashamed. Thank 
God there is forgiveness for such ignorant opposition to his 
Word. Ere long the mornlight of the grand new day will enable 
all to discern truth from error. Bro. Seaton's last letter tells that 
already prejudice is giving way to some extent. The church there 
requests your prayers and sympathy. 



R1090 : page 2 

ORIGIN OF SUPERSTITION. 

Archbishop Trench calls words, "the indestructible vesture of 
thought." 

The original thought may have become corrupt, obscured, or 
obsolete; but the word remains "indestructible, " and by it we 
may recover the thought. Superstition is such a word. It 
originally meant something standing over or above— something 
that remains or has taken the place of something else. It is, 
therefore, akin to supersede and superimposed. So the tree 
stands over or above the root of which it has grown; so other 
subsequent cities have stood over and buried out of sight the 



genuine Homeric Troy. But as the something to which the word 
refers is always false or delusive in distinction from the true, so, 
(we may say) does the fungus "stand over" the fallen and 
decayed tree in whose substance it is rooted. Nature and the 
world, like wheat and the corn field as well as religion, are full 
of such false parasitic outgrowths, bred from the decay of higher 
organisms which only exist in lower and degraded forms- 
superstition. 

The word superstition, thus gives us an important thought, of 
which it is the "indestructible vesture." Something previous, and 
in a purer and better form, was before superstition. What was it? 
A comparative history of the oldest religions, such as those of 
Egypt and Persia and India and China, surprises us with many 
likenesses to the Bible faith. Trench has beautifully illustrated 
this idea in his Hulsean lectures, "The Unconscious Prophecies 
of Heathendom, " under such headings as these: "The 
Vanquisher of Hades," "The Son of God," "The Perfect 
Sacrifice," "The Redeemer From Sin," etc. These things were in 
the oldest religions, anticipations of the true and obscured by 
myth and superstition; but how did they get there? The idea of a 
suffering God was not unfamiliar to the Eastern mythologies — 
one who, like the Egyptian Osiris, also descended into Hades 
and there judged the dead righteously. And in their worship 
these religions were all originally monotheistic. The inference 
is, of course, the one suggested by the word superstition. It is an 
independent peep into the Eastern world, far up under the dawn. 
Outside the Jewish nation and uninfluenced by it, before 
Abraham's day, before the evolution of superstition, there was 
among the scattered nations a purer religion, and one received, 
apparently, from the same general reservoir of truth. Nor, if 
Moses was inspired to record for us the true history, need this 
surprise us. And Christ must in some way be got rid of, before 
skeptics can get rid of "Moses and the prophets." According to 
the Mosaic chronology Abraham was fifty-eight years old when 
Noah died: he lived to be one hundred and 

R1091 : page 2 

seventy-five, and even then died thirty-five years before Shem! 
Up to that time these two patriarchs of the flood were living 
somewhere among those Eastern nations. They are not 
mentioned, nor any of the nations except Egypt, because they no 
longer touched the onward historic stream. But, at the dispersion 
of Babel, some two hundred years before Abraham's birth, these 
two must have gone with some of the descendants, carrying with 
them, as they had already made known, the true religion, and 
something of the earlier civilization. 

This fact of an earlier religion, however soon and widely it may 
have become corrupted, explains some things which the brevity 
of Scripture has left obscure. When Abraham, himself a 
monotheist from the Euphrates in the East, was in the vale of the 



Jordan in the far West, there came to him and blest him, 
Melchizedec, "Priest of the Most High God; " whilst not far off 
there was Abimelech and his people, with whom still dwelt "the 
fear of the Lord." This in Canaan itself, and in the very 
neighborhood of Sodom! But from beyond that same distant 
Euphrates, 470 years later than Abraham's time, came Balaam to 
confront Moses and Israel; a man who worshipped the same 
God with Moses, and by the same name: "I cannot go beyond 
the word of Jehovah, my God;" the man who, when the king of 
Moab, in his terrible extremity, proposed to "sacrifice his first 
born," uttered those sublime words, recorded only by Micah: 
"Jehovah hath showed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth 
the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and 
to walk humbly with thy God!" "Hath showed thee" -where, 
how, in what early record known to both Balaam and the king as 
the word of the "Lord?" Moreover, of this Balaam from the far 
Euphrates it is said, that he "knew the knowledge of the Most 
High"-the very word used for God by Abraham and 
Melchizedec in the valley of the Jordan. Except once in 
Deuteronomy, we do not meet it again till the history gets back 
to the Euphrates, to Daniel, to the Chaldeans, to 
Nebuchadnezzar the Assyrian, and to Cyrus the Persian. They 
all use it, as evidently the earliest and the descended term for the 
one God. It brought Cyrus, as belonging to a common 
monotheistic worship, into sympathy with the Jews. It is known 
to-day among the mountains of Tibet; and in the form of Shang- 
Ti, is the one missionaries in China have adopted to express the 
idea of God. 

This word (in its different forms), Most High, the Highest, the 
Lord God of Heaven, is, indeed, itself pregnant with thought. It 
indicates a process of thought and a conviction in the earliest 
men as they looked up to heaven; a conviction of a One God 
who was above all in power and glory, and to be worshipped. It 
was a source of conviction independent of any other source of 
knowledge, as, for instance, Noah and Shem; and how strongly 
it impressed them is crystallized in the word they used and 
handed down to indicate God. David felt precisely the same 
when he exclaimed: "The heavens declare the glory of God, and 
the firmament showeth his handiwork. " And this has an intimate 
bearing upon some present discussions about the heathen. Paul 
declared them "without excuse." Why, upon what ground? Upon 
the ground that "the invisible things of him from the creation of 
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that 
are made. " Their lapses into idolatry and superstition, with the 
consequences, were purely willful-they "did not like to retain 
God in their knowledge. " Up the stream of universal history 
there was that knowledge, "clearly" to be derived, in all ages, 
from the same overspreading testimony, the heavens. The power 
of that testimony and its effect upon the earlier men, lives in 



many languages, in that "indestructible" word, the Most High 
God. --A. G. Vermilye. 

REMARKS BY THE EDITOR. 

The above observations are valuable, considered in connection 
with Paul's inspired account of how ignorance and superstition 
came to be so wide-spread throughout the world, as detailed in 
Romans 1:18 to 3:23. Deplorable and dense as the ignorance and 
superstition of the world is, it is well that all should see that it is 
not the fault of God, that it is not because God made men 
degraded and vile. It is necessary that this be fully recognized as 
an offset to the growing idea that God did a very imperfect work 
in the creation of man, and that present progress from darkness 
and superstition, to light and reason and civilization, is merely 
human development— evolution. 

Be it noted, that the Scriptures everywhere give one harmonious 
account of the origin and cause of evil and ignorance in the 
world, and show that God is not guilty; they tell that "God hath 
made men upright but they have sought out many inventions" 
(Eccl. 7:29); and that it was when and because man was not 
desirous of retaining a knowledge of God in his heart that God 
gave them over to a reprobate mind. (Rom. 1:28.) Thus sin, 
which entered at Eden (Rom. 5:12), manifested its tendency to 
be continually downward, except as God introduced "the salt of 
the earth" (those exercised by his truth- led of his spirit) whose 
influence has been to keep the social mass from utter corruption. 
Thank God for the blessed assurances of his word, that though 
the world has been thus left largely to its own course, that both 
angels and men may see the real tendencies of sin, yet, that 
when this severe lesson has been well illustrated and deeply 
impressed, then He will through his anointed ones, Christ Jesus 
and his Bride the overcoming church, arrest the sway of 
ignorance, and sin, and superstition, and cause the knowledge of 
the Lord and his perfect plans to fill the earth. Thank God that 
his promised kingdom (the glorified church "a royal priesthood" 
—rulers and teachers) shall re-establish righteousness and give to 
the billions of earth (who, as inheritors of sin and weakness, 
have never known or been able to appreciate righteousness, 
purity, and their attendant joys), an opportunity to taste and see 
that the Lord is gracious and that wisdom's righteous ways are 
ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. 

When thus the right is known, and its results appreciated, all will 
be permitted to choose good or evil, right or wrong, 
righteousness or sin, obedience or disobedience to God; and 
according to their choice, they shall receive their final and 
lasting reward; according as it is written, "The wages of sin is 
death [extinction, the withdrawal of all life], but the gift of God 
is eternal life through Jesus Christ, " to as many as truly accept 
of him as their Lord and Master. 



R1091 : page 3 



ALL THINGS NEW. 

The world is old with centuries, 
But not for these she bows her head; 
Close to her heart the sorrow lies, 
She holds so many dead! 

Sad discords mingle in her song, 
Tears fall upon her with the dew, 
The whole creation groans— How long 
Ere all shall be made new? 

Yet brightly on her smiles the sun, 
A bounteous heaven delights to bless; 
Oh, what shall be that fairer one, 
Wherein dwells righteousness? 

Oh, happy world! Oh, holy time! 

When wrong shall die, and strife will cease, 

And all the bells of heaven chime 

With melodies of peace. 

No place shall be in that new earth 
For all that blights this universe; 
No evil taint the second birth, 
'There shall be no more curse.' 

Ye broken hearted, cease your moan; 
The day of promise dawns for you; 
For He who sits upon the throne 
Says, 'I make all things new.' 

We mourn the dead, but they shall wake! 
The lost, but they shall be restored! 
Oh, well our human hearts might break 
Without that sacred word! 

Dim eyes look up, sad hearts rejoice, 
Seeing God's bow of promise through, 
At sound of that prophetic voice: 
'I will make all things new.'" 



R1091 : page 3 



THE DESIRE OF ALL NATIONS. 

"We know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in 
pain together until now,. ..for the earnest expectation of the 
creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God." "And 
the Desire of all nations shall come. "-Rom. 8:19,22; Hag. 2:7. 



Thus the apostle and the prophet refer to the woes of earth and 
the great remedy which God has provided, and which is soon to 
be applied. None, experienced in life or acquainted with history, 
will dispute the correctness of the apostle's statement. And the 
declaration of the prophet, that God will eventually establish a 
reign of righteousness in the earth which, when realized, will 
indeed be the desire of all nations, is borne out by the testimony 
of every prophet and apostle (Acts 3:19-21), and cannot, 
therefore, be disputed by any who acknowledge the inspiration 
of the Bible. 

The cause of all creation's groaning and pain is sin; for all the 
moral as well as the physical degradation which directly or 
indirectly causes the pain and groaning of humanity, is part of 
the wages of sin. Humanity is thus under a blight and suffers 
both individually and as a whole. Its own imperfect and often 
unjust governments, as well as its aches and pains of body and 
mind, are the natural consequences of its imperfect, fallen 
condition. And though men can do something toward general 
improvement, their efforts are at best, but feeble and spasmodic; 
they are utterly incapable of releasing themselves from their 
difficulties. Their varying success, but on the whole futile efforts 
for the past six thousand years, prove this conclusively. 

They have never yet, in all the centuries they have had for 
experiment, succeeded in establishing a perfect government; nor 
have they silenced the groans and wiped away the tears of the 
race, or lifted it up physically, or mentally, or morally, to the 
image of God in which they were created, as represented in 
Adam. Diseases of every description still prey upon them 
physically. There are still burning fevers, wasting ulcers, 
frightful cancers, 

R1092 : page 3 

loathsome skin and poisonous blood diseases; and there are 
sightless eyes, deaf ears, dumb tongues, broken backs and limbs, 
and other physical disorders and deformities. Mentally, their 
condition is still worse: some are crazed; others are partially so; 
and in all the race not one is perfectly balanced. Morally, their 
condition is no less deplorable; selfishness, and greed, and pride, 
and love of display, and hatred, and malice, and evil speaking, 
and deceit, and envy, and contention, and war, and bloodshed, 
wring agonizing groans from the lips of millions; and desolate 
widows, and helpless orphans, and broken-hearted mothers, and 
grief-stricken fathers, and disappointed friends still weep over 
the graves of buried hopes and fond ambitions. 

Truly, it is a groaning creation still; and yet, as the apostle 
suggests, they are not hopeless; they are waiting for something, 
they know not exactly what— a panacea for sickness and pain 
and sorrow and death, and a just and righteous government, 
which will lift up the poorest and meanest from the mire of 



ignorance and squalor, to comfort and happiness and a share of 
life's luxuries. They are looking forward to "a good time 
coming," "a golden age," of which even heathen poets and 
philosophers have dreamed in glowing terms. And some, 
catching a strain from the divine inspiration, though unconscious 
of how it will be brought about, sing of a blessed millennium- 

When man to man united, 
And every wrong thing righted, 
The whole world shall be lighted, 
As Eden was of old. 

But what heathen poets and philosophers, and all mankind have 
longed and vaguely hoped for,— but have proved themselves 
utterly incapable of bringing about, with all their state-craft and 
priest-craft, and multiplied religious ceremonies and forms of 
godliness without the power,- God, through his prophets, has 
clearly and definitely foretold, will come. And further, he has 
shown exactly, how it is to be brought about,— that it is to come 
to pass through the agency of the Lord Jesus Christ, the 
messenger of Jehovah, who nearly nineteen centuries ago 
redeemed the world, giving his life as the ransom-price for the 
life of the world; and who will shortly set up his Millennial 
kingdom and establish his authority over the redeemed world. 
He will not oppress the people and exalt himself, as human 
rulers generally do; but will "bless all the families of the earth" 
through a wise and righteous administration. Having "tasted 
death for every man," and thus secured the right to give 
everlasting life to all who shall prove themselves worthy of it, 
the object of his Millennial reign will be to so instruct, train and 
discipline men, as to enable them to become worthy of lasting 
life, on the original conditions-perfection and obedience. To 
this end, he will first "rule with a rod of iron" (Psa. 2:9) -with 
power and force, causing in the overthrow of present imperfect, 
selfish, proud and unjust systems, "a time of trouble such as 
never was since there was a nation" (Dan. 12:1); and then he 
will "fill the earth with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, 
as the waters cover the sea." (Hab. 2:14.) He will restrain and 
humble the wicked and selfish, and bless and lift up the humble 
and those seeking righteousness (Zeph 2:3; Matt. 5:5); finally 
making an end of sin and all its train of evils, by destroying 
(finally and forever) all who then, with full knowledge and 
appreciation, still love sin; and by bestowing upon all who shall 
then love righteousness "the gift of God," everlasting life.-Rom. 
6:23. 

OBSTACLES TO FAITH IN 
CHRIST'S MILLENNIAL KINGDOM. 

All this would seem reasonable to thinking people but for two 
reasons. One is, that another, and an unscriptural view has for 
centuries predominated, and the people have been instructed 



from infancy in that direction. The second reason is, that so long 
a period has elapsed, before the establishment of this kingdom 
as the remedy for sin and its disorders. Yet so convinced are 
people of the propriety of such a divine rulership, that regardless 
of facts and Scripture, some claim that Christ is reigning over 
and ruling the world now. And yet, if posted in the world's 
history, and candid, all must admit that it has been a 
monstrously bad rule; and all might well pray that it be 
discontinued. Humanity, if given the entire control, certainly 
would not do much worse than has been done in the way of 
misgovernment. 

As we look backward our hearts are sickened with the injustice, 
misery and oppression we behold. If this be God's kingdom and 
ruling, let it end; it is far from what sane people want. But it is 
not God's kingdom. On the contrary, as the Scriptures declare, it 
is the dominion and ruling of Satan, "the prince of this world" 
(John 14:30), and will cease with the introduction of Christ's 
Millennial Kingdom, for which his servants have long prayed, as 
some still do, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as 
it is done in heaven. " 

People naturally wonder that God has not long since exerted his 
great power (his kingdom power and authority) to suppress sin, 
and to lift mankind out of its present state of ignorance, 
superstition, groveling depravity, disease and death. But since 
six thousand years have passed without such an interposition, 
they reason that God's future dealings should be judged of by 
the past. And hence they think, we cannot expect such a rule or 
kingdom in the future, believing that all things must continue as 
they now are and have been from the foundation of the world. —2 
Pet. 3:4. 

But what reply can be made to this objection? We answer: It can 
be shown that the Scriptures teach that God not only has 
promised such a kingdom for the purpose of blessing the world, 
but that he also foretold the long period intervening, in which 
evil has been permitted. And they show good and sufficient 
reasons for the six thousand years' delay. This, clearly seen, 
should remove every obstacle to faith in the promised Millennial 
kingdom. Yet, in examining the reasons for the delay of the 
reign of righteousness, let us not forget that it is only as 
measured by the shortness of present life that six thousand years 
seems very long. With God, "a thousand years are but as 
yesterday. "-Psa. 90:4. 

WHY THE LONG DELA Y. 

The long delay and its purposes are clearly marked in the 
Scriptures. Over four thousand years after the first promise of 
deliverance, the redemption was accomplished; and nearly two 
thousand more fill the measure of the Gospel age for the 
selection and development of the Gospel church to be the bride 



of Christ and joint-heir with him of the coming Millennial 
kingdom; while the long six thousand years were designed to 
give the race a necessary experience with the dreadful effects of 
sin, its exceeding sinfulness, and the firmness of that justice 
which will by no means clear the guilty violators of God's just 
and holy law— an experience which will be of inestimable value 
to all, for all eternity. By contrast, it will lead to such an 
appreciation of righteousness, during Christ's Millennial reign, 
as to make it, when realized, what the prophet predicted— "The 
desire of all nations." 

The delay, from the time of the redemption to the Millennial 
age, while it served this purpose to the world, served also a 
further purpose— the development of the Gospel Church, a "little 
flock" of believers in and followers of Christ, sharers of his 
reproach in the present time, and thus selected to share his 
Millennial work and glory,-to reign with him as joint-heirs of 
the long promised Kingdom of God for the blessing of all the 
famiHes of the earth. -Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:16,29. 

The selection of this company, as individuals, has been in 
process during the entire Gospel age now closing, though as a 
class they were foreknown from the foundation of the world. 
(Eph. 1:4.) That is, God predetermined to exalt to this kingdom 
honor and restitution work a certain class, each of whom should 
meet certain predetermined conditions; and the Gospel age of 
nearly two thousand years was appointed as the time for 
developing, testing and selecting the individuals who should 
compose that class. The election of these individuals is not 
arbitrary, but according to fitness; the qualifications being, first, 
justification by faith in Christ; then meekness and devotedness 
to God's service, at the cost of self-sacrifice. 

Many (justified believers) were "called" or invited to share these 
kingdom honors, but only the above mentioned, a faithful few, 
will be selected or chosen; the majority even of professed 
Christians, we are informed, will fail to make their calling and 
election sure; and hence will fail to share those kingdom glories 
as joint-heirs with Christ their Lord-though with the world they 
will be blessed and disciplined under this kingdom. During the 
Millennial age, Christ's power will be exercised to prevent 
deceptions, to clear away ignorance, to strengthen the weak and 
lead and restore to sight those now blinded by the god of this 
world. (2 Cor. 4:4.) A thousand enticements to sin, which appeal 
specially to the depraved appetites of the fallen race now, will 
not be tolerated, when the new, heavenly rule is established. But 
the Gospel church— the kingdom class— is called and tested 
during this age, while evil is permitted to hold sway, in order 
that their testing may be like that of gold tried in the fire. This 
company will be complete when the present age ends, and the 
control of earth will then be entrusted to them, under and in co- 



operation with the Lord Jesus, then the King of kings. — 1 Cor. 
6:2. 



LOOKING FOR THE KINGDOM OF GOD. 

No student of the Bible can have overlooked the fact that the 
constant theme 

R1093 : page 3 

of our Lord and his apostles was the coming Kingdom of God. 
The Jewish people, as a nation, had for centuries expected 
Messiah's coming, to be the ruler of the world; and they 
naturally expected that as he was to come out of their nation, 
they would be his soldiers, co-workers, and joint-heirs in that 
kingdom. They knew themselves to be the natural seed of 
Abraham, and inferred that they were indispensable to God's 
plan. They saw not, that spiritual children of God, of the faith 
and loyalty of Abraham, were meant by the promise. 

But the real greatness of the promised kingdom and its work of 
blessing were not appreciated by Israel: they expected a 
kingdom similar to the kingdoms of this world; that Messiah, as 
a fleshly being of the seed of Abraham, would establish his 
kingdom at Jerusalem, and that his glory would be the earthly 
glory of purple 

R1093 : page 4 

and fine linen and gold and silver and the usual accompaniments 
of earthly royalty. And their pride and ambition longed for the 
time when this promised king should exalt himself above the 
Caesars, and them above all the nations of the earth. Hence their 
rejection of him who came humbly, born in a manger, with no 
assumptions of titles, or earthly honors, or influence, or even 
friends; and yet he came proclaiming the kingdom of heaven at 
hand and himself the promised king. 

So thoroughly impressed upon the Jewish mind, was the 
thought, that Messiah's coming meant the establishment of a 
kingdom of righteousness, that several times the "common 
people" would have taken Christ by force to make him king; but 
he withdrew, that their ardor might cool, knowing that they who 
shouted "Hosanna to the Son [and heir] of David" were not the 
class whom the Father designed should be the joint-heirs with 
him of that kingdom. He knew too, that the Father's time for his 
exaltation to power had not yet come, and that first he must die 
to purchase those whom he was to afterward reign over,— to 
whom he might therefore restore the original blessings and 
favors lost for all through Adam's failure. -Rom. 5:12-19. 

Like others, the twelve apostles held this hope of the kingdom, 
and believed Christ to be the promised Messiah, or King of 
kings. And our Lord Jesus, so far from ever contradicting their 
ideas, always encouraged them, and told them that they should 



yet sit with him in his throne. But, he explained that "first he 
must suffer many things and be rejected of this generation" 
[people]. To the same class he explained that, as it had been 
written in the prophets, -"thus it behooved Christ to suffer and 
to rise from the dead;" and said to them: "O, slow of heart to 
believe all that the prophets have spoken; was it not needful for 
Messiah to suffer these very things and to enter into his 
[kingdom] glory?" 

One of our Lord's parables, given just before his crucifixion, 
was for the very purpose of teaching them that the expected 
kingdom would be deferred until his second coming. It is 
introduced thus: "And he spoke this parable unto them because 
they were near to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the 
Kingdom of God would be manifested immediately. " (Luke 
19:1 1-27.) That parable represents the Gospel age as the period 
in which Christ, "the Nobleman," went "into a far country" 
(heaven), to receive for himself a kingdom— to be invested with 
authority. The parable also shows that during the absence of the 
Nobleman, the opponents of his rule are in the majority and hold 
sway; they even declare that they do not desire him to come and 
establish his kingdom, preferring to be let alone as they are- 
"They sent an embassage after him, saying, 'We do not desire 
this man's rule."' 

The parable shows, too, the proper attitude of those who love the 
Nobleman. Obedient to his command, "Occupy till I come!" 
they are to use their various talents to forward the interests of his 
coming kingdom. And finally, the parable shows that the 
Nobleman will surely return with full power, and how he will 
use it, to reward those faithful to him with a share in the 
kingdom, and to destroy all opposed to his rule of righteousness. 
Thank God, there is good reason to believe that many now 
enemies to the King of kings will not be such, when present 
misconceptions are cured by the increased knowledge of the 
King's character, plan and kingdom, then to be afforded to all. 

A SCRAP OF HISTORY. THE BEGINNING OF 
PRESENT, SO CALLED CHRISTIAN KINGDOMS. 

During the first century of its existence the church held firmly 
to the Apostolic teaching and waited for the second coming of 
the Lord Jesus, and the establishment then of the long-promised 
kingdom of God and its rule of righteousness, by which triumph 
all overcoming Christians were to share with Christ. The period 
of that reign, it was generally understood would be a thousand 
years.-Rev. 20:2-4. 

Chamber's Encyclopaedia says, "In the first Century of the 
church, Millennarianism (the Greek equivalent of which, 
Chiliasm from chilioi, a thousand, is the term employed by the 
"fathers") was a widespread belief.. ..The unanimity which early 



Christian teachers exhibit in regard to Millennarianism, proves 
how strongly it had hold. " 

This was the period of the church's purity and fervor, before she 
left her first love. But, as time passed, and the expected Lord 
came not, the love of many waxed cold and their hopes turned in 
other directions. Then, as Christianity became formalistic, 
Grecian philosophers came into the church, and the doctrines of 
Christ became blended with heathen mythologies, producing the 
great apostasy, or falling away from the true faith, foretold. (2 
Thes. 2:3.) Nevertheless, there was always a faithful, though 
small minority, which clung to the truth; for the Lord has never 
left his truth without witnesses. 

It was at this time, that the degenerated Christian system 
conceived the view commonly held since, that the Church was 
to establish Christ's Kingdom upon the earth, without waiting 
for the Young Nobleman's return, and that Christ would come 
after the Millennial reign of the Church had ended-to approve 
her work. This is styled the post-millennarian view of the Lord's 
coming. This view introduced into the nominal church an 
aggressive political policy; and thenceforth the Church sought 
influence with the civil power,— and that successfully, though to 
her injury and apostasy. It was not long until Christianity was 
recognized by Constantine, the Roman emperor. Soon, from 
among several aspiring chiefs, or bishops, the bishop of the city 
of Rome rose to prominence and influence in religious matters, 
and finally to influence in the empire. In 534 A.D. the emperor 
of Rome, Justinian, recognized the Bishop of Rome as chief 
bishop, or POPE-the head of the religious affairs of the Roman 
empire, which for centuries had ruled the world. 

This great success, though accomplished by cunning, trickery 
and scheming political intrigue, wholly foreign to the spirit of 
true Christianity, and in opposition to the express counsel of the 
Lord and the apostles (Matt. 20:25-28; 23:8-12 and 1 Pet. 5:3), 
was hailed as the beginning of the establishment of Christ's 
kingdom in power. By this time, be it remembered, the nominal 
church numbered millions who were Christians in name merely, 
and totally ignorant of the doctrines of Christ; for the clergy had 
gradually lowered the true standard, amalgamated errors, and 
exalted themselves, to gain popularity and to draw the people, 
through fear and superstition, to their support. And when the 
imperial authority began to recognize the apostate church, and to 
concede its false claims, the unregenerate heathen millions 
rushed into her bosom, adding to her defilement their 
uncircumcised views and heathen superstitions. So fast did they 
come, that the original form for symbolizing consecration by 
immersion, was abandoned as no longer practicable, and the 
multitudes were sprinkled. 

But though nominal Christianity had now gained freedom from 
persecution, civil recognition, and finally religious jurisdiction 



as Papacy, her ambition, sustained by her post-millennial error, 
was far from satisfied. Scheming, plotting, etc., continued, under 
the theory that the end justifies the means, until the power, 
authority and crowns of the civil rulers of Europe, were 
subjected to the popes. The beginning of this temporal power 
was gradual, from A.D. 539, but it was fully established in A.D. 
800, when Charlemagne, king of France, was crowned by Pope 
Leo III., and accepted from him, and by his supposed divine 
authority, the title of Emperor of the West. There, really, what 
was afterward known as the "Holy Roman Empire," had its 
beginning. 

Thenceforth it was boldly claimed and generally admitted 
(except by the Lord's faithful few, who discerned the apostasy 
and waited for the establishment in righteousness of his true, 
promised kingdom) that the (nominal) church was God's 
kingdom in the world, and that the popes successively 
represented Christ as King of kings, while as his joint-heirs, 
cardinals and bishops filled the places promised to the 
overcomers. In support of these claims, the universal authority 
of the popes in matters both secular and religious was claimed 
and admitted; and kings and emperors representing the greatest 
nations of Europe and the world (even England and Germany) 
prostrated themselves at the feet of the pope, acknowledging 
him as King of kings. Every title which the Scriptures apply to 
the true Christ, and every prophecy describing his future 
kingdom and its glory has been applied by the popes to 
themselves and the kingdom thus introduced, which was none 
other than the kingdom of Antichrist, the counterfeit of the true, 
predicted by the prophets and apostles. (See 2 Thes. 2:3-7; Dan. 
7:25,26; Rev. 13:4-8.) The deception was so 

R1094 : page 4 

great and magnificent that all the nations of Europe were 
deceived; and as the Lord himself foretold, had it been possible, 
the very elect [faithful] would also have been deceived by it. 

But the inevitable came: the reverence and flattery of the people, 
the pride and power of the clergy, and especially of the higher 
dignitaries, gradually sunk the doctrines and practices so low as 
to excite the disgust and open the eyes of the honest and blinded 
souls connected with the system. It was nearly a century after 
the invention of printing, when men were beginning to think for 
themselves, that the public sale of indulgences by the authority 
of the pope for the purpose of raising money for the completion 
of St. Peter's Cathedral at Rome, and particularly by one John 
Tetzel, a Dominican monk of notorious character and shameless 
effrontery, that general indignation was aroused; and under the 
bold leadership of Luther, Zwingli, Carlstadt, Melanchthon, and 
others, a Reformation movement set in, which, though beset by 
many hindrances, thank God, is not yet extinct. It is progressing 
steadily toward the utter repudiation of priestcraft and the 



various superstitions and errors of the dark ages, back to the old 
landmarks of primitive simplicity and purity which 
characterized the apostolic church, both in life and doctrines. 

Luther, Knox, Melanchthon, Zwingli, Calvin, and others of their 
time, though still befogged by the errors of Antichrist, which for 
so many centuries held the world as under a mesmeric power, 
made remarkable progress out of the darkness toward the full, 
clear light. When all the circumstances of their time are realized, 
it cannot be denied that they were remarkable men, and that they 
not only took a courageous step, but a long one in the right 
direction. The trouble is that those who since have followed 
these leaders, have taken their names as sects, without having 
their spirit of reform. So far from continuing the reform 
movement, each party or sect set itself against all light, truth, 
and reformation in advance of what its leader had seen and 
advocated. Hence reform almost ceased with the reformers of 
the sixteenth century. What progress has since been made, has 
been in opposition, not only to Papacy, but to professed 
Protestants as well. 

But the course of the reformers was not a wholly 
uncompromising one. They soon saw that the masses of the 
people were so steeped in ignorance that they could not 
appreciate the Scriptural teaching that God is no respecter of 
persons; and that in his sight all men are free, and that king, 
peasant and slave are on a common footing before God. So long 
had people been taught that the pope and church dignitaries 
represented God, and must be obeyed as God; so long had they 
been taught that kings and princes, when crowned and 
commissioned by the pope, were God's appointed rulers, 
reigning by God's authority in matters civil, as the "clergy" by 
the same authority reigned as princes in matters religious; so 
long had they been taught that to deny or oppose such pope- 
sanctioned authority, was to deny and oppose God and his 
kingdom, that (under this ignorance and superstition) to have 
declared the whole truth, would have involved all Europe in 
anarchy and lawlessness. Stepping out of such deep slavery of 
mind and body, into full liberty, the masses were far from 
prepared to use it wisely. 

This, indeed, was the basis of the conflict between the early 
reformers. Zwingli in Switzerland, was a representative of some 
who took their stand for full liberty; he not only denied the 
authority of the pope to rule the church, but denied also his 
authority to appoint civil rulers in the name of God. He claimed 
for the people the right to elect their rulers, as we do in this great 
Republic. Here, Luther wavered for a time as to what course to 
pursue, when he saw that the reform, fully carried out, would 
not only take away the authority of the pope, but also the 
authority of all the princes and kings of earth appointed by him. 
While retired for ten months in Wartburg Castle under the 



hiding and protection of Elector Frederick, Luther reflected on 
the situation carefully; then he came forth to oppose Zwingli, 
Carlstadt and others under whose preaching the images in the 
churches were being dashed to pieces and the Mass abolished. 
His plea was moderation. He cooled the rising ardor of the 
Germans, and with Melanchthon turned the German 
Reformation into the channel which it finally took. The German 
princes on the one hand glad to be freed from their abject 
bondage to Papacy, and on the other hand glad to escape the 
growing tendency of teachings such as Zwingli's, recognized in 
the teaching of Luther and Melanchthon a way of escape from 
both, which would still preserve their powers, and even increase 
them. From policy, therefore, many of 

R1094 : page 5 

the German princes embraced the Lutheran cause, which 
prospered, while the yet more thorough reformers and their 
works went down. 

Why did not God forward the greater and purer views? it may be 
asked. Because it was not then due time, we answer. But slowly, 
after three centuries, thinking people will admit that Zwingli and 
Carlstadt were much nearer the truth, much more thorough 
teachers of reform than Luther. D'Aubigne (Hist. vol. 3. p. 243.) 
upon this subject, cautiously but forcibly remarks: 
"Notwithstanding his opposition to Papacy, Luther had a strong 
conservative instinct. Zwingli, on the contrary, was predisposed 
to radical reforms. Both these divergent tendencies were needed. 
If Luther and his followers had been alone in the work, it would 
have stopped short in its progress; and the principle of 
reformation would not have wrought its destined effect. " 

Luther, though he had denounced the Papacy as Antichrist, and 
declared that the popes had no right or authority whatever to rule 
the world in the name of Christ, was led by his course of 
moderation into doing the very thing he had condemned in 
Papacy. The princes who remained in harmony with Papacy, 
were forward to claim its sanction as the true basis of authority 
over the people; and, those who espoused Luther's side, of 
course looked to him who claimed to represent the true reformed 
Church, to pronounce in their favor-as the choice of the true 
church, and hence the divine choice. Having taken the stand he 
did, escape from the dilemma was impossible; and there was 
considerable truth in Luther's joke, when, later on, he called 
himself 

"THE GERMAN POPE. " 

Thus it came that Protestantism continued the very error which 
lay at the foundation of the great apostasy-the very error it 
started out to remedy. Instead of advocating freedom- 
government of and by the people-it arrayed itself on the side of 



these false kingdoms of God whose rulers were glad to have 
assistance in holding the control which Antichrist had given 
them over the people. They desired to hold forever, for 
themselves and their families, the fat positions already attained. 
Hence, the various governments of Europe are wedded to some 
religious system, which they support, and at the hands of whose 
officers, with religious pomp and ceremony, titles and offices 
are entered upon. No matter how villainous, or imbecile, or 
insane, or opposed to both the letter and spirit of God's Word, 
these announce their authority to perpetuate wrongs under the 
hypocritical mask (authorized first by Papacy, and since 
conceded by all Protestant sects)— king, or queen, or emperor, 
"by the grace of God. " 

Thus we find to-day, many so-called Christian kingdoms in the 
world, as well as many churches, though our Lord only 
established one church, which in due time was to be completed 
and glorified to constitute the one kingdom of God promised. In 
the light of God's Word, we must deny that kings and emperors 
now reign by the grace of God, or that God is in any degree, 
responsible for their misruling, though he predetermined to 
permit these various experiments at self-government for an 
appointed time- "until He come, whose right it is." (Ezek. 
21:27.) The facts of history corroborate the testimony of the 
Scriptures, that present governments are under the control of 
"the prince of this world." (John 14:30; Eph 2:2.) To deceive 
the people he assumes a garment of light, and authority is given 
not in his own name, but in the name of God, at the hands of the 
apostate church. —2 Cor. 11:14,15. 

How much of the spirit of Christ do they manifest? Hear louder 
and louder down the centuries the clash of arms, the thunder of 
artillery, the tread of mighty armies, and the groans of the dying, 
in the strife of these so-called kingdoms of God to annihilate 
each other; and remember, that at no period of the world's 
history were there ever, as to-day, armies numbering eleven 
millions of men, thoroughly equipped and trained, ready at a 
moment's call to rush to battle, armed with weapons of carnage a 
hundred fold more dreadful and destructive than were ever 
before known, which make them equal to a hundred millions in 
former times. 

Remember too, that these eleven millions must soon be called 
into action, if for no other reason than that the great expense of 
their maintenance is rapidly bankrupting these various kingdoms 
of Christ (?). Remember too, that when the tocsin of war shall 
sound, the various pulpits will support the various thrones with 
words of burning eloquence and prayers to God for help, each to 
consume the other. And with the army corps shall go chaplains, 
to cheer the dying soldiers of God's (?) kingdom; to assure each 
host that its cause is just, and that if they fall it is in support of 
the Lord's anointed representatives. 



Mark the oppression, and injustice, and tyranny, and misrule; 
and behold how giant evils are licensed to enslave and oppress 
mankind; and say not that these are Immanuel's kingdoms. 
Surely, 

R1095 : page 5 

they bear little resemblance to the character of that kingdom 
promised under the "Prince of Peace. " Verily, if these kingdoms 
of Europe are Christ's kingdoms, free America wants none of 
them. Away with Christ's kingdom, if such be its character; and 
welcome to this free soil the poor oppressed refugees from 
European "Christendom. " 

When Christ's kingdom has come, it will indeed be "the desire 
of all nations." It will be just what all men need. At first it will 
rule with a rod of iron dashing the now tottering kingdoms of 
this world in pieces like a potter's vessel (Psa. 2:9), breaking up 
every civil, social and religious system of tyranny and 
oppression, putting down all authority and power opposed to it, 
humbling the proud and high-minded, and finally teaching all 
the world to be still and know that the Lord's Anointed has taken 
the dominion. (Psa. 46:10.) Then the blessings of its peaceful 
reign will begin to be experienced. Truth and equity will be 
established on a sure and permanent footing; "justice will be laid 
to the line, and righteousness to the plummet" (Isa. 28:17), and 
the great restitution work will progress grandly to its glorious 
consummation.— There will be sweeping moral reforms, great 
educational and philanthropic enterprises, wonderful faith-cures 
from every disease and deformity, mental and physical. There 
will be awakenings also from death, and a grand re-organization 
of society under the new order of the Kingdom of God. And all 
the world's bitter experience during the six thousand years past 
will prove a valuable lesson, on the exceeding sinfulness of sin; 
helping them to appreciate the new rule of righteousness, and to 
live in everlasting conformity to the perfect will of God, and 
thus to accept God's gift of everlasting life, designed for all who 
will receive it on his conditions of love and loyalty and 
obedience to him. Then, "Whosoever will, let him take the water 
of life freely. "-Rev. 22:17. 

Such being the grand object of our Lord's return and the 
establishment of his kingdom, we believe with the prophet, that 
it will be "The desire of all nations;" and with the apostle that 
the earnest expectation of the creature longs, though ignorantly, 
for this coming revelation of the Sons of God-the overcoming 
Church exalted with their Lord. 



R1095 : page 5 



COMING FROM EAST AND WEST. 

"Many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down 
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. But 
the children of the kingdom shall be cast into outer darkness: 
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth."- Matt. 8:11,12. 

Israelites were "the children of the kingdom, " the natural seed 
of Abraham, to whom God had promised that Millennial 
kingdom whose power in all the earth shall, under divine 
arrangements, be instrumental in spreading truth and 
righteousness, and restraining evil, so that all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed. In the words above quoted, our Lord 
foretold the change of dispensation by which the natural seed of 
Abraham were cast into outer darkness— as outcasts from God's 
favor, and from the special light of prophecy which for eighteen 
hundred years had enlightened them and given them "much 
advantage every way" above the world in general. 

Those from the east and west who come and sit down with 
Abraham and the faithful of the past age, are faithful ones from 
among the Gentiles, called to be the bride and joint-heir of the 
true and only heir of all things-Christ Jesus. The Jews in 
general, and even the disciples, could not have digested meat so 
strong, as this, and hence our Master left this among other of his 
"dark sayings," unexplained; merely saying to his disciples, I 
have many things to tell you, but you cannot bear them now;— 
the spirit of truth shall guide you into all truth and bring to your 
remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you. The Jews 
resented sternly any suggestion, that any except their own elect 
nation could share the kingdom honors. Even when, after his 
resurrection, our Lord commissioned his disciples to go teach 
and baptize all nations (Matt. 28:19), they seemed to understand 
that he meant, -every Israelite scattered throughout all nations; 
and it was not for some years after that they learned, that the 
Gentiles were to be fellow-heirs of the same promises. — Eph. 
3:6. 

As during the Gospel age honest Gentiles heard the "call," and 
came out of darkness into marvelous light and great privilege, 
by accepting and following Christ, so the Jews, because of pride, 
rejected Christ; and during this age they have been left with the 
heathen world, in darkness, shut out from divine favor. There 
they have had trouble, distress, perplexity and persecution, well 
described by the metaphor "weeping and gnashing of teeth. " 

The elect Gentiles (chosen through sanctification of spirit, by a 
belief of the truth), are coming to the Kingdom; coming it is 
true, by a narrow thorny path of trial; but they are not downcast, 
"not in darkness;" because the light of the glory of God as it 
shines in the face of Jesus Christ hath shined into their hearts 
dispelling the darkness. Not with weeping and gnashing of teeth 
do they come; for though they suffer, it is as good soldiers — 



rejoicing in tribulations, and that they are counted worthy to 
suffer reproaches for the name of Christ. 

And now the coming ones have nearly all passed over the 
"narrow way:" a few more are to come by the same route, and 
then all shall sit down in the Kingdom, with Abraham and all the 
faithful of the natural seed of the natural Abraham,-as sharers in 
the joys of the Lord, and in the promised work of blessing all 
nations. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the faithful prophets, 
will share in that blessed employment as well as Christ Jesus 
and his bride,— "his body." But there are last which shall be first, 
and first which shall be last. Those first called will receive all 
that was promised them, and more doubtless than they ever 
appreciated or expected, when they obtain the earthly phase, or 
human department, of the Millennial Kingdom. But the Lord, 
the heir of all things, and his chosen faithful bride and co-heir, 
will inherit what Abraham and the prophets never knew of; that 
which was not even made known until the Gospel age (2 Tim. 
1:10), namely, the spiritual phase or department of the 
Kingdom; "God having provided some better thing for us [the 
"last" called-the Gospel church], that they [the "first" called, 
and all others] without us should not be made perfect. "-Heb. 
11:40. 



R1095 : page 5 



THE CHRIST LIFE. 



The expression has been made to me by a returned missionary, 
that in China and Japan they are getting to find the difference 
between Christians and the friends of Jesus. For a time they 
were deceived by the name Christian. Every sailor and foreign 
resident in these parts called himself a Christian, as 
distinguished from heathens. And so as the natives found many 
of these men so outrivaling heathen corruption, they became 
disgusted. They said if these drinking, blasphemous sailors and 
grasping merchants are Christians, we do not want Christianity. 
He told me that they were calling true Christians "Jesus' people, " 
and all the others were merely Christians. They meant that these 
were Christ's friends, and had his resemblance in person and 
character. This is the distinction I would bring before you- 
nominal Christianity and the Christ- life. There is all the 
difference between them that there is between a system of truth 
and a living person; all the difference there is between ideas and 
living, loving hearts. Christian is a name used by many, 
committed to certain principles. But the Christ-life is a living 
thing, and a divine thing. 

The first thought that comes up in connection with Christ is the 
thought of personality. The things we value in history are not the 
records of events, the geographical and historical information; 



but what they reveal of the men and women that have lived. 
That which makes a country great is not its lofty mountains and 
beautiful plains, its magnificent scenery and Eden-like climate; 
for many of the fairest scenes of earth may claim all this, and yet 
they are waste and desolate for want of men. That which makes 
a country great is glorious men and women, far more than things 
or events, resources or incomparable advantages. That is what 
we cherish in our annals, -not our art, poetry, traditions and 
memories, but our heroes. And, if we come down to the nearer 
realm of our own life, what do we value most? Not our houses 
and lands, our commerce and wealth, nor our earthly 
advantages. You would give everything on earth for one frail 
little life that others would not give a farthing for. There is more 
to you in one human heart, than in all the world. Your treasures 
are in your friends, those that have become in some sense your 
own. 

R1095 : page 6 

Personality, then, is the dearest and most precious thing in the 
world. And if this be so in secular and historical things, how 
easy it is to rise to the thought of personality in God. I am so 
glad He is revealed to us as a person and 

R1096 : page 6 

not a doctrine— a living being that we can touch somehow with 
the susceptibility of our spirit, that we can take in the arms of 
trust and love, that we can know in the depths of our 
consciousness, a good, and glorious, and divine reality, even 
more than any other individual. The other day in Minneapolis, a 
dear friend just recovering from that terrible snare of Christian 
Science, who had been under its power until her heart and spirit 
had been almost drawn away from Christ, "How strange, " she 
said, "that I never thought; they taught me that Christ was a 
principle. I have been trying to love a principle. I might as well 
try to love a grapevine on my wall as to love a principle. " And 
with gladness and joy she added, "O, it is a person, he is my 
blessed Saviour." Read the story of his life, and back of the 
events shines out most vividly the man Himself; alone the 
character so beautiful; alone that crystallization of all that was 
wise, and gentle and lovely, the living One, whom our 
consciousness can grasp and gather out of the story. Even 
infidelity has been compelled to say that the most remarkable 
thing in the Bible is the Christ,-the hardest to explain away. - 
Selected. 



R1096 : page 6 



POLITICS OF THE SAINTS. 

A Brother who has been growing in the truth for about a year 
encloses to us a copy of a letter sent by him to a friend, on the 
subject of politics. As it may interest others we publish it below: 

DEAR FRIEND:-Being desirous that you understand my 
position regarding politics, and my reasons for it, I have decided 
to write you at some length in the premises. 

I believe that Jesus is the Son of the Living God, that after his 
death He was raised up a Divine being, and that now "All power 
in heaven and on earth" has been given him. I further believe 
that all "who name the name of Christ" are invited to the high 
calling of following his footsteps on earth, and then being raised 
to the same nature he now has, and joining him in the 
establishment of a coming kingdom, "wherein dwelleth 
righteousness." I also believe that the coming of this Kingdom 
on earth is delayed for the purpose of selecting the "bride, the 
Lamb's wife," which will be the "Body" and he the "Head," in 
the holy temple which is being prepared for the habitation of 
God. (Eph. 2:21-22.) I do not believe that this kingdom has yet 
been established on earth. Its foundations are to be in "justice 
and righteousness," and "They shall not hurt nor destroy in all 
my holy mountain [government]; for the earth shall be full of the 
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. "— Isa. 1 1 :9. 

These conditions do not obtain now, and though this United 
States' government is undoubtedly the best on earth now, its 
machinery is generally used-in results-for the benefit of the 
comparatively few, and actual justice or equality is rarely, if 
ever realized. This is but a new demonstration of what every 
other human government has proven, and of what must continue 
to be until he, whose right it is, shall come and take the 
government to himself. -Ezek. 21:27; Rev. 11:17. 

Our Father has given repeated promises that this Kingdom shall 
be established on earth, and the Lord has joined in the assurance. 
God alone is capable of setting it up, and bringing humanity 
from its present blind, depraved condition, up to the standard 
where they can maintain it. It is specifically stated that this 
Kingdom will come "down from God out of heaven. " We, who 
are following Christ, are now considered members of this 
Kingdom, and when it is set up, will be God's agents in its work. 
A brief study of the subject has enabled me to present the 
following Scripture texts:- 

"For he [Abraham] looked for a city which hath foundations, 
whose maker and builder is God.... For they that say such things 
declare plainly that they seek a country, and truly if they had 
been mindful of the country from which they came out, they 
might have had opportunity to have returned; but now (as it is) 
they desire a better, that is, a heavenly [one from heaven]: 
Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God; for he 



hath prepared for them a city.. ..And these all having obtained a 
good report through faith received not the promise, God having 
prepared some better thing for us, that they without us should 
not be made perfect.... Let us go forth, therefore, unto him 
without the camp, bearing his reproach. For here we have no 
continuing city, but we seek one to come. ...For our conversation 
[country or polity] is in heaven from whence we look for the 
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change [transform] our 
vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, 
according to the working whereby he is able to even subdue all 
things unto himself.... Now, therefore, ye are no more strangers 
and foreigners, but fellow-citizens of the saints and of the 
household of God. "-Heb. 11:10- 14-15-16-.-39-40; 13:13-14; 
Phil. 3:20-21 and Eph 2:19. 

Thus finding "exceeding great and precious promises" for those 
who are "new creatures in Christ Jesus who walk not after the 
flesh, but after the spirit," it behooves us to "prove all things" in 
every matter, and "hold fast that which is good. " Our Lord prays 
that while we are in the world, we may not be "of the world." 
We are admonished by Paul to "be not conformed to [fashioned 
after] this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your 
mind, that ye may prove what is that good and acceptable and 
perfect will of God" (Rom. 12:27), and by John to "love not the 
world, neither the things that are in [of] the world. If any man 
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is 
in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and 
the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the 
world is passing away, and the lust thereof, but he that doeth the 
will of God abideth forever." (1 John 2:15,16,17.) Jesus himself 
says, "No man can serve two masters: For either he will hate the 
one and love the other; or else he will hold to the one and 
despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. " -Matt. 
11:24. 

Those who are not running in the Christian race are at full 
liberty, and doubtless in duty bound, to labor and study on the 
present political problems from human standpoints; but we who 
have consecrated our lives to God, and are striving to fulfill our 
vows, must be about our Father's work, and devote all the time 
we can honestly spare from the vocations necessary to enable us 
to "provide things honest in the sight of all men, " to the work 
and study that will enable us to be "vessels unto honor, 
sanctified and meet for the Master's use, and prepared unto 
every good work."— 2 Tim. 2:21. 

The blind and deaf leaders in the world are thus left to do their 
best, and if all "fall into the ditch," it will be but to fully 
demonstrate their inability to accomplish what God says he 
alone can do, and prepare them in due time to accept from God 
his free and gracious gift. In the "Regeneration [a literal 
translation of "Regeneration" is "New Birth Day." How 



significant!], when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his 
glory" (Matt. 19:28), and the instruments the "Potter" is now 
preparing, (who are a "peculiar people zealous of good works,") 
shall be elevated to the Divine Nature (2 Pet. 1:4), the time will 
be ripe for the founding of this wondrous and longed for 
Kingdom. Until then, we must "make straight paths for our feet, 
lest that which is lame be turned out of the way."— Heb. 12:14. 

By going into politics never so little, we enter one of the very 
"crookedest paths" the enemy has presented to this generation, 
and are liable to become "lame" or "turned to one side," before 
we are able to realize it. 

However much these views may impress you as either truthful 
or Scriptural, you can readily see that, as they are mine, I cannot 
honestly do other than voice them, and take neutral ground, 
standing to one side, and waiting for the manifestation of the 
glory of God. 

Very truly your friend, 

W. E. P. 



R1096 : page 6 

AS BECOMETH WOMEN 
PROFESSING GODLINESS. 

NO. 3. 

CHRISTIAN WOMEN AS MOTHERS. 

Since a large proportion of those called to be saints are already 
charged with the care of families; and since God does in no 
sense release them from those cares and responsibilities, it 
behooves such to carefully study how they may best fulfill them 
according to the divine directions. 

In searching the Scriptures we do not find full and complete 
directions as to methods and plans for the training of children, 
but we do find principles laid down which we are expected to 
study and work out with care, and which we are assured will in 
due time develop the desired results. Solomon said, "Train up a 
child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not 
depart from it." (Prov. 22:6.) Parents are exhorted not to 
provoke their children to anger, but to rebuke and punish when 
necessary, and to train them up in the nurture and admonition of 
the Lord, etc. And then we have the example of our heavenly 
Father set forth for our study and imitation. 

R1097 : page 6 



A little reflection upon these simple rules, together with a close 
observation of God's methods of training and discipline, will 
supply all the needed instruction on the subject. 

In the first place, if we would govern others properly, we must, 
God- like, govern ourselves: We must be just, benevolent, kind, 
thankful, patient and loving, remembering always that our most 
effective lessons are given by personal example. If you teach 
only by word, you are constantly condemning yourself and 
pointing out your weaknesses, and the ready perception of 
childhood will quickly draw the inference that you should first 
practice what you preach; and all your preaching will be in vain, 
unless you do so. Here, then, is the first rule for Christian 
parents —So far as possible, be what you would have your 
children be; Never for a moment forget that you are a teacher, 
and that from morning till night you are being studied and 
copied. If you are peevish, fretful, and complaining, disliking to 
do this duty, and despising that, wishing the lines had fallen to 
you in pleasanter places, coveting your neighbor's wealth, or 
health, or ease, etc., etc., do not be surprised, if you find the 
same dispositions cropping out in your children. And if it does, 
its constant friction and interference with the home duties, will 
necessitate force and pulling and driving and punishing, and 
thus greatly increase your burdens and cares. 

If, on the other hand, you are cheerful and happy, regarding the 
duties of life as your greatest pleasure, yes, even what many are 
pleased to style the menial offices of home service; if you are 
thankful for such things as you have in the present life, and 
anxious and helpful in relieving the cares and lightening the 
burdens of your less favored neighbors, the little ones around 
your feet will quickly discern and catch your happy, thankful, 
energetic and helpful spirit; and thus half the victory in the 
matter of home training will be accomplished. 

Dear mothers, never let the little ones hear you say, "I dislike to 
wash dishes," or "I dislike to cook," or that you dislike to 
perform any other duty that devolves upon you now; and never 
allow such an expression from them to pass unreproved. Rather 
say, "My dear children, if you will think again, you will see that 
you are very unthankful when God has so generously filled your 
plates, to be too indolent to wash them, that he may fill them 
again. " Perhaps if we continue such ingratitude he may some 
time refuse to fill them, to bring us to our senses and show us, 
how mean we have been. Never give them the idea, by word or 
look of yours, that pleasure is to be sought for elsewhere than in 
the line of duty. Then you will be preparing them to find 
happiness all day long in the kindly offices of love and duty, 
instead of stolidly toiling all day at irksome tasks, and 
impatiently waiting for a little diversion or frolic at the end of 
the day or week as compensations. In the cheerful performance 
of duty is the highest form of happiness, with which an 



evening's diversion, a picnic, etc., are not worthy to be 
compared. And yet such innocent pleasures, when they come 
without special seeking— i.e., when they are not looked for, and 
longed for, and sought after, as the chief end of existence— are 
pleasant, healthful and happy episodes which may add greatly to 
the happiness especially of young life, particularly when they 
come not too frequently, and as pleasant surprises from loving 
parents or friends. The habit of some, of paying children for 
what they do, detracts from their sense of duty in the matter of 
home service and substitutes a selfish and independent spirit. 
Better far let any gift be understood as entirely independent of 
remunerative considerations. 

Our second rule should be, never by word or example to 
encourage idleness. Idleness is the mother of vice and a fruitful 
source of every evil; for Satan finds some mischief still for idle 
hands to do. Nature itself teaches plainly that idleness is not the 
normal condition of any healthy human being. You cannot 
punish a child more severely than to require perfect idleness. 
The human mind is never idle except when asleep, and 
sometimes not then. And it is almost an impossibility for the 
human body to be inactive, unless disabled by disease. 

To release a child, therefore, from all the restraints of duty, is 
not always to rest him. If no duties or responsibilities are placed 
upon him, he will spend the time and effort in doing as he 
pleases and in learning from other willful and untrained children 
what you may afterward find it impossible to eradicate or fully 
counteract. Children are better for having some responsibility 
and some care, though, if possible, they should not be 
overburdened. They will also develop more perfectly, if they 
have some time and opportunity to work out their own original 
ideas. Boys will be well and happily employed with carpenter's 
tools and other constructive implements; and girls with dolls and 
needles and pins, etc. But do not give them too many or too 
complete a set of toys, or you will leave no room for ingenuity. 
A rag doll of Katie's own make and on which Johnny has 
displayed his art in penciling features will often be more 
precious than one you might purchase. And economy and 
carefulness can be taught by very special care of the finer 
Christmas doll. And as they acquire skill, let it be applied to 
things useful, and let them see that you appreciate their skill by 
giving them this liberty to utilize it. Play should always be 
secondary to real service. Nellie must drop the doll quickly to 
heed the cry of the 

R1097 : page 7 

real baby; and Johnny must leave the interesting hammer and 
nails to run the necessary errands. If taught to do so from 
infancy these habits will grow, and they will be both useful and 
happy in so doing. 



Prompt, cheerful, loving obedience should be expected and 
enforced— not by repeated urging to duty, but by a simple 
showing of duty, and a penalty of some kind for its non- 
performance. Do not lower your dignity, work yourself into a 
nervous excitement, and disturb the peace of the rest of the 
family, by continually upbraiding and urging a refractory one. 
Rather give some one else the privilege (for so they should be 
taught to regard it) of doing that duty, and let that one feel that 
he missed both the privilege and the approval that comes with it. 

And this gives another suggestion, namely, to train children to 
be sensitive to the approval of parents, of God, and of their own 
consciences. If conscience is unheeded, if God is unknown or 
unloved, and if parents are only regarded as servants, nothing 
but brute force will compel submission to authority; and that 
submission will be an ignoble one, and at best only temporary. 
How can this be done? Well, it cannot be done in a day; and 
listless, heedless parents cannot do it at all. This is one of the 
fine points that will require skill and ingenuity. You will need to 
study the disposition of your child, to watch for the 
opportunities to instruct and impress him, and to let none of 
them slip. You will need to watch the little things in his 
deportment, to express your affectionate approval of his good 
points (when expedient, but not always, lest it cultivate vanity) 
and your pain and displeasure at his errors and failures. Let him 
feel that your eye and God's is ever upon him, just as we feel 
that God's eye is upon us. (2 Chron. 16:9; Psa. 34:15; 1 Pet. 
3:12; Prov. 15:3.) Do not let him sit by your side at the table and 
eat like a savage who does not know the use of a knife and fork; 
do not let him be mean enough to grab the best of everything for 
himself and pay no attention to the wants of others. Teach them 
to be generous, to prefer one-another, and to be watchful for 
one-another's interests; and the table, however plain be the meal, 
is one of the best opportunities for inculcating such lessons. Let 
good manners and good principles be the frequent subjects of 
conversation at such times. In fact no other opportunity so 
favorable and so frequent presents itself. Make good use of them 
all, and study to do so. Remember, too, that your children come 
into the world ignorant of everything, and even the commonest 
civilities must be taught them by both word and example. 
Therefore be patient, careful, watchful and wise both in teaching 
them good and in counteracting evil. 

Cultivate the acquaintance of your children; enjoy their society 
and let them enjoy yours. Be young with them, but give them 
the advantage of your years of experience; and to this end never 
let your dignity descend to the level of frivolity or foolishness. 
Hold your own standpoint, but sympathize with theirs, and do 
not forget your feelings and experiences at their age. Invite their 
confidence and never make light of their troubles, but comfort 
and advise them as your love and experience enables you to do. 



Never speak slightingly of one to another, nor allow them to do 
so without correction. 

Watch for the first outcroppings of wrong principles and talk to 
them seriously about them. Show them the mean principles in 
some very small actions and what their miserable fruits are 
when a little more matured. Talk freely, not always to them, but 
before them of the wants and sufferings and trials of others, and 
let them see you planning and active in efforts to relieve as 
much of it as possible. Send them or take them with you on 
errands of love and mercy; and let them see that you prefer to go 
to the house of sorrow and mourning to comfort those that weep, 
rather than to the house of mirth. 

Be cheerful, do not wear a long dejected face, even if you have 
trouble, or if you are sympathizing with others in trouble. Let 
the sunshine of Christian peace and joy illuminate your 
countenance at all times, and you can carry that 

R1098 : page 7 

sunshine not only into your own home, but into all the homes 
you enter. 

Be generous, no matter how poor you are, and teach and talk of 
generosity and show by word and action, how it needs to be 
balanced by frugality, and what extremes both run to, when not 
rightly balanced. 

Let your children have access to good books and encourage 
them to read for information, and to report what they read. 
Endeavor to give them broad ideas; do not let them think that 
the little home circle and their immediate friends and relatives 
are the largest and most important part of the world. Show them 
that the human race is one great family, children of one father 
and mother, and that as brothers and sisters they should love one 
another; that the dead as well as the living were part of this one 
family, and that history shows how they lived and what they 
accomplished, how good and great some were, and how wicked 
others were. This will serve to awaken interest in a very 
instructive line of reading and prepare the way for further 
instruction of prophecy which reveals the future destiny of the 
race. Instructive reading of various kinds will crowd out bad 
company and its attendant evils. 

To these suggestions we might append the following useful hints 
which some one terms— 

THE SCIENCE OF CHILD-TRAINING IN A NUTSHELL. 

1 . When you consent, consent cheerfully. 

2. When you refuse, refuse finally. 

3. Often commend. 

4. Never scold. 



5. Beware of making an issue with your child, but when an issue 
is forced carry it out. It is with children as with men, few of 
whom, says Goethe, are open to conviction, but the majority of 
whom are open to persuasion. 

In other words-Rule yourself before attempting to rule your 
child. 

All of these points good and wise worldly parents have observed 
and profited by; and even without the restraints and power of a 
religious training, they have raised sons and daughters to honor 
and to comfort them in their declining years. And yet, in 
addition to all the nice points and the fine points of wise and 
careful training, there is a mightier power than all else in a 
decided religious training. If the little ones are taught from 
infancy to know and love God as the wise and loving provider 
of every blessing they enjoy, as the rewarder of righteousness 
and the punisher of evil doers (not always now, but in his own 
due time); if they are early taught to bring their little troubles to 
him for sympathy and help, and their little joys and blessings to 
him in thankfulness and praise; and if they are taught the plan 
and purposes of God as they are able to comprehend it, the 
instruction thus received in the plastic period of childhood will 
never be effaced. "Train up a child in the way he should go and 
when he is old he will not depart from it. " He may stray from it 
in youth, but by and by under the chastening hand of God, (for 
God will not forsake them, but will watch over them for your 
sake), a mother's prayers and counsel and love will be freshly 
recalled and heeded, -perhaps long after she has been laid to 
rest. 

Since such carefulness and watchfulness and constant attention 
to the physical, mental and moral wants of children demand 
almost all of a mother's time and strength, and sometimes more 
than she has to give, but little can be expected of her beyond the 
family circle in the earlier years of motherhood. Her faithfulness 
here, therefore, will show the measure of her desire and 
willingness to be faithful in the greater work; and verily, she 
shall not lose her reward, either in the Master's approval, or in 
the love and respect and reverence of her family. Even if for a 
time wayward and thoughtless as some children seem to be 
naturally, they also will by and by rise up and call her blessed. 

The work of Christian parents for their children now should be 
regarded as part of the great restitution work of the now 
dawning restitution age. And if the children of the saints are 
carefully trained and instructed in the plan of God, and the great 
work he is about to accomplish in the great time of trouble and 
after it, doubtless God will be pleased to make special use of 
them as the world's instructors, to point men to the real and only 
remedy for all their woes. 



Work, dear Christian mothers, with this end in view, and God 
will in due time show that your labor has not been in vain, in the 
Lord. Humble and obscure though you may seem, you have a 
blessed mission to fulfill. God bless you all and give you 
wisdom, and patience, and constancy, and prudence, and faith, 
and hope, and love, and grace in every way sufficient to act 
nobly your part, while you walk humbly with God casting your 
care upon him knowing that he careth for you and yours 
specially, for your sake. 



MRS. C. T. R. 



R1098:page7 



THE POWER OF THE TRUTH. 

The Lord seems to lay hold by his truth upon a variety of 
characters, in his call to joint-heirship. The following letters all 
showing excellent spirit, represent some of these. They serve to 
show that the power of the truth extends to all classes and that 
the Lord accepts of and is willing to bless and use all who accept 
of his righteousness and desire to render him service. 

The first is from an ex-convict, recently released from the House 
of Correction in Detroit, where he served a long term for 
highway-robbery. We know not how the truth reached him 
there, but it made him free from his old master Sin. Since his 
release he has started into what he says shall be his life-work, 
preaching the truth by selling DAWN, and he meets with good 
success. The TOWER goes to three other convicts, one in Joliet, 
Ills., one in Detroit and one in Allegheny. 

The other letters explain themselves. 



House of Correction, Detroit, Mich. 

DEAR BROTHER:-... When I got into trouble, I did not wish to 
have my people exposed to the disgrace that a knowledge of my 
situation would be sure to bring upon them; and I adopted an 
assumed name and have not written to them nor heard from 
them since. 

This pride that prevented me from writing to my people, and 
receiving of their assistance, would also hinder me from going 
home, if I did not have suitable clothing, and sufficient money to 
satisfy it. But I was thinking, if my parents are still living, they 
still have affection for me, and how much greater their joy 
would be to have me come home clothed in the rich robes of 
Christ's righteousness, than to come clothed in the scarlet and 
purple of sin, or soft raiment of my own provision, which would 
be but as filthy rags in comparison. Besides, if I am seeking not 
my own glory, but the glory of my Master, and if His 



righteousness may be clearer seen through my humiliation, it 
will but leave me greater cause for rejoicing. I have long 
endeavored to render cheerful obedience to all men have 
required of me. But now I should much more endeavor to yield 
grateful submission to my Father's will whose loving care 
guides and protects me, and nothing is allowed to befall me 
without His permission. He also assures me, that all things are 
working together for good for me. So, if it is his good pleasure, I 
may still hope to get home at the holidays. And I can be 
contented with Christ's righteousness as a covering, instead of 
fine clothing, and the gold and silver of spirit and truth, instead 
of money, and bearing a precious message whose value is 
beyond rubies. And although I may not be skillful in telling this 
glad message, I hope that its affect in me may be clearly 
manifested, as some one has written:— 

Gladly in the dust I would lay me, 
That the world my Savior might see. 
Hoping to see you soon. Yours in the faith, 



New Haven, Conn. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL, BELOVED IN THE 
LORD:-While in Boston I was told of a sister at Winchester, 
about seven miles from Boston and I went to see her. Some 
eleven years ago she was a lawless Roman Catholic rumseller 
there. Her conversion (a most remarkable one) occurred in the 
prison, where she was confined for repeated violation of the 
liquor laws. When she was released, she poured to waste all of 
her liquors and renounced the Roman Catholic Religion. As she 
lived in the midst of an Irish Catholic community, her 
persecutions were terrible. Her children were hooted, pelted 
with stones, and abused in every conceivable manner. She was 
cursed and slandered before her face and behind her back. 

They even soaped the stairs of her dwelling to cause her to fall 
and maim or kill herself. The priest visited her, and when he 
found that she was firm in her determination to serve Christ 
rather than the devil, he cursed her and persuaded her husband 
to abandon her and declared that she should never have a 
Catholic dollar, and said they would drive her from her home. 
They broke the window panes in her house, and for two years 
she was obliged to keep them stuffed with rags, etc., being too 
poor to afford to replace the glass. She united with the Baptist 
church and was most zealous in her missionary efforts to bring 
others into that "communion. " She soon ceased to have her 
hunger satisfied with the husks of the less popish branch of 
Babylon and longed for 

R1099 : page 7 



more truth, for she saw and deplored the same spirit in 
Protestantism as in Romanism. About nine years ago, hungering 
and thirsting for the Word of Life, she heard that there were a 
series of meetings held at Lynn. You were the preacher and she 
was so well fed that she eagerly inquired, where she could 
continue to hear you. A friend told her that she could hear you 
through Z.W.T. every month. Ever since that God has fed her 
through your paper. When she was rejected by every body, that 
spoke peace to her heart. All was written in such a sweet spirit. 
The very pages seemed illumined by the spirit of God. She 
cannot write at all and can not read writing. 

She has grieved because of her inability to tell you the great 
comfort and joy you have been to her, under God. She expressed 
her belief in the fact that there must be so very much of which 
you have never known that would so greatly encourage you, did 
you but know. When her boy lay dead in her house, a crowd 
collected opposite and cried that they wished it was the old devil 
that was dead, 

R1099 : page 8 

instead of the young one, or she along with it. Well, the next day 
after that she got the TOWER. For all the sorrow she had had, it 
brought great joy, and she felt lifted up. She could not describe 
the gladness God sent her through it. The Lord anointed her 
eyes, and she came out of the Baptist church, and her 
persecutions at the hands of the Protestant religionists were 
harder to bear than those of the Roman Catholics-a refined 
cruelty. She attempted to reason with them out of the Scriptures, 
but was called an ignorant Irish woman and was rebuked for her 
insolence in presuming to teach them who had been studying the 
Scriptures all their lifetime. But she knew she had the truth, and 
counted it all joy- even her severest trials-for they brought her 
nearer to God, and taught her dependence upon Him. She was 
overjoyed at the thought that at last you should know of her and 
of the joy you had been the means of imparting to her. 

Yes, dear Brother, you'll find out concerning many a weary 
heart comforted and cheered and helped in the struggle against 
the world, the flesh and the devil, when you reach the end of 
your faith. Rejoice! Your affectionate brother in Christ, 

S. I. HICKEY. 

page 8 

San Diego, Cal. 

DEAR SIR:— As I am one of the many readers of your valuable 
paper and have been for about seven months, I write to tell you 
how I came in possession of it, and that grand book M. DAWN. 

Before I had seen DAWN, the Plan of Salvation was as greatly 
mystified, as could be imagined, according to the different 



doctrines I had been raised under. My wife and a sister are 
members of the Christian Church; my mother was a Methodist; 
my father thinks that all beliefs are wrong, except the hard-shell 
Baptist faith; and I have another sister that believes the only way 
to reach the place where Christ is, is through the Presbyterian 
Church; and a brother thinks no one will ever see Christ unless 
he takes, as he thinks, the only straight and narrow road through 
the Methodist Church. 

This brother has for hours tried to show me, why I should join 
the church, be a better man, and be saved from everlasting 
torment. I could only contend, that I could not see how they 
could all be right, and if the different teachers or denominations 
were all right, why was it that God wanted men to travel so 
many different roads, when they were all trying to reach the 
same place. It was something that worried me not a little. But I 
could not believe in the doctrines they all preached, therefore 
have been traveling with the majority of the world until now. 
But thank God, since the truth has been made so plain, I feel that 
I am a better man. And I must say, my friend, that I believe the 
discord in the church is the cause of millions not wanting to 
accept Christ to-day. 

About a year ago in Fort Worth, Tex., I received the DAWN as 
a loan with a request to read the book and return, or remit; so of 
course I remitted the 25 cents and kept the book. I read and re- 
read it, again and again, and am still reading it; in fact have read 
it, until it is about worn out. 

Now dear friend, I have never been a Christian, though always a 
believer, and I never could fully explain my way of thinking, or 
belief, until now; so I wish to change my ways and strive to do 
all the good I can, that all that will, may see the light that is 
dawning. Therefore you will find enclosed $5.00 for which 
please send me-one Emphatic Diaglott $1.50, two Dawns Vol. 
I. cloth-bound, ten Dawns Vol. I. paper covered; also the whole 
list of back Nos. of Tower advertised in August, 100 Missionary 
Envelopes and 300 or 400 Arp Slips, which I will distribute 
among my friends and others in this country; for there are 
thousands here longing for something different from what these 
people preach. 

Trusting this may reach you safely, I am yours, 

R. L. B. 

R1099 : page 8 

Pierce City. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-What I want to tell you is this, I 
am free! The truth has made me free! To-day I was excluded 
from the Baptist church of which I have been a member for 
almost twenty years, on the charge of heresy. 



But they did not exclude me until I asked the privilege of 
withdrawing. It came up in this way. This was regular church 
meeting day (business meeting). I was present as usual, but this 
time with my mind made up to explain to them my change of 
views on several so-called orthodox points. I waited until the 
regular business was transacted, before I arose to speak, and in 
the meantime they balloted for delegates to the association. No 
special nominations, each member voting for whom he chose; 
and when the ballot was announced, I was one of the chosen. At 
this point I remarked that they would probably want to rescind 
their action after hearing what I had to say. I then explained to 
them as best I could parts of my belief, and ended by telling 
them, I could not be consistent in believing and teaching as I do, 
and still retain my membership in the Baptist Church; in other 
words, I could not be two things at once without hypocrisy. 
Therefore, I asked the privilege of withdrawing my name from 
the church roll. I told them that my action was prompted by a 
sense of duty, and not that I held aught against any of them; for, 
said I, you have all been kind to me, and my relations as a 
member of your body, have ever been most pleasant. I believe 
that many of you are Christians, but blinded; and in one sense of 
the word, it is no easy matter for me to sever my connection 
with you, for I leave among you my dear old gray headed 
mother and father, sisters, wife, and many of my dearest friends. 
But brethren! Jesus said, "He who is not willing to leave all 
these for my sake is not worthy of me. " Then I sat down. Quite a 
number were in tears, including our pastor; and after the 
question was discussed, and regrets expressed on my strange 
action, it was decided to exclude me for heresy. But before the 
question was put, a good old brother arose and suggested that I 
be given a letter, not of dismissal, but a letter showing that I was 
not excluded on account of any misconduct, but simply on 
account of refusing to believe and teach Baptist doctrine. But the 
suggestion was not acted on, and the vote for exclusion was 
unanimous. In regard to the letter suggested by the brother, I 
will here state, I did not expect and do not want anything of the 
kind. I then handed to the Assistant Superintendent of S.S. my 
written resignation as Supt. of Pierce City Baptist Sabbath 
School, and in a few days I expect to hand in my resignation as 
Treasurer of the Baptist College at this place. And so I am all 
alone in the "flesh," but not in the "spirit." I believe Jesus of 
Nazareth is with me. And I believe he will continue to walk with 
me, if I hold fast to the faith first delivered to the saints. Pray for 
me. 

I have about 30 DAWNS loaned out. One Baptist sister, to 
whom I loaned one, said to me since my exclusion, I believe the 
doctrine taught in that book you loaned me, and in a short time I 
expect to do as you have done, withdraw from the Baptist 
Church. Her name is on the enclosed list of subscribers to the 
TOWER. 



May God bless you and us all in the work, is my prayer. 

T W R 



J. W. B 

page 8 



LET YOUR LIGHT SHINE. 



A recent letter from Sister Tackabury to Sister Russell, shows 
that Brother Tackabury's death-bed preaching was not without 
its influence for the Lord and the truth. It was his earnest desire 
and constant endeavor to show forth the praises of him who hath 
called us out of darkness, into his marvelous light. 

DEAR SISTER RUSSELL:-I must write to you again, for it 
relieves my mind to talk to you, and it comforts me to read your 
letters. 

O, how thankful I am to our Heavenly Father for such friends in 
this time of great affliction— brothers and sisters in the Lord. 
Natural ties are strong and all are very kind, and thoughtful of 
my sorrow, but that strong bond growing out of the ONE HOPE, 
is dearer to me than all earthly ties; especially now. How sweet 
to me the words of cheer and comfort that come from the saints. 
I am trying to spend much of my time in reading and study for 
which, of course, I have had little time for months. Indeed, for 
the last year Mr. Tackabury's condition was such that neither of 
us could read much, and now I feel that a part of my work is to 
gain more strength from a more thorough study of the Word, 
and be the better prepared to give a reason for the hope that is in 
us. 

Well, dear Sister, each week adds to my loneliness. As they go 
by I realize more and more that my earthly home is desolate; 
that there is no more happiness in it for me. How I thank God 
that the time is short. And yet I have my work to finish, and I 
shall no more than have time e'er my change shall come. 

I have much to write to you this time, of God's workings in this 
place. It really seems wonderful to me, and yet nothing is too 
great for Him to accomplish. 

The beginning was Mr. T.'s sickness; and as people knew that 
we were professedly Christians, although of a peculiar sort, of 
course, it was Christian people who called to minister to our 
needs, and therefore, it was to them that Mr. T. had access, when 
he was able to talk, and he improved every opportunity. It also 
seemed usually Baptist people who came in, and we often 
remarked to one another that they seemed more willing to listen, 
and manifested more Christian spirit than any others who called. 
We had distributed reading matter considerably, but after Bro. 
Russell was here, I immediately handed out all I could, where I 
thought it might be read to advantage, and I found a good deal 



of interest among the readers upon meeting and conversing with 
them. They almost without exception said, they had studied the 
Bible of late more than ever before. When Bro. Russell was here 
the Baptist church in which the funeral was held was without a 
preacher, and had been for quite a long time. Now they have a 
minister, and he believes and teaches God's Word almost 
identically with us. The first time he came he stopped with a 
near neighbor of ours who had been with us a great deal during 
the summer and had read Millennial Dawn. They showed it to 
him, and he said, "That is MY belief and I PREACH it." And he 
surely does. He is a young man and very intelligent, superior in 
that respect to any one they have had here before. I heard him 
preach last Sunday morning and he talked the Millennium to 
them strong, and said during his discourse, that he believed he 
was telling them God's truth, and if they cast him out as a 
heretic, he must be cast out. Of course he has adopted these 
views but recently, and I do not see how he can preach them to a 
Baptist church, unless the church becomes revolutionized, and 
then surely it would not be Baptist. He also gives a Bible 
reading every Thursday evening and I have attended them all so 
far. It seems wonderful to me, how these things have been 
brought about, and how much sound doctrine this people will 
endure. How the matter will terminate, time will tell. I am trying 
to do what I can-I strive not to allow an opportunity to go by, 
where I think I can do something to honor the Master-it is my 
meat and my drink to do His will. O, how I long for the time 
when the Lord Jesus will be glorified in his saints. 

Pray for me that my affliction and trials may "work out for me a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. " Remember me 
kindly to any who may inquire after me. May I not hear from 
you soon? Very affectionately, Your sister in Christ, MRS. S. T. 
TACKABURY. 



"Sacrifice is the test of love." 



page 8 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 

THE WAGES OF SIN. 

This small tract of 24 pages, neatly printed, is considered 
excellent for new readers. They are of proper size for enclosing 
in envelopes. We believe that one of these, and an Arp Tract, 
enclosed in a Missionary Envelope, would be a good means of 
reaching many of your friends. Those who think the plan a good 
one and desire to avail themselves of it can do so. We will put 
them up, as above described, and send one to each address sent 



us, as well as a sample copy of the TOWER, if you will remit 
two cents each for postage. 



ARP TRACTS-A good supply now, English and German, 
FREE! Order all you will engage to faithfully distribute-say 
how many. Sent by mail, postage prepaid by us. 



SAMPLE TOWERS. The December 1888 number is a good 
one for new readers. We will send free all you can judiciously 
use. Send addresses to us. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN VOL. I. Cloth-bound, $1.00 
(To Tower subscribers, 75 cts.) 
in paper covers, 25 cts. 
in German, same prices. 

Brother Bryan's suggestions, in last issue, prove to be good, and 
are helping many to success who previously were unsuccessful. 
Try that plan. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. A fresh supply now. 25 for 10 
cents; 100 for 35 cents; 300 for $1.00- postage free. 



FREE TO NEW READERS. 

For the sake of new readers, we mention below special topics 
treated in recent issues of the TOWER of which we still have a 
supply. Order any one of these as a sample, free. Additional 
copies 5 cents each, except to those too poor to pay, who are 
welcome to any or all free. 

THE LAND QUESTION. -June 87. 

THE SABBATH QUESTION.-Sept. 87. 

OUT OF BABYLON,-the claims of the Episcopal Church 
examined. -Oct. '87. 

"ONE GOD," --the Bible teaching vs., human tradition of 
Trinity. -Nov. '87. 

"SPIRITS IN PRISON. "--Dec. '87. 

"HELL," "EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT," "WAILING 
AND GNASHING OF TEETH," "THE RICH MAN AND 
LAZARUS," etc., are subjects treated in January, February, 
March and June 1888, TOWERS. 

BAPTISM,-the Bible doctrine. -May '88. 



SIN AND SICKNESS, "FAITH CURES," "PRAYER 
CURES," "MIND CURES," etc. -July '88. 

THE TABERNACLE AND ITS SACRIFICES, -their 
lessons to the saints-July '88. 


