VOL. XIII. MARCH 15, 1892. NO. 6. 
TRAVELS IN THE HOLY LAND. 
AUGUST 1891. -EDITORIAL NOTES. 



Here we are at last in this land so sacred to 
the hearts of all who love God— the land of 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the Prophets, the Lord 
and the Apostles. And although our eyes are 
busy trying to notice all the points of interest, 
and our memories busy recalling the many 
things written concerning these places in the 
remote past, and our hearts full and tender as 
we recall the scenes of our Master's sufferings 
on our behalf, and our hopes vivid for the evidences 
of coming blessings upon the natural 
seed of Abraham, we do not forget the true 
spiritual Zion whose deliverance and glorification 
must first take place before fleshly Israel, 
and then all the families of the earth, shall be 
blessed. 

We therefore invite all of the TOWER readers 
to go with us in mind over these hills and valleys, 
that together we may be refreshed and rejoiced 
in spirit. 

We land at Jaffa or Joppa, the seaport for 
Jerusalem, to which the king of Tyre sent the 
cedars of Lebanon to king Solomon for the 
building of the Temple. It is probably much 

R1381 : page 83 



the same as when Jonah visited it, fleeing from 
his duty, to take ship for Tarshish; much the 
same, too, as when Peter lodged here at the 
house of one Simon, a tanner, upon whose roof 
he saw the vision directing him no longer to 
consider God-fearing Gentiles "unclean." 

The houses are small and crowded, and as 
the town is built upon rising ground, the houses 
and streets are quite up and down. As in all 
oriental cities, the streets are very narrow- 
mere alley-ways, we should say in America. 

The conveyance which will carry us to Jerusalem 
is a rickety carriage drawn by three lean 
little horses— for the railroad, although progressing 
and already finished about one-third 
the distance, carries no passengers yet. Upon 
it, however, construction trains are running 
constantly. 

While our conveyance is getting ready we 
will see the city, and get dusted from head to 
foot by taking a walk, and climb to the house 
of Simon, the tanner. Ah! there it is. Not 
the same house, of course, but one upon its site, 
and probably much of the same size and shape, 
for here architecture and the building art have 
made little progress— retrograding, more probably. 
It is a house of one large living-room 
with a smaller reception room. Outside is a 
large stone box recently found near the spot, 
and supposed to be the one used by Simon and 
his successors in the tanning business. There 
beside the box is a water-well: quite likely, the 
same at which Peter drank while residing here. 
Outside the house against the well a flight of 
stone steps leads to the roof— similar to the one 
where Peter prayed and saw the vision.— Acts 10 
and 11. 

Our conveyance is ready and we start for 
Jerusalem on a route full of interesting memories 
—over hills and valleys trodden often by 
the feet of the Great Teacher and his apostles. 
Not the same road exactly, but the same route; 

R1381 : page 84 

for the present excellent road is of recent construction, 
the old Roman road of our Lord's 
day being here and there visible, but now 
abandoned for the better one. 

The tomb of Dorcas (Tabitha) is the first 
item of interest; it is a public fountain. This 
recalls the story of Dorcas, one of the saints of 
the early Church, a friend of the poor, whose 
awakening from the sleep of death is recorded 
in Acts 9:36-43. The tomb is in the outskirts 
of Jaffa, and leaving it we pass rapidly several 



fruit gardens hedged about by prickly-pear 
trees. At any other time, no doubt, these would 
appear beautiful, but now they are dry and dusty, 
for this is the dry season here, and no rain 
has fallen for several months. 

Outside of Jaffa we are in the "Plain of Sharon." 
It is at present very dry and barren 
looking, but our guide, a very well-informed 
and reliable man, tells us that it yields large 
crops, and that at any other season we would 
see it spangled with wild flowers of every hue. 
Our route lies across this plain for twenty miles, 
while it is nearly one hundred and fifty miles 
long. Under skilful management and with 
proper machinery this strip of land would yield 
immensely. Even at present it yields large 
quantities of grain for export, though the native 
farmers are taxed enormously for all they 
raise, besides paying heavy rentals for the use 
of the land and heavy interests for the money 
necessary to put in a crop. As much as 30, 40 
and 50 per cent interest, for a six months loan, 
is charged by the wealthy who have money to 
loan. The Jews are seldom farmers here, but 
many of them, as everywhere, are money-lenders. 
In the eyes of a European or American, 
however, none of the people appear to be 
wealthy: all look to be poor. 

Here on our left is a modern Arab village, 
built of small stones and slimed over with earth. 
The people of this and other similar villages are 
called "fellah"— they are the poor tax and 
interest burdened farmers. They are probably 
happy in their way, but others used to some of 
life's comforts would be miserable if thus situated. 
Ah! the thought comes forcibly, if such 
things pain our hearts and awaken our sympathy, 
what must it have been to our dear Master 
to witness the pain, poverty, degradation and 
general distress which sin brought into the 
world. No wonder "Jesus groaned in spirit," 
for, surrounded by such, he would not increase 
their troubles by explaining to them the extent 
of their degradation, while he could not yet, 
according to the Father's plan, apply the balm 
for all their woes (Restitution)— until he had 
paid the ransom-price for all; and until his 
Church, his Bride, being selected, the due time 
should arrive for the healing of every wound. 
(Acts 3:19-21.) We also groaned in spirit as we 
saw their poor estate and the blind and maimed 
in the way, and prayed, "Thy Kingdom come!" 
and wished it were already time to pour out the 
great blessing upon the world, typified in the 
Sabbath-day healings performed by our Lord. 
We rejoiced, however, in the "greater works" 



in which even now we are permitted to have a 
share— feeding the poor with the spiritual bread, 
anointing the eyes of the spiritually blind and 
cleansing spiritually those afflicted with the leprosy 
of sin. We concluded that we must be 
content for the present, and wait the Lord's 
time for the rising of the Sun of Righteousness 
with healing in his beams.— Mai. 4:2. 

There on our left is the traditional site of 
Hazar-Shual, where Samson caught the foxes 
and used them in burning the crops in this very 
Plain of Sharon, which at that time was held 
by the Philistines who had invaded and over-powered 
Israel. (Judges 15:4.) Samson's trick 
was not mere wantonness, but a warfare for the 
impoverishment of the captors and for the recovery 
of the land to his nation. 

Although so dry and parched looking, there 
is something growing here even now. It looks 
like our American corn or maize, but the stalk 
is only half as thick and the grain is not in 
"ears," but in a bunch or head at the top of 
the stalk. It is called "Indian Corn," and 
our guide has plucked a sample for us. The 
grains are larger than wheat, and round. 

Here we are at the Tower of Ramleh. While 
the horses rest we will climb to its top and have 
a good view of the surroundings. To the east 
is the hill-country or mountains; to the west is 
the Mediterranean sea; to the north is Mt. 
Carmel, where Elijah tested the prophets of Baal 

R1381 : page 85 

and proved that Jehovah alone is God (1 Kings 18:19); 

to the south is Gaza, the city whose 

gates Samson carried away; and this side of it 

is Gath, the home of Goliath, and Lydda, where 

one of the early Christian Churches was founded 

and where the Apostle Peter performed a 

notable miracle.— Acts 9:32. 

We have now reached the valley of Ajalon, 
and to the north-east is Mt. Gibeon. We recall 
this as the scene of the notable battle between 
Israel and the Amorites, in connection with 
which is the account of the standing still of the 
sun and the moon. Endeavoring to locate the 
battle, we are impressed with the fact that if 
the sun were standing over Mt. Gibeon there 
could be no use for moonlight in the valley of 
Ajalon, which in that event would be flooded 
with sunlight. The account given in Joshua 
does not purport to be recorded by an eye witness, 
but is rather a note and comment upon a 
record given in the "Book of Jasher," now 
lost. The facts which form the basis of the 



matter recorded would seem to us to be explainable 
in either one of two ways:— 

(1) That Joshua addressed the Lord as the 
Sun, whose strength and help had so signally 
been revealed for the relief of Israel and for 
the destruction of their enemies. With this 
the words agree well: "Then spake Joshua to 
the Lord. ..and he said in the sight of Israel, 
Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon, and 
thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon:" that is 
to say, O Lord, our Sun and strong Deliverer, 
continue thy mighty help for us in this battle 
at Mt. Gibeon, and let thy peaceful blessing 
[the Moon] be upon thy people in the valley of 
Ajalon; or 

(2) That the sun was setting in the west 
and its last beams still lighted Mount Gibeon 
while the rising moon cast her beams directly 
through the valley of Ajalon. In this 

view the desire and request of Joshua would 
be not with reference to the sun itself, but with 
reference to the sun-light: he desired that utter 
darkness might not overtake them, in order 
that the victory be a complete and lasting 
one. If this be the proper view, then it 
was the sun-light merely that continued, without 
the orb itself being visible. This would not 
have required a stoppage of the earth upon its 
axis, for clouds might have been so arranged 
as to prolong the sunset, as they sometimes 
do at the present time. 

We are now more than midway between 
Jaffa and Jerusalem, in the valley of Wady-Ali, 
and before us is the site of Kirjath-jearim, 
where the Ark of the Covenant rested for twenty 
years in the house of Aminadab (1 Sam. 7:1,2), 
whence it was taken by King David to 
Jerusalem. (2 Sam. 6:3.) Away before us, to 
the left, is Mizpah, (not the place named Mizpah 
by Jacob when he covenanted with Laban 
his father-in-law, saying, "The Lord watch between 
thee and me when we are absent one 
from another"— that was on the other side of 
Jordan, but) the place where Saul, the first 
king of Israel, was chosen and anointed, near 
which also Samuel, the prophet, reared a monument 
to the Lord, called Ebenezer, saying, 
"Hitherto the Lord hath helped us." (1 Sam. 7:5-17; 
10:17.) Yonder, not far off, is Gibeah, 
the birth-place of King Saul. 

Since getting into the hill-country the land 
has seemed very desolate, stones being almost 
the only things in sight, except that here and 
there in the valleys we have caught glimpses of 
cultivated gardens and settlements. Undoubtedly 
it would look much less barren at any other 



season of the year; and there are evidences that 
the hill and mountain sides now lying waste, 
except here and there a few olive trees and 
grape vines, were once well terraced and no 
doubt yielded grapes and olives in profusion. 

Here we pass near by Ain-Karim, which tradition 
marks as the birth-place of John the 
Baptist. Here in the hill-country of Judea 
Mary visited his mother, Elizabeth.— Luke 1:39. 

Now we have reached the brook and valley 
of Elah, the reputed site of David's battle 
with Goliath, and while we are listening to 
"the voice (sound) of the grinding of the mill," 
manipulated by women by hand, as in olden 
time, Abdullah, our thoughtful guide, has selected 
for us as mementoes five smooth sling-stones 
from the brook-bed, such as the five 
which David took, the first of which smote and 
killed Goliath, the Philistines' champion. 

Now we pass close to a town supposed to be 

R1382 : page 86 

the Emmaus to which our Lord walked with 
two disciples after his resurrection.— Luke 24:13. 

It is late when we reach Jerusalem, so we secure 
lodging, etc., at the clean, airy and comfortable 
"Hotel Jerusalem," outside the Jaffa 
Gate, in what is sometimes termed "the new 
city of Jerusalem," because here are most of the 
new buildings. Indeed, the population outside 
the wall near the Jaffa Gate bids fair to be 
greater than that within at no distant day. 
And our attention is drawn to the fact that this 
portion is precisely that so accurately described 
by the prophets. -Zech. 14:10; Jer. 31:38-40. 

(To be Continued.) 



R1382 : page 86 

BELIEVERS' CONVENTION, 

AT ALLEGHENY, PA., 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 

FOR BIBLE STUDY, 

IN CONNECTION WITH 

THE ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION OF OUR LORD'S DEATH. 

APRIL 7THTO 14TH, INCLUSIVE, 1892. 



For a number of years past it has been the 
custom for such of the WATCH TOWER readers 
as can do so to meet in Allegheny for fellowship 



and study for a few days in connection 
with the memorial of our Lord's Last Supper. 
Such meetings are purposed for the present 
year, as above announced. These meetings will 
be held in the chapel over the office of Zion's 
Watch Tower, "Bible House," No. 58 Arch 
Street, Allegheny. 

No fixed program is announced except for 
Sunday Evening, April 10th, when the Lord's 
Memorial Supper will be celebrated at 7:30 
o'clock. The meetings will commence on 
Thursday, April 7th, and continue from 10 A.M. 
to 6 P.M. (with noon adjournment for lunch) 
daily for a week. The sessions preceding the 
Memorial celebration will be specially devoted 
to Bible study, at which Bible questions of every 
kind will be entertained— among others, Baptism 
and its significance— and an opportunity 
will then be afforded for any who may so desire 
to symbolize their death with Christ by immersion. 
We have robes and every convenience. 
More than fifty persons availed themselves of 
this opportunity last year. 

WHO ARE INVITED TO ATTEND. 



(1) All who trust for justification in the 
great atoning sacrifice for sins given at Calvary 
by our Lord Jesus will be welcomed; and (2) 
especially all such who have presented themselves 
as living sacrifices in God's service; and 

R1383 : page 86 

(3) particularly all such who are regular subscribers 
to Zion's Watch Tower; and (4) all 
those engaged in the Colporteur work, or who 
contemplate entering that ministry. 

ENTERTAINMENT DURING THE MEETING. 



Friends of the Lord and the Truth, here, 
have arranged for the lodging and breakfast 
and supper of all Watch Tower subscribers and 
Colporteurs who may attend the Convention. 
And in return we have assured them that all 
who come will gladly lend a hand to carry 
what otherwise would burden them and hinder 
their attendance at the meetings. Come prepared 
to sleep on clean comfortable floor-beds 
or the best that we can supply to so large a number. 
But do not bring little ones or uninterested 



friends, unless they can be otherwise provided 
for, as every bit of space will be required 
and reserved for those who are interested. 

Come in a thoughtful and prayerful mood, 
expecting to be influenced for good and earnest 
to exercise such an influence upon all with 
whom you may come in contact. It has been 
remarked of previous meetings that from the 
waking to the sleeping moment, both in and 
out of meetings, there was but the one topic 
of conversation— the good tidings of great joy. 
One old Brother, a U.P. minister, remarked: 
"I have been at many Conventions, but never 
before at one like this, where the will and plan 

R1383 : page 87 

of God are the only and the incessant topic 
from rising until retiring; in the house, on the 
street, at meeting, at lunch and everywhere." 
Come resolved that this meeting shall be 
none behind its predecessors in spiritual fervor 
through coldness or indifference or unfavorable 
influence on your part. 

DINNERS DURING THE DAYS OF THE MEETING. 



Arrangements will be made, with boarding 
houses near, whereby all attending the meetings 
can procure good, comfortable dinners, as 
low as 15 cents each. Thus the near-by friends 
as well as those from a distance can spend the 
entire days at the meetings. And those of 
limited means, from a distance, can know that 
their entire expense for the seven days need 
not exceed twenty-five cents a day, including 
street-car fare. 

R.R. EXCURSION RATES. 



The following railroads have granted excursion 
rates to Allegheny or Pittsburg:— 

(1) The Trunk Lines, viz., P.R.R.; B.& 
O.R.R.; and N.Y.C. & H.R.R.R., and generally 
all connecting railroads of N.Y., Penn'a. 

and N.J. 

(2) The Central Passenger Association, including 
almost all the railroads west of Pittsburg 

and Buffalo, and north of the Ohio river, 
as far west as Chicago and St. Louis. 

(3) The Southern Passenger Association, 
including almost all the principal railroads of 



the South. 

The terms are uniform, as follows: Any one 
purchasing a first class, full fare ticket (limited 
or unlimited) over the above lines to the Convention 
of the Tower Tract Society, Allegheny, 
Pa., will be entitled to a printed and signed 
Certificate, stating that he has purchased such 
ticket and the route taken. On arrival here, 
said Certificate will be given to a designated 
clerk who will certify to your attendance at 
the Convention; and when ready to take your 
return journey, you will be granted a return 
ticket over the same route by which you came, 
at ONE THIRD the regular first class fare. Thus 
full fare here and one third of full fare back will 
be your railroad charges. But to secure this 
cheap return, you must have your Certificate 
properly signed over railroads belonging to the 
above associations. Make no mistake. If the 
railroads of your town are not members of any 
of these associations, the ticket agent can direct 
you to the nearest station of such roads. 
In that case go to such station and buy your 
through-ticket and get your Certificate there. If 
coming from points north of Chicago and west of 
Chicago and St. Louis, buy ordinary tickets to 
those cities and there get your Certificate, etc. 

If you think of coming to the Convention, 
at once drop us a postal card to that effect, and 
also call upon your railroad ticket agent and tell 
him that you will want such a Certificate. Do 
this in time, so that if he has no blank Certificates 
on hand, he can get them from his General 
Ticket Agent. But do not buy your ticket 
until you are ready to start. 



R1382 : page 87 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



We believe and teach that the most proper 
occasion for the celebration of our Lord's death 
is its anniversary. This was the custom of the 
early Church, and it is still observed in a fashion 
by some denominations on Good Friday— 
although, in order to have the observance come 
upon the same day of the week, the exactness 
of the date is disregarded. We, like the early 
Church, prefer to observe the memorial upon 
its exact anniversary— which we reckon as they 
and the Jews reckoned it— by lunar time— the 
day before the beginning of the Jewish Passover. 



Furthermore, we believe and teach that the 
only proper manner for the celebration of this 
memorial is that which our Lord introduced 
and which the early Church followed, and not 
as Good Friday is now celebrated by some. 

On the same night in which he was betrayed 
—after 6 o'clock P.M. of what we now would 
call the 13th day of the Hebrew month Nisan, 
but which the Jews called the beginning of the 
14th day of the month (their 24-hour day beginning 

R1382:page88 

with the evening); and therefore, in 
Jewish reckoning, in the same day in which he 
was crucified (the day before their Passover 
week began)— our Lord celebrated the Passover 
supper with his disciples. (The lamb supper, 
which always preceded the feast-week of Passover, 
was not, and is not now, termed the 
Feast of Passover by the Jews.) And after 
having thus complied with the Law (which was 
still in force over every Jew until our Lord's 
death on the cross), Jesus instituted a memorial 
of his own death, bread and "the fruit of the 
vine" being used as emblems of his flesh and 
blood. 

He instructed his followers that thus they 
should commemorate his sacrifice for sins, 
saying, 

"THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME." 



And to us it appears that the time is no less 
a part of the institution than the bread and the 
juice of the grape. We should as soon think 
of substituting another time than that of the institution 
—especially in view of the particularity 
of our Lord in the matter; for although he 
declared, "With desire have I desired to eat 
this passover with you before I suffer," yet, according 
to the Law, it could not be eaten until 
the anniversary of the killing of the typical 
lamb preceding the passing over of Israel's first-born 
in Egypt; which was to be the anniversary 
also of the killing of the true "Lamb of God 
which taketh away the sins of the world" and 
by whom the Church of the first-born is first 
to be spared or delivered. Our Lord waited, 
therefore, and "when the hour was come [the 
earliest hour possible according to the Law] he 
sat down."— Luke 22:14-20. 

The words of the Apostle "As oft as ye do 
this, ye do show forth the Lord's death until 



he come" (1 Cor. 1 1:26— particularly explained 
in March '9 1 Tower), are understood by many 
to give license to the observing of any hour, 
any day and any month; but not so to those who 
read critically; for the words "do this" have 
special weight. It would not be this if done 
at another time: just as if a command were 
given to celebrate the Independence of the 
United States on the fourth day of July, it 
would not be a fulfilment of this command, nor 
a celebration of this event, but something else, 
if another day were celebrated. 

But let no one suppose that we teach that 
God's people are under the Law on this or on 
any other subject. The only law of our new 
covenant is the law of love. We love our 
Master, we love to celebrate his great sacrifice 
for our sins, and we love to do it as he was 
pleased to show us, as nearly as we can. 

Some of the Lord's people celebrate his 
death every first day of the week, supposing 
that in so doing they have the sanction of the 
custom of the apostles and the early Church, 
as recorded in Acts 2:46; 20:7. We hold, 
however, that they err in this application of 
the words "breaking of bread," and that it 
was not the Memorial Supper, but an ordinary 
meal customary in the early Church for two 
reasons, (1) being few and scattered, when they 
gathered for a meeting they brought a luncheon; 
and (2) probably for the same reason that 
they met on the first day of the week, they ate a 
meal together, viz.: because it was on the first 
day of the week that our Lord arose from the 
dead, and because on that day he expounded 
unto them the fulfilment of the Scriptures applicable 
to himself and was known to them in 
the breaking of bread, i.e., in the eating of 
supper. No wonder that afterward they loved 
to celebrate both the day and the meal which 
brought them so much joy and blessing.— 
Luke 24:25-32. 

Those who have confounded these luncheons, 
celebrating the resurrection on the first 
day of the week, with the Memorial of our 
Lord's death have erred greatly if not seriously. 
They should notice, too, that the fruit of the 
vine is not mentioned in connection with these 
luncheons, while it is never omitted when the 
Memorial Supper is referred to, being no less 
important than the bread. The same expression, 
"breaking of bread," from the same 
Greek words, is used in Acts 27:35 where there 
can be no doubt that it refers to an ordinary 
repast for the satisfying of hunger and not as a 
memorial or symbol. 



We treat this subject but briefly here. As 
to who should celebrate the Memorial, and 

R1382:page89 

how, and many other interesting points, our 
regular readers are referred to our issue of March, 
1891. While our supply lasts, we will be pleased 
to send a copy of that issue free to new readers 
who desire to study the subject further. 

Let us urge upon all who recognize that value 
of Christ's death as their ransom-sacrifice, to 
surely "do this," as the Master enjoined, in 
remembrance of that great event which is the 
basis of our present joy in the Lord as well as 
of those which we shall enter upon as the fulfilment 
of this Memorial— when we shall partake 
of the joys of our Lord in glory, in the 
Kingdom. But those who trust to forgiveness 
aside from this sacrifice for sins, or who are 
trusting that they can crucify their own sins, 
and thus render themselves acceptable to God 
(as some claim), should not celebrate this Memorial; 
for in so doing they would be eating 
and drinking condemnation to themselves— 
not discerning the value of the Lord's broken 
body and shed blood as the one and only sin-offering 
which can take away sin and make the 
believer acceptable before God. 

The proper time for celebrating the Supper 
this year will be after 6 o'clock of Sunday, 
April 10th— that hour being the beginning of 
the 14th day of the Hebrew month Nisan. 



R1385 : page 89 

"HE CARETH FOR YOU." 



"Casting all your care upon him, for he careth for 
you."-l Pet. 5:7. 

"What can it mean? Is it aught to him 
That the nights are long and the days are dim? 
Can he be touched by the griefs I bear, 
Which sadden the heart and whiten the hair? 
Around his throne are eternal calms, 
And strong, glad music of happy psalms, 
And bliss unruffled by any strife. 
How can he care for my poor life? 

"And yet I want him to care for me, 

While I live in this world where the sorrows be; 



When the lights die down on the path I take; 
When strength is feeble, and friends forsake; 
When love and music, that once did bless, 
Have left me to silence and loneliness; 
And life-song changes to sobbing prayers- 
Then my heart cries out for a God who cares. 

"When shadows hang o'er me the whole day long 

And my spirit is bowed with shame and wrong; 

When I am not good, and the deeper shade 

Of conscious sin makes my heart afraid; 

And the busy world has too much to do 

To stay in its course to help me through, 

And I long for a Savior— can it be 

That the God of the universe cares for me? 

"O wonderful story of deathless love! 
Each child is dear to that heart above: 
He fights for me when I can not fight; 
He comforts me in the gloom of night; 
He lifts the burden, for he is strong; 
He stills the sigh, and awakens the song; 
The sorrow that bowed me down he bears, 
And loves and pardons, because he cares. 

"Let all who are sad take heart again. 

We are not alone in our hours of pain; 

Our Father stoops from his throne above 

To soothe and quiet us with his love. 

He leaves us not when the storm is high, 

And we have safety, for he is nigh. 

Can that be trouble which he doth share? 

Oh! rest in peace, for the Lord does care."— Sel. 



R1392 : page 89 

"THE DELIVERANCE." 

A MUTUAL ASSURANCE SOCIETY 

ESTABLISHED IN 

ST. JOSEPH'S CHURCH, 

WEST DE PERE, WIS., 

FOR THE RELIEF AND THE DELIVERANCE 

OF THE 

POOR SOULS IN PURGATORY. 



Thus runs the title-page of an advertising 
circular before us. The second page gives a 
picture of Christ in heaven, with Joseph and 
Mary on either hand, praying to him for those 
suffering in Purgatory; below which the sufferers 
and the flames are pictured. Subsequent 
pages explain that the admission fee is 25 cents 



and the annual dues 10 cents. Any surplus of 
merit more than is necessary for the members 
of the society will be generously donated to 
others now in Purgatory. The money goes to 
pay the priest for the sacrificing of the Mass. 
(See M. Dawn, Vol. III., p. 99.) The priest, 
"Rev. J. F. Durin," is President, Secretary, 
Treasurer and General Manager. How blind 
are those who support such an institution and 
those Protestants who sympathize with it. 



page 90 

INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. 



SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1383 : page 90 

"THE WAY OF THE RIGHTEOUS." 



LESSON I., APRIL 3, PSALM 1:1-6. 

Golden Text— "Blessed is the man that walketh not in 
counsel of the wicked, nor standeth in the way of sinners, 
nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful."— Psa. 1:1. 

The first three verses of this lesson picture 
the perfect man, the man whose heart is perfected 
in holiness, the pure in heart. Hence 
the picture is pre-eminently that of the perfect 
man, Christ Jesus, and secondarily that of those 
imperfect men and women who, being justified 
by faith in Christ, are, as new creatures, walking 
in their Master's footsteps, and hence right 
at heart, even though sometimes imperfect 
through the weaknesses of their earthen vessels. 

The first verse shows three steps, (1) the 
ungodly— literally, the wicked, (2) sinners or 
transgressors, and (3) scorners or the conceited 
and unteachable. 

The proper course is to have no fellowship 
(sympathy and common interest) with people 
of any of these classes. This, of course, does 
not mean that we are to treat them unkindly 
or discourteously, nor that we are never to be 



seen walking, standing or sitting with such; 
but it does imply that our company should, as 
far as possible, be select, and of those who 
reverence our God, and that other fellowships 
should not be encouraged. 

A greater number, perhaps, are in danger of 
getting into fellowship with the scorners or unteachable 
than with the others: yet fellowship 
with such leads to the same spirit; and that 
leads gradually to violation of the covenant 
with God; and that leads to open wickedness 
and wilful sin. The safe way is to have no 
fellowship with darkness: it is never profitable. 

But this advice will apply also in another 
way. In all the nominal churches there are 
many who have a form of godliness, but who 
are really ungodly— far from being in harmony 
with God and his plan. In the nominal 
churches are also many sinners, living in known 
violation of their covenant with God. And 
there, too, may be found, alas! sometimes even 
in the pulpits, those who are of an unteachable, 
haughty spirit, who even scoff at God's Word 
and make it void through their traditions. 
Come out from among them; and neither sit, 
nor stand, nor walk in fellowship with such. 
(Rev. 18:4; Isa. 52:11.) Stand with God, 
even if that should seem to imply standing 
alone. The Lord knoweth them that are his, 
and he has yet more than seven thousand who 
bow not to the idol of sectarianism. 

Verse 2. Some might suppose that one thus 
isolated would have an unhappy lot; but no, 
he is truly said to have a delightful experience. 
He delights day and night in meditating upon 
God's will and plan. In this he finds a joy and 
a peace which the world and a worldly church 
can neither give nor take away. One thus consecrated 
and full of the spirit of the Lord finds 
that God's laws of righteousness are not restraints 
which he would fain be freed from; 
but, like the Master, he can say, "I delight 
to do thy will, O my God: thy law is engraven 
in my heart." 

Verse 3. Such children of God as have 
reached this degree of development do not 
wither away and become dead and barren, but, 
since the root of their new life is fed by the 
river of God's grace and truth, they are always 
fresh and joyous and fruitful— adding to faith 
virtue, brotherly kindness, love, and so are not 
unfruitful in either the knowledge or the wisdom 
which surely comes to all who have communion 
and fellowship with God. 

Whatsoever such do shall prosper. They 
have no plans of their own: they desire that 



God's will shall be done. And since God's 
plan shall prosper (Isa. 55:1 1), their plan shall 
prosper; for his is theirs. 

Verses 4 and 5 describe the reward of the 
wicked. In God's plan no provision is made 
for the wicked; and, as the chaff dust blown by 
the tornado can never again be found, so the 
wicked shall have no place after the Lord has 
thoroughly cleansed the world and swept them 
into oblivion. 

But a distinction should be made between 
wrong-doers and wicked people. The wicked 
are those who wilfully prefer sin to righteousness, 
while many violators of God's law now 
are deceived by the great enemy, Satan, (2 Cor. 4:4), 
and entrapped by depraved appetites, etc. 
Thank God that Satan soon shall be bound and 
shall deceive the nations no more; and then a 
clear knowledge of God and of righteousness 
shall be granted to all. We may reasonably 
hope that the wilfully wicked will thus ultimately 
be proved to be a much smaller number 
than at present might appear. 

But the description here given of the way of 
the wicked does not relate to their present life. 

R1383 : page 91 

In the present life they, more often than the 

righteous, flourish and prosper, as is shown by 

the same writer elsewhere.— Psa. 73:3,12; 37:10,16,35; 

145:20. 

Verse 5. The wicked, therefore, shall not 
be able to stand [shall not continue to stand- 
shall fall, pass away as the chaff] in the judgment 
[of the Millennial age]; nor shall sinners 
[those disobedient to their covenant] longer be 
found in the congregation of the just. 

The judgment which is to determine who are 
the lovers of righteousness, and who are deliberately, 
wilfully wicked, is here stated to be 
future, which accords with our Lord's words 
uttered ten centuries later— "I came not to 
judge the world, but to save the world." (John 12:47.) 
That the world has not yet been 
judged is evident; for the wicked are not yet 
overthrown and carried away as the chaff. But 
though our Lord's mission, at the first advent, 
was not to judge, but to redeem the world, the 
testimony is unmistakable that, at his second 
advent, he will judge the world, and that his 
saints now being selected from among men 
will be associate judges, kings and priests with 
him in that thousand-year-day of judgment. 
(Acts 10:42; John 5:22; Acts 17:31; 1 Cor. 6:2,3.) 
The character of these judges and 



the object of the judgment give assurance that 
it will thoroughly and righteously separate those 
for whom God in Christ has provided the gift 
of grace— everlasting life— from those who, he 
declares, will be "cut off from among his 
people," in the second death. 

Then sinners [violators of their covenant of 
consecration] will no longer have a place among 
the faithful who are completing their covenant 
of self-sacrifice. (Psa. 50:5.) This division 
of the faithful and wise servants from the unfaithful 
and foolish servants is already beginning. 
The judgment of the world will follow. 
See "The Work of Harvest" in Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. III., Chap. vi. 

page 91 

Verse 6. "The Lord knoweth [or appro veth 
of] the way of the righteous, but the way 
of the wicked leadeth to destruction." 

R1384:page91 

THE KING OF ZION. 



LESSON II., APRIL 10, PSALM 2:1-12. 

Golden Text— "Blessed are all they that put their 
trust in him."— Psa. 2:12. 

In considering this psalm it is well to remember 
that King David, its author, was a typical 
character, a type of Christ. Those of David's 
time and he himself, also, no doubt understood 
his words to refer to his own conflicts with 
surrounding nations and their kings, and although 
some of the expressions are quite too 
strong to fit the typical king and kingdom, 
and could fit only their antitypes, this no doubt 
was considered poetic license. From a higher 
standpoint, however, guided by the holy spirit 
and the words of the apostles, the Gospel 
Church can see in this psalm a prophecy of our 
Lord Christ Jesus at his first advent, and still 
further of the entire Christ (anointed) including 
the Church which is the body of Christ, 
and their final exaltation as the Millennial 
Kingdom. 

While the application of this prophecy, by 
some in the early Church, to the time of the first 
advent, and the events connected with our 
Lord's crucifixion (Acts 4:25-27), is not corroborated 
by the testimony of any of the inspired 



apostles, it is not without justification in 
the circumstances they relate. But notwithstanding 
this partial application, the fulness 
of the import belongs to the time of the second 
advent, as do almost all the prophecies which 
relate to Christ's Kingdom and glory. The object 
of his first advent was to give himself a ransom 
for all, and thus legally to prepare the way 
for the selection of some of the redeemed, his 
Church, to be his bride and joint heir, and also 
to prepare the way for restoring the race 
(whosoever wills) to all that was lost in Adam. 
The second advent, and the Kingdom of God 
then to be established, are to accomplish all 
that was made possible by the work of the first 

R1385 : page 91 

advent. The time for the fulfilment of this 
psalm in its fullest, completest sense is just at 
hand. See Millennial Dawn, Vol. II. 

Verse 1 . "Why do the nations rage and 
the peoples devise vain schemes?" This we 
understand to refer to the commotion and discontent 
already prevailing throughout the civilized 
world and daily increasing. As a result 
of the dissatisfaction, how many are the 
vain and impracticable schemes and theories being 
devised for relief— Communism, Socialism, 
Nihilism, Anarchism. But these can not bring 
the relief needed and desired. God's remedy 
is the only one that will cure present social, 
political and financial ailments and sores. 

Verse 2. "The kings of the earth entrench 
themselves, and the rulers [religious, financial 
and political] take counsel together against Jehovah 
and against his Anointed." Ah! yes; we 
can see this fulfilling on every hand. The kings 
of Europe are banded together against Socialistic 
influences; and they set or establish their 
power over the people by various combinations. 
The lesser rulers, the money-princes and religious-princes, 
are also busy; and Unions, Combinations, 
Trusts and Syndicates are the order 
of the day, not only in financial, but beginningly 
in religious matters. 

R1385 : page 92 

But little do any of these imagine that they 
are preparing to resist the establishment of the 
Kingdom of Jehovah in the hands of his 
Anointed Son. Nevertheless, this is just what 
they are doing. The time is at hand for the fall 
of present systems and for the establishment 
of God's long promised Kingdom which will enforce 



his will on earth even as it is done 

in heaven. So far from knowing that they are 

setting themselves to oppose God's will, they 

are so blinded that they call their own poor tottering 

thrones God's kingdoms. But in vain 

do they worship him in lip and form while their 

hearts are far from him. His will is not in all 

their thoughts. 

Verse 3. "Let us break their bands and cast 
away their cords from us." The translators of 
the common version got the impression that 
these words represented the sentiments of the 
kings and rulers; but not so: they are the expression 
of Jehovah and his Anointed, relative 
to the kings and rulers who have banded themselves 
together to oppose the execution of 
God's plan, because it includes the fall of their 
power. God will break all their bands— their 
combinations and trusts of every sort— and will 
cast off the cords, by which they still attempt 
to claim God's favor, protection and Word as 
upholding their kingdoms, rights, authorities, 
etc. Seelsa. 8:9-13. 

Verses 4 and 5. "He that sitteth in the 
heavens shall laugh: [i.e.] the Lord shall have 
them [as well as their wonderful banding together] 
in derision. Then shall he speak unto 
them in his wrath and trouble them in his sore 
displeasure." 

For eighteen centuries the civilized world has 
heard the words of the Great King, instructing 
that all righteousness consists in loving God 
with all the heart, mind, being and strength, 
and in loving our neighbor as ourself; and that 
he that exalteth himself shall be abased, while 
he that humbleth himself shall be exalted. 
But his instructions have been unheeded except 
by the very few: pride and love of money and 
power have ruled. Now the time has come to 
speak the same truths in a different manner— 
so loudly and so forcibly that they will never 
be forgotten. And the great time of trouble 
just approaching, such as was not since there 
was a nation, will be merely the reiteration of 
the Lord's message, once given in tender tones, 
but unheeded. 

Verse 6. "Yet [meanwhile] I [Jehovah] have 
established my King upon Zion, my holy 
mountain [kingdom]." Thus briefly does God 
announce what his work will be in connection 
with the overthrow of human systems and governments. 
He will establish Christ's Millennial 
Kingdom, and he shall take unto himself 
his great power and reign.— Rev. 11:17,18. 

Verses 7-9. Here, evidently, the speaker is 
our Lord Jesus. The words represent the lesson 



that he will first make plain to the world— 
that it is by the Father's divine decree that he 
takes possession. "I will make known the decree: 
Jehovah hath said unto me, 'Thou art 
my Son; this day have I begotten thee." The 
fulfilment of this was when our Lord Jesus, as 
the man Christ at thirty years, consecrated himself 
wholly to the will and plan of God, even 
unto death. There the sacrifice was really 
made which was "finished" three and a half 
years after at Calvary: and there, too, he was 
begotten of the spirit to the divine nature, to 
which he was fully born three and a half years 
later, when he was made a quickening spirit, 
by a resurrection to the perfection of the divine 
nature— "highly exalted."— Phil. 2:8-10. 

Next comes the enthronement of the Son in 
his Millennial Kingdom. He at his first advent 
"bought us with his own precious blood," 
and consequently he has only to "ask" for 
that which he redeemed to get it. He would 
have asked for it at once, but for another feature 
of the plan— the selection first, from among 
the purchased race, of a bride and joint-heir 
in his kingdom. This selection will be complete 
at his second advent, and then he will be 
ready to deal with the world, the nations, and 
then he will ask and receive from the Father 
all the power and authority necessary. "Ask 
of me, and I will give thee the nations for 
thine inheritance, and the earth to its uttermost 
parts for thy possession." 

While the object of the kingdom will be to 
establish peace on earth and good will toward 
men, it will not be peacefully introduced. The 
beginning of Messiah's reign will mean the 
greatest revolution the world has ever seen. 
(Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:21.) Kings and princes 
will hold on to power and advantage to the 
last, and as a result all will be dashed in pieces. 

Verses 10-12. After telling of the fulness of 
the authority given to him, and that it must be 
enforced, even though such a revolution be necessary 
to introduce it, the great King of Glory 
shows his willingness to be merciful, and points 
out that, if the trouble comes thus upon men, 
it will be because of their neglect to come into 
harmony with him. But the kings and rulers 
of earth will not hear nor heed the exhortation, 
and this is clearly indicated in prophecy. They 
will not hear the voice of the antitypical Elijah 
Class— the Church in the flesh (See Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. II., Chap, viii.) — and hence the 
earth will be smitten with the great disaster so 
clearly foretold in Scripture.— Mai. 4:6. 



R1385 : page 93 

These verses 8-12 were freely quoted and applied 
by the popes to their systems during the 
dark ages of Papacy's triumph— that was the 
counterfeit Antichrist's millennium. See Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. II., Chap. ix. 

"Blessed are all they that put their trust in 
him [Christ]." These words stand as an offset 
to the promise of great trouble and overthrow 
for such as oppose the new and rightful King 
of earth. It includes the Church primarily— 
the real, the believing, the consecrated Church. 
When men's hearts begin to fail them for fear 
of those things coming upon the earth— when 
the powers of the heavens [the nominal churches] 
shall be shaken, these are instructed to 
look up and lift up their heads, because their 
redemption draweth nigh. At the same time 
that destruction comes to the one class, redemption 
and glory comes to the other. Compare 
Isa. 35:4; 63:4. 

Yea, beloved, can not all we who see the 
sign (indication) of the presence of the Son of 
Man now say, "Happy are all they that put 
their trust in him." 



R1384:page93 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



Texas. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am one of the lone 
ones— an old lady of 84 years, but I love the 
precious truths for these last days. Providentially 
I picked up the first volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN when I was away from home on a visit 
in Waco a year ago, and I thank God that he 
ever directed me to these precious truths. I 
seem to have a new Bible now and I thank God 
daily for his beautiful plan of salvation. 

I feel that I cannot wait longer for the 
TOWER. Please send it to me. I will send the 
money for it and some DAWNS to scatter. 

Yours in Christ, MRS. M. E. RUST. 



page 93 



Cincinnati. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Glad to tell you 



that I have recently found here quite a goodly 
number deeply interested from reading the 
DAWNS. 

I am drawing my canvass here to a close 
preparatory to the holding of some meetings at 
Columbus and also at New Albany, O. In the 
latter place the brethren are preparing that 
they may be mightily helped by my visit and 
preaching among them. Will you, and Sister 
Russell also, pray for us? After the meeting, 
when on my way to Chicago, I have promised 
to stop again at Columbus and Van Wert. 

Much love, in which Sr. A. joins. 

Yours in Christ, J. B. ADAMSON. 



R1384:page93 

England. 

MY VERY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have 
started several times to write to you since your 
ever-to-be-remembered visit, but have always 
been put off. Your visit here was a veritable, divine 
appointment. Its influence on others has 
been great for good, I doubt not, but to me 
especially. I cannot tell you all I have felt since 
Sept. 13th: words fail me utterly. The humiliation, 
the self-abasement, the light, the love, 
that have succeeded each other, no tongue can 
tell, but you can understand it, because you have 
known it yourself. The Scriptures have seemed 
to open out of themselves, and never before 
have I had such freedom in giving meat to the 
household of faith. 

You suggested to me the Colporteur work. 
This I felt I could not undertake without further 
consideration. I should have been so glad to 
say, Yes, to you, but something held me back. 
I could not feel that I was fitted for such work. 
This conviction has grown upon me; but with 
it I have also realized that for the present I 
must labor where I am. And I am confirmed 
in the belief that this is the Master's ordering 
by the blessing granted on the work I am doing. 
I think I told you or Sister Russell that I 
had a class of twenty to thirty men every Sunday 
morning for a Bible lesson. Somehow some 
portion of the spirit of Elijah fell upon us 
at those memorable London meetings, and the 
men have realized that their teacher has received 
a blessing and must bless others if he is 
to keep it. A fortnight ago the kindly and 
helpful testimony given as to the way these 
lessons are appreciated was most encouraging. 
To the Master be all the praise. Three of the 



men were specially anxious to testify of the good 
they had received, and these were men cradled 
and reared in Methodism. Two of them said 
the Bible was a new book to them, and that 
they had learned more of the word, plans and 
purposes of God during the last few weeks than 
in all their former life put together. I felt 
deeply humiliated and could only ask for grace 
to help in this time of need. Knowledge puffeth 
up, but I am deeply conscious that I am 
nothing and fearful that men will look too much 
at the instrument. Since then there are two 
others, who, having heard of the light God is 
giving, have come to see for themselves. One 
of them is a local preacher. He has been impressed 
with the beauty of God's plan and says 

R1384:page94 

he will not miss being present whenever he can 
get here. I have sold all the DAWNS I had and 
am glad to hear that now we can be supplied 
from London. I hope to be able to arrange 
for public meetings occasionally this winter, 
but hold myself open to anything and everything 
that the Master of the Harvest gives me 
to do. And it is astonishing how many ways 
he opens up. 

Your first discourse in London, "Come out 
of her, my people," has been a source of encouragement 
to me. I am always on the lookout 
for the sheep and lambs. O! I thank God 
that not one of his shall be lost, also for the great 
privilege of seeking them. Three weeks ago 
we had a very dear friend staying with us who 
is a Minister in the Prim. Meth. church, and 
with whom we had often exchanged views by 
letter. He and his wife left us deeply impressed 
by "our manner of life." They are 
both sincere Christians and have very much of 
the love and likeness of the Master about them. 
The Master himself ordered all our conversation. 
We invariably entered into sweet fellowship, 
and yet the doctrines of the trinity, immortality, 
future punishment, the destiny of 
mankind, and the greatest doctrine of all— the 
Atonement through Christ our Ransomer— all 
were entered into as they were suggested to us; 
and this profitably to both sides. Since then 
left us for home (London) we have received a 
good letter from them. They are fully consecrated 
to him whom we love. These means 
God has brought to me, and in so many ways— 
by letter, by speaking and by teaching— have 
I been shown God's graciousness, so that I feel 
sure that for the present, at least, my influence 



is greatest and best exerted where I am. I am 
able to sell DAWNS and get others to do so, too, 
but if the Lord will that I go out, I pray he 
may show me and give grace in needful supply. 
There are many things one would like to talk 
about. O! the time of refreshing from the 
presence of the Lord at and ever since your 
visit! But I cannot write more now, only to 
say that our (wife and self) hearts are overflowing 
with gratitude to the Master for his goodness 
in sending you to England. 

Sister Home wrote me a characteristic letter 
yesterday. She tells me she has heard from 
you. There are none on earth that occupy 
such a place in our hearts as your dear selves. 
My heart is full and I am overjoyed at having 
received such blessing. Give our loving greeting 
to all the Brethren and Sisters, and may 
your hands be strengthened and your hearts 
cheered in the great work, is the sincere prayer 
of your affectionate fellow-servants, 

AARON & P. C. RILEY. 



page 94 

Texas. 
TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, DEAR BRETHREN: 

Enclosed you will find Express Money Order 
for six dollars, the amount of my "Good 
Hopes" for this quarter. Rather early, but 
better than too late. This leaves me paid up 
until June. I delight in this opportunity for 
serving the Lord and the truth, and have a 
feeling at heart that I am doing right. With 
love to you all, I am 

Your Brother in Christ, E. WALLACE. 



R1384:page94 

Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your very kind 
and highly appreciated letter was duly received. 
After considerable study and prayer, I have 
concluded that it is best for me to have as little 
as possible to do with the nominal church, 
and nothing at all to do with their religious 
services. 

I have been singing in protracted meetings 
every night for seven successive weeks, and during 
that time I have felt very much out of place 
—as their doctrines and especially their revival 
services very much oppose the Bible and God's 



plan of the ages. "Eternal torment" and the 
"restitution of all things" do not go well 
together. 

It is my greatest desire to do the Lord's will, 
and I am confident that in the near future the 
way will be opened for me to serve him more 
effectively than I have been able to do in the 
past. 

Oh, how thankful I am to God and to you, 
Brother Russell, that the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
ever came into my hands! How thankful I am 
that God has called me out of darkness into his 
wonderful light! I cannot thank him enough 
for it. May I prove my loyalty to him by living 
the truth— by letting my light shine, and 
by putting forth every possible effort to lead 
others to the light! 

I have enjoyed studying your articles on the 
Ransom. I am sure they are thoroughly Scriptural 
and are very much needed in this evil 
day. You cannot overdo that subject. The 
S.S. lesson expositions are "meat in due 
season," and I am sure they will be highly appreciated 
by all TOWER readers. 

Enclosed you will find $5.00, which kindly 
hand to Sister Russell on account of my "Good 
Hopes." Please remember me to Sister Russell, 
Brother Henninges and all the TOWER 
workers, and pray for me that I may be as 
"wise as a serpent and harmless as a dove," 
and that I may never shrink from the consequences 
of truth. 

I remain your brother in Christ, 
M. L. McPHAIL. 



page 95 



England. 
DEAR SIR AND BRO. RUSSELL:-I see by the 

last issue of the TOWER that you desire all the 

readers to send you a few lines. And in compliance 

I beg to state I am one to whom the 

M. Dawn and the TOWER have been indeed 

and in truth meat in due season. But I have 

to state that I can no longer send in the subscription 

price, for my whole income is but 10 

pence a day; but I cannot afford to lose the 

precious food in the mean time, so I request 

that the TOWER be continued to me as one of 

the interested Lord's poor. 

I will mention the address of a friend who 
I think will be a subscriber, if you will send 
him a sample copy; his address is . 

I may describe him as a ravenous truth-seeker. 



The copies of Millennial Dawn which 
I loaned him have been to him meat in due 
season. The Parish Minister in visiting him 
saw the DAWNS, and after examining them described 
them as being a wonderful work. 
Yours with much love, in Christ, J. PLINT. 



Wisconsin. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write just a few 
lines to try to give you some idea of my high 
appreciation of the TOWER in its new dress, as 
it comes to us semi-monthly laden with the 
food now due, and which is to build up and 
strengthen the household of faith, and which, 
if properly digested, will enable them to stand, 
firmly established, by and through a knowledge 
of the Truth as found in God's Word. 

I think you have shown wisdom in taking up 
the Int. S.S. Lessons, and your manner of 
treating them will prove a blessing to all who 
will give the proper attention to their study. 
There were just three of us who met at my house 
last Lord's day. We took for study Lesson 
8th, Jer. 36:19-31, and read your remarks on 
the lesson, proving everything up as we went 
along. When we came to where you compared 
Jeremiah's prophecy with Revelation to prove 
that the Prophet referred to mystic Babylon 
we went carefully through all the references, 
comparing one with the other. When we got 
through we all felt there was no room for doubt. 

I fear many fail to get the full benefit of 
these precious truths, because they do not take 
the trouble to prove them up, and thereby put 
it beyond doubt in their own mind, and when 
they point out these truths to others, and are 
met with, "Oh! that is what Russell says," they 
are not able to reply, "It is what God's Word 
teaches." And doubtless in many instances 
doubts are created in their own minds, and all 
because they swallowed the food without proper 
mastication, and have failed to digest it and 
benefit by it, and so they are weak. 

I see I have strayed away from what I intended 
to say. Of course we get very hungry 
between meals: we have no preaching, no sermons 
except what we get from the precious 
TOWER, and that seems not half enough to 
satisfy us. And we go to the fountain of water 
(God's Word), and drink in the blessed truths, 
and look forward to the time when we may 
say to all, "Come to the waters of life and 
take freely." 

Yours in hope of the victory, S. T. BARNES. 



West Virginia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Warmest thanks 
to you and Sister Russell, with love and gratitude 
for so much of the Lord's bounties you 
have spread and are spreading before us. It is 
simply delightful to follow you through the 
earth, into the heavens, and the ages revealing 
the "Miracles and wonders God has wrought" 
—exposing the power and signs and lying 
wonders of Satan, putting a "new song into our 
mouth, praise unto our God" (Psalm 40), and 
confirming unto us the Covenant. 

How strange to see the power of Satan exercised 
side by side with God's agencies without 
restraint— even up to and beyond the most 
thrilling crisis in the history of man. How 
Satan succeeded in preventing the arrival of 
the two thousand chosen troops in time for the 
noble Pilate's use, must have astonished higher 
intelligences than man at the time. And to-day 
he is permitted to surround the saints with 
his cunning devices, working miracles, claiming 
the sanction, if not openly the authority 
of Christ— Antichrist to the last, and deceiving 
many for a time. 

While objectors hereabouts cannot gainsay, 
yet they do express their scorn. If we had a 
name with an "ism" to it, they might tolerate 
our views.... 

Yours in Christ, H. L. GILLIS. 



BINDERS FOR THE WATCH TOWER. 

We have had some of "Emerson's Patent 
Binders" made for the present size of the Watch 
Tower. The issues can be put in from time to 
time as they come, and thus be kept straight 
and clean as a book. They are very convenient, 
have the name Zion's Watch Tower on the 
side, and will hold about three years' issues. 
By having a quantity made at once, we are able 
to supply them at fifty cents, including postage. 



THE SYRIAC NEW TESTAMENT. 

Murdoch's Translation of the Syriac-Peshito 
manuscript is sometimes inquired for. 

We can supply it in substantial half-leather 
binding, post paid for $2. 



page 98 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



R1392:page98 

MEMENTOES OF OUR JOURNEY TO PALESTINE. 



While in Jerusalem it occurred to us that 
many of our friends might like very much to 
have some little thing as a memento, both of 
our journey and of the "Holy City." We had 
no difficulty in selecting some inexpensive ones 
suited to our purpose. Some small olive-wood 
articles— paper weights, pen-holders, egg-cups 
and napkin-rings. 

Next came the difficulty— How many shall we 
purchase? How many friends have we to whom 



we would like to present a little token? We 
knew no place to draw a line, for surely all 
the TOWER readers are beloved as friends indeed. 
We could not, however, afford to purchase 
and pay transportation and customs and 
postage duty for so many— nor did we like to 
offer to sell them to our friends. We concluded, 
finally, to purchase about 1700 pieces and present 
them to the WATCH TOWER TRACT 
SOCIETY and let the society pay freight and 
customs tariff and packing and postage, and 
supply them at low prices to such as may desire 
them. Thus all will be accommodated, some 
will be pleased and the cause will be profited. 
These articles we ordered from the Baron 
Rothschild Industrial School in Jerusalem. 
They are olive-wood and stamped Jerusalem. 

We also saw some neat but inexpensive "Flower 
Cards," which we surmised would be appreciated 
by many of you. We ordered 4000 of 
these; they, too, have arrived. These will be 
sent gratis, postpaid, as love tokens and mementoes 
from Sister Russell and myself. They 
are not printed flowers, but colored wild flowers, 
grasses, etc., from the surrounding country, 
pasted on cards in tasteful designs. These 
will be sent as follows: (1) One card to each 
person purchasing one or more of the olive-wood 
articles and (2) one card each to those 
of the Lord's poor who have written since Dec. 
1, 91, requesting the Watch Tower for 1892, 
gratis. Thus all can have a little memento. 

OLIVE-WOOD MEMENTOES 



The following articles donated to the Watch 
Tower Tract Fund, as explained above, are 
offered for sale to Watch Tower readers, postage 
paid by us, at the following prices:— 
Olive-wood Pen-holders, each 20 cents. 

" " Paper-weights, " 15 " 

" " " " four 50 " 

" " Napkin Rings, each 15 " 

seven 1.00 

" " Egg cups, each 15 " 

" " " " seven 1.00 
We will be too busy to fill orders before and 
during the Memorial Meeting; but orders will 
be filed and filled in order as received. Write 
order with full address separate from other 
orders and letter. When the article ordered 
is sold out, we will send one of the 
others until all are gone. If you have a second 
choice, name it in your order. 



page 98 

THE MEMORIAL MEETINGS AT ALLEGHENY. 



The present prospects are that there will be 
quite a large attendance this year. The last 
TOWER gave very explicit directions for all intending 
to come, and it should be carefully 
re-examined to insure no mistakes. On arrival, 
come to the TOWER office, 58 Arch st. 

We have only to add further that friends 
coming from points West of Chicago and St. 
Louis can obtain excursion Certificates with 
their tickets from PEORIA, ILLINOIS, via the 
C.R.I.& P., or the C.B.& Q., or the J.S.E. 
-A.T.& S.F. Rail Roads. 

We are by no means sure that these Memorial 
Excursions will be granted another year, 
as the railroads are yearly more exacting. 

When sure that you can come, drop us a 
postal card about 24 hours before you start, advising 
us again of names and sexes, that our 
preparations may be as complete as possible. 



R1386 : page 99 
