R608 : page 1 

Passaic Co., N.J., March 31, 1884. 

DEAR BRO.:-The WATCH TOWER for this month has not 
reached me, and I think the subscription may have expired. 

Sister paid it last year, I think, and it seems I ought not 

to be among "the Lord's poor" when I have the comforts of home, 
etc. ; but I am flatly refused the amount for a paper that has been the 
means of my withdrawal from the M.E. Church, and even my 
postage and change are watched so closely that I have not been able 
to save even the small price of the subscription. However, I have 
the prospect of some change by washing, which I will send as soon 
as accumulated, with that of an acquaintance who is reading my 
"Food" and will be a new subscriber. Meanwhile please continue 
sending the paper, for it furnishes me more food than any reading 
matter I can get, explaining to me Scripture, and increasing 
continually my interest in God's Word. And in almost every case 
where I become puzzled or troubled over some text, the next paper 
(by direction of God I am sure, not chance,) furnishes the solution. I 
was troubled about "Let not your hearts be overcharged with the 
cares of this life." My cares are so numerous, my hands so busy, my 
head in such a state of confusion often, that Satan vexed me with 
the text; but your paper emphasizing "hearts" brought me such 
comfort that I was filled with praise that my heart is not in these 
things, though I find I have great need to watch. I am compelled to 
suffer much because of my non-relation to the nominal church, 
being accused of self-righteousness, etc., but I endeavor to count it 
all joy, treading alone, like Jesus, the wine-press. Pray that God 
may keep me in all humility, making my calling and election sure. 
Yours in Jesus, . 



page 1 



Russell, Kan. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I thank God that you sent or rather 
that he sent me your publications. Through studying them God has 
shown me my position before him. I can look back on my past life 
and see how he has been preparing me for this very day, and O how 
my heart does swell in loving gratitude to him for his loving 
kindness towards me. I have not been connected with any church 
for the last twenty-five years, but when your publications came 
along I recognized the Good Shepherd's voice and you know how 
sweet that voice is to them that love him. I rejoice to know that he 
counted me worthy to be numbered with the flock; and this was a 
great surprise to me that he should call on one seemingly so 
unworthy. It was a long time before I could get to understand how I 
had consecrated before 1881 but it was made clear to me at last, and 
when I had this settled then I found that I had oil enough in my 
lamp to go to look for the Lord's second coming, and I have found 
him.... 

Your Bro. in Christ, 



R609 : page 1 

WATCH YE THEREFORE. 

"Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong." 1 
Cor. 16:13. 

The careless, indifferent, and lukewarm may lightly heed the 
words of warning, and scarcely discern the necessity which 
prompted them; but the faithful saints earnestly aspiring to attain 
that whereunto they are called, realize the necessity and thankfully 
heed them. 

We should bear in mind that our foes are unseen, wily, and 
deceptive, and that if there is a weak or unfortified place that is 
where the enemy will make the attack. We need therefore to study 
well our position, and to know every avenue by which the enemy 
may approach. First, last and all the time we need to watch that the 
spirit of Christ in us is not displaced by the spirit of the world 
which so continually surrounds and allures us from our chosen 
course. We need to watch that 

R609 : page 2 

we be not entangled with the cares of this life; we need to watch 
that no root of bitterness springing up may trouble us. We need to 
watch that the fruit of the spirit of God is manifest in all our 
actions. Have we got them, and are they being cultivated and 
developed in us daily? Let us read slowly and bring not our 



neighbors, but our own hearts to the test of God's word— "The fruit 
of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance... .And they that are Christ's 
have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. 

What a glorious character yours must be if you have all these fruits 
in their perfection! But that I know you have not. The soil of your 
heart and mine is too poor to expect so much from it, but are we 
pulling up the weeds and doing the necessary pruning and 
cultivating; and in consequence are these fruits developing toward 
perfection? Is our love broad enough to make us patient with those 
whose Christian graces have not developed so rapidly as ours may 
have done? O how we need to watch here, and to guard against the 
roots of bitterness which may spring up! 

Has our love for God and our desire for that goodness which so 
shines in his character, drawn us often to his word? and has our 
faith so laid hold upon its precious promises as to fill our hearts 
with joy and peace. We know this is the case with many, but this 
joy and peace may grow yet more by constant feeding on the word 
of truth. Watch here that you do not neglect to feed upon the word, 
and watch that in coming to it you may come with meekness, a 
simple childlike desire to learn God's ways, and not to establish 
your own. 

While thus exhorted to set a vigilant watch over our Christian 
character lest it be dwarfed, withered or utterly destroyed, we are 
also told to "stand fast in the faith"; and in order that we may so 
stand fast, to equip ourselves and be strong, as men arm and prepare 
themselves for the battle. 

Many make a great mistake in supposing that it is not a very 
important matter to stand fast in the faith; but Paul esteemed it of 
utmost importance. It is possible for every student of the Scriptures 
to have a clear, definite, positive faith, symmetrical and 
harmonious; and to be able to give to every one that asketh, a 
reason for the hope that is in him. If our faith is not thus definite 
and clear, we are just in condition to be blown about by every wind 
of doctrine. O how we need to watch here. Only those strongly 
supported by the truth will be able to stand in this evil day. 

Finally, not only must we keep a vigilant watch over our faith and 
character ourselves, but if we would be strong, we must watch unto 
prayer, and thus keep constant and open communication with the 
heavenly grace and secure the necessary help in every time of need. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R609 : page 2 



WHAT IS IT, AND WHEN AND HOW? 

DEAR SIR: Please explain in your next issue the following 
sentence in the March WATCH TOWER, page 6, middle of second 
column, viz: "Those reckoned saved now, as though they had 
already received the perfect human life, are privileged to relinquish 
their claim and title to it, presenting it as a sacrifice to God, holy 
and acceptable to him when offered in the acceptable time. And 
being thus sacrificed with Christ," &c. This relinquishing their 
claim to salvation, and being sacrificed with Christ, What is it, and 
when and how? 



Dear Sister: It affords us pleasure to endeavor to make still plainer 
the point referred to. Former ideas of salvation were so vague and 
indefinite that when now we speak as the Apostle did of a 
"common" or general salvation, and of a special one, many are 
confused. The central thought in salvation used to be to us, as with 
most Christians it yet is— an escape from everlasting torture. But 
now we have learned that salvation is an escape from death, and 
that it will be fully accomplished by a resurrection. And we find 
that while salvation has been purchased for ALL MEN by the 
precious sacrifice of Jesus, and that consequently all men will be 
saved out of death [which includes a release from all present 
imperfections of body and mind], yet we find that there is a special 
salvation to be shared only by the few, and that the salvation 
[resurrection] of these is called a chief or first resurrection, and that 
it is attainable only by a class, who, during this Gospel age follow 
the example set by Jesus in the beginning of the age —who suffer 
distress and reproach during this age for Christ's sake. 

To come more particularly to your questions: What is this special 
salvation? we answer it is a salvation from death, and in that respect 
like the "common" salvation; but it is more, for while mankind in 
general get back "that which was lost" (Luke 19:10), viz.: human 
nature (a fleshly image of the divine) in all its beauty and perfection 
of mind and body, and a right as such to live forever, these 
esteemed worthy of this chief resurrection, this special salvation, 
will receive everlasting life as new creatures of the divine nature. 
Thus it is seen that salvation to both is from death and to 
everlasting life, but life as human beings to one class, and as divine 
beings to the other. 

To answer your second question: When may this chief salvation be 
obtained? we answer, In the Gospel age. The invitation to run the 
race for the prize of our high calling was never made before the 
gospel age began. In fact Jesus was the first one to run the race. He 
was the first or fore-runner, and we seek to follow in his footsteps, 
as he hath set us an example. This is the age in which as a FAVOR 
some are called to "fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ," and to enter into his glory, which is to follow when the 
sufferings are all filled up. Since, then, this age fills up or 



completes the sufferings of Christ, a share in which is the condition 
on which the new nature is bestowed, it follows that the attainment 
of divine glory is limited to the Gospel age. Now is the 
ACCEPTABLE year [or time] of the Lord, i.e., whoever during this 
time, while the sacrificing is in progress, presents himself a 
sacrifice to God, will be ACCEPTABLE provided he is one of 
those "called"; and none are called but those who are JUSTIFIED 
by faith in Jesus as a propitiation or satisfaction for their sins. 

That only justified believers in Christ are acceptable sacrifices, and 
that only such are "called" or invited to become heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ" by suffering with him (Rom. 8:17; 1 
Pet. 2:20,21), is proved by many plain statements, and forcibly 
illustrated in the typical circumstance of Abraham calling a bride 
and joint-heir for his son. That is unquestionably an illustration for 
the calling of the Gospel Church as a chaste virgin (2 Cor. 11:2), to 
be the Bride, help-meet, and joint-heir with the true Isaac— Jesus. It 
has before been shown that Eliezer, the servant sent to select her, 
typified the Holy Spirit of God by which the Church is "called" and 
"led" to her journey's end. But the point to which we now call 
attention, is the particularity of Abraham about the class of people 
from whom this bride of Isaac was to be selected. The servant 
might not go anywhere —"Thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of 
the daughters of the Canaanites...but go unto my country, and unto 
my kindred, and take a wife unto my son." The teaching of this is 
clear-sinners (typified by Canaanites) are not called to be the Bride 
of Christ, no, the invitation is sent to those who are by justification 
esteemed to be related to God. In a word, it is those who by faith in 
the ransom have become justified as human beings-these are 
invited to a still closer relationship, to become joint-heirs. 

Your third question is: How may this chief salvation be obtained? 
We answer: it can only be obtained by the sacrifice of the human 
nature. It must be "worked out," "run for" and "fought for;" we 
must suffer with Christ if we would reign with him. We must give 
up, surrender, sacrifice, the human nature and its rights and hopes 
purchased for us by our Redeemer, if in exchange we would have 
existence of the same duration, everlasting, but on a higher plane of 
existence, the divine nature. Though we must work it out and 
sacrifice to obtain it, yet when it is remembered that the human 
nature as we inherited it through Adam was forfeited and that the 
justified human nature which we exchange was a free-gift of God 
through Jesus, then it would be but proper to esteem that divine 
nature which we get in exchange for its sacrifice -as a GIFT also. 



R610 : page 2 



DON'T UNCHAIN THE TIGER. 

"Don't Unchain the Tiger!" was the trumpet blast that terrified 
triflers at a perilous period of the late war. It was the title of a fly 
sheet of warning which was not unheeded in those days. 

The warning has again been heard: Don't unchain the tiger! 

A warning to the fools of fortune, squatted on their golden piles 
amid the surging hordes of starvelings: Don't unchain the tiger! 

A warning to the ruck of millionaires whose millions have been 
racked out of the men by whose muscle they were created: Don't 
unchain the tiger! 

A warning to the huge, grinding, swindling corporations, which 
disregard all right and every man's rights in their vampirish lust: 
Don't unchain the tiger! 

A warning to the gamblers in men's food, men's toil, men's land, 
and men's lives, who grind the faces of the people that fall in their 
tracks: Don't unchain the tiger! 

A warning to all who live by the organized brigandage of the times: 
Don't unchain the tiger! 

The tiger is gaunt and hungry, as he restlessly trails his chain. 

The tiger got loose for a moment in New York, in the summer of 
'63, and we who remember the week of the draft riots are not likely 
to ever forget it. 

The tiger got loose again in the summer of 1 877— the year of the 
continental railroad strike— and it took a hundred thousand armed 
men to scare him back to his lair in the jungle. Don't unchain the 
tiger! 

The tiger is not mankind, though he may lurk in the heart of the 
community. He is bred there by wrong; raised to life by it, and is 
stirred to action; he would have no being but for it. 

The right thing to say to the wrong doers now under warning, is 
not, "Don't unchain the tiger," but don't breed the tiger; don't raise 
him to life; don't stir the hot-bed out of which he grows; don't let us 
have a tiger among us that needs to be chained; let us have neither 
tiger nor chains; away with the wrongs by which he is generated. 
Sure as death, in the long run, he will be here if they are not put 
away. 

But what of the men who, in the interest of mankind, ought to put 
them away? Congress and the Legislatures are full of schemers who 
reck not of aught but their own ends, and think of naught but the 
bribe-giving corporations upon which they fatten. 

The people themselves must take things in hand. Chain up wrong, 
and chain it strong, before it breeds the tiger. —John Swinton. 



The above words by a well known representative of the labor 
interest, contains much truth. The Cincinnati riots during the past 
month have added another illustration to the ferocity of the "Tiger" 
when brought to life. 

But though wise men and good men may cry aloud and warn of the 
dangers ahead, yet the warnings will not be heeded. The love of 
money will still further grind and the love of power will lead to still 
greater frauds until the Tiger, bred of almost despair, will devour 
and destroy his adversaries. 

Yet this, with other evils, will work out for mankind a deliverance 
and under the guiding hand of the New King will prepare the way 
for the rule of righteousness, when Justice shall be recognized and 
the GOLDEN RULE govern among men. 

That present governments will be overturned by this "Tiger" is the 
united testimony of the prophets. Thus God often causes the wrath 
of man to praise Him.— EDITOR. 



R610 : page 2 

JOY UNSPEAKABLE. 

A good story is told of a little blind child who once had a surgical 
operation performed that resulted in restoring her to sight. The 
oculist had skilfully pared off the integument which had prevented 
the light from passing through to the retina, and then the eyes were 
bandaged for awhile, until the wounded parts should be somewhat 
healed. At length the hour arrived when the bandage, which had 
from time to time been partially and temporarily removed, was to 
be removed altogether. Ah! what a moment of supreme interest and 
anxiety to all her friends, but more especially to the little patient 
herself, who as yet had never seen. This child, when her eyes could 
bear the light, and she was permitted by her kind physician to open 
them, and for the first time to look out upon all the beauty there was 
around her, realizing indeed as no words could ever show "that the 
light is truly sweet, and that it is a pleasant thing for the eyes to 
behold the sun," cried out with delight, "O, mother, why did you 
not tell me it was so beautiful?" The mother, bursting into tears, 
replied: "I tried to tell you, my dear, but the words wouldn't make 
you understand." Precisely; and so, withal, is it with the Christian 
when he attempts to tell what is the joy unspeakable and full of 
glory, the peace of God that passeth understanding, the love of God 
shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Ghost, and what is the 
excellency of the knowledge of that Christ for whom he would, if 
necessary, joyfully suffer the loss of all things.— Sel. 



R610 : page 2 



INFIDELS AND THE BIBLE. 

A German writer relates that at a literary gathering at the home of 
Baron von Holbach, where the most celebrated infidels of the age 
used to assemble, the gentlemen present were one day commenting 
on the absurd, foolish and childish things with which the Holy 
Scriptures, as they maintained, abound. But the French philosopher 
and infidel, Diderot, who had himself taken no small part in the 
conversation, suddenly put a period to it by saying, "But it is 
wonderful, gentlemen, it is wonderful! I know no man in France 
who can write and speak with such ability. In spite of all the evil 
which we have said, and undoubtedly with good reason, of this 
book, I do not believe that you, any of you, could compose a 
narrative so simple, and at the same time so elevated and so 
affecting, as the narrative of the sufferings and death of Christ— a 
narrative exerting so wide an influence and awakening so deep and 
universal feeling, and the power of which after so many hundred 
years would still be the same." This unlooked for remark filled 
every one with astonishment, and was followed by a protracted 
silence.- Selected. 



R6 1 1 : page 2 

THE times are critical, not here alone, but all over the world. 
Prospering in purely material interests, as I fully believe the people 
at large have never done before, the elements to bring on the 
gravest moral changes are simultaneously at work everywhere. The 
problems now lavishly presented for agitation touch the very 
foundation of religious faith, of moral philosophy, of civil 
government, and even of human society. New forms of power are 
developing themselves, seriously menacing the solidity of all 
established institutions. Even that great conviction, ever cherished 
as the apple of your eye, and which really is the rock upon which 
our political edifice rests, the durability of representative 
government, bids fair to be sooner or later drawn into question on 
solid grounds. The collision between the forces of associated capital 
and those of associated labor is likely to make itself felt throughout 
the wide extent of human civilization.— Charles Francis Adams. 



R610 : page 3 



CUMBERED WITH MUCH SERVING. 



Christ never asks of us such busy labor 
As leaves no time for resting at his feet; 
This waiting attitude of expectation 
He oft'times counts a service most complete. 

He sometimes wants our ear, our rapt attention, 
That he some sweetest secret may impart; 
'Tis always in the time of deepest silence 
That heart finds deepest fellowship with heart. 

We sometimes wonder why the Lord has placed us 
Within a place so narrow, so obscure, 
That nothing we call work can find an entrance; 
There's only room to suffer— to endure. 

Well, God loves patience; souls that dwell in stillness, 
Doing the little things, or resting quite, 
May just as perfectly fulfill their mission, 
Be just as useful in the Father's sight, 

As they who grapple with some giant evil, 
Clearing a part that every eye may see; 
Our Saviour cares for cheerful acquiescence 
Rather than for a busy ministry. 

And yet he does love service, where 'tis given 
By grateful love that clothes itself in deed; 
But work that's done beneath the scourge of duty 
Be sure to such he gives but little heed. 

Then seek to please him, whatsoe'r he bids thee, 
Whether to do, to suffer, to lie still; 
'Twill matter little by what path he leads us, 
If in it all we sought to do his will. 

-Selected. 



R611 : page 3 

FLESH AND BLOOD. 

"Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye 
have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood 
hath eternal life." "The words that I speak unto you are spirit and 
are life." "It is the spirit that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth 
nothing." Jno. 6:53,54,63. 



It was a custom with Jesus to express truth under cover, in "dark 
sayings," and to many this is one of the darkest. When they heard it 



the Jews wondered, saying, "How can this man give us his flesh to 
eat?" and many of the disciples murmured, and said, "This is a hard 
saying, who can hear it?" And to-day, while it is generally 
recognized that Jesus did not mean that they were to eat his literal 
flesh, few have a clear idea of what he did mean. 

Some have hastily concluded that because the Master said his 
words were spirit or spiritual, that therefore to appreciate them they 
must seek the very opposite of the literal meaning of the words; and 
such have concluded that the expression "flesh and blood" means a 
spiritual nature. They overlook the fact that Jesus did not say that 
the flesh was spiritual, but the words. 

That the Lord did not refer to a spiritual nature when he used the 
words "flesh and blood," is easily seen when all of his words are 
remembered. Did he not say, "My flesh... I will give for the life of 
the world"? (ver. 51.) Did he mean that he would give his spiritual 
nature? If so, if he gave that for us, then he has not a spiritual nature 
now; for we remember that he "gave all that he had." (Matt. 13:44.) 
It cannot be that he gave away all that he had of the divine nature 
for the life of the world. Speaking of the same thing again he said, 
"This is my body broken for you... and my blood shed for many for 
the remission of sins." Who can for a moment suppose that the 
divine nature is here meant? Was it the spiritual that was broken 
and shed, or was it the human— the "body prepared" for sacrifice 
(Heb. 10:5) and taken for the suffering of death (Heb. 2:9)? Which 
think you? 

In view of these and other statements of Scripture, let none interpret 
these words of Jesus to mean that his spiritual nature was broken, 
and that all are to eat it. Better far confess as did some of the Jews, 
"We cannot tell what he saith" [meaneth]. 

But some one else suggests that, possibly "flesh and blood" here is 
used as referring to MORAL PERFECTION, and that all must eat 
or receive moral perfection from Jesus or they have no life. This is 
as far from the import of Jesus' words as the other suggestion, for 
while it is true that to have everlasting life all must have moral 
quality, yet such is not the meaning of the words of our Lord now 
under consideration. Let us test it and see. Was Jesus' MORAL 
PERFECTION "laid down," "given," or "broken" for us? Assuredly 
not; to "break," or give up, or lay down moral perfection, would be 
to become MORALLY IMPERFECT. Hence it is clear that the 
"spirit" or MEANING of Jesus' words was not that we are to eat his 
divine nature nor yet his moral qualities. 

What, then, is the spirit or import of the words "blood and flesh" 
here used? We answer, The same spirit or significance should be 
attached to these words here as elsewhere. Flesh and blood 
uniformly represents HUMAN NATURE as many Scriptures 
prove.* 

Now, let us try this definition of "flesh and blood," and see whether 
it will fit and fill all the conditions. Was Jesus' human nature "laid 



down," "given" and "broken" for the life of the world? Yes, verily; 
he took our human nature, which is a "little lower" than the nature 
of angels, that he might give it as a ransom for all. He gave his 
human nature as a ransom for our human nature; he bought us with 
his own precious blood; he "gave all that he had" (Matt. 13:44) for 
us. And thus "as by a man came death, by a man also came the 
resurrection of the dead." (1 Cor. 15:21.) It was the man Christ 
Jesus that became our substitute or representative, giving his human 
nature a ransom for ours. 

If, then, this definition is found to meet all the conditions under 
which the expression is used, it is thus proved to be the correct 
meaning or spirit of the Master's teaching. 

But we inquire: In what sense can we eat Jesus' human nature? We 
must still remember to look for the spirit or meaning of the words, 
for the EATING is as much a symbol as the flesh and blood. To eat 
is to appropriate to one's self the life-giving properties of the thing 
eaten. Now, let us see, how does it harmonize to say, Unless you 
appropriate to yourself Jesus' human nature given, broken, and laid 
down for that very purpose, you have no life in you. This is in 
perfect harmony. Humanity lost all right to life through Adam, 
hence are now dying and dead, having in them no right to life; and 
though the ransom has been given, though the body has been 
broken, it is a part of God's plan that no man shall ever reach 
human perfection (life) again, except by a full recognition of the 
ransom price and an appropriation by faith of those rights which the 
man Christ Jesus secured by giving his flesh (human nature) for all. 
And as fast as we appropriate, God imputes; and thus the 
righteousness of Christ, and its right of life everlasting, are imputed 
to us. 

Thus by faith we eat or appropriate to ourselves that which was 
sacrificed for us. Unless we thus eat or appropriate to ourselves the 
rights and merits of the man Christ Jesus, who was sacrificed FOR 
us, it is evident that we would have no life, nor right to life in us. It 
is in or by or through him that we obtain back again the life lost for 
us by the first Adam— neither is there salvation (life) in any other, 
for there is none other name under heaven given among men 
whereby we must be saved [from death]. Acts 4:12. How 
dangerous, then, is the position of those who deny the ransom and 
its necessity and value as the life-restoring power given for the 
whole world. Neither they nor any shall ever have life until they do 
eat or appropriate that which was sacrificed. Hence the Apostle 
marks as one of the most serious offences any attempt to depreciate 
that sacrifice, or deny its necessity, saying, "Of how much sorer 
punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath 
trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of 
the covenant wherewith he was sanctified an UNHOLY [common 
or ordinary] thing." 

So, then, the eating or appropriating to ourselves of the "flesh and 
blood" [human nature] of Jesus, JUSTIFIES us from sin and its 



penalty death— justifies us to human life and its privileges. (Rom. 
5:18,19.) This is the "common," that is to say, general salvation. 
(Jude 3.) But to the "little flock" being selected or elected out from 
among the saved world— called to be saints, joint-heirs of God with 
Jesus Christ, there is a special salvation mentioned by the Apostle. 
(1 Tim. 4:10.) 

These called to this "high calling," and to become "partakers of the 
divine nature," not only eat or appropriate life by appropriating the 
value of Jesus' sacrifice, but THEY do more. Having been justified 
to life as men, i.e., having obtained back again (in faith) the rights 
lost for them by Adam, the call or privilege of this class during 
THIS AGE is that they may sacrifice or "break themselves, laying 
down their lives as Jesus did, thus becoming "dead with him" in 
hope that thereby they shall be accounted worthy of the promise 
made to them, that they shall live with him, and partake of the 
divine nature bestowed on him as a reward for the sacrifice of the 
human nature. 

It is thus that the Apostle refers to this class, not only as having 
eaten or appropriated Jesus' sacrifice to themselves, but also as 
having become associated with him in the sacrifice. He says of the 
Lord's Supper: "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the 
communion [sharing] of the blood of Christ? The bread which we 
break, is it not the communion [sharing] of the body of Christ? [Is it 
not thus that we illustrate the "filling up of the afflictions of 
Christ"? Col. 1:24.] "For we being many are one bread [loaf] and 
one body [the body anointed] 1 Cor. 10:16,17. 

So, then, in a word— one loaf of life-giving bread has been provided 
from heaven for all mankind, and during the Gospel age an 
opportunity has been offered to some of joining the body of Christ 
and sharing with him in sacrificing the human nature and inheriting 
with him the divine nature. 

Thus we see that while to have eaten Jesus' flesh literally would 
have profited nothing, yet to appropriate the rights which he 
possessed and laid down for men, is to have a right to perfect 
human life and all its privileges. "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son 
of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you." 



*Matt. 16:17; Jno. 1:14; Col. 1:22; Phn. 16; 1 Cor. 15:50; 1 Pet. 
1:24, and 3:18, and 4:1. 



R612 : page 3 



"WHO ART THOU THAT REPLIEST 
AGAINST GOD?" 

ROM. 9:20. 



It is the mistaken idea of some that justice requires that God 
should make no difference in bestowing his favors among his 
creatures; that if he exalts one to a high position, in justice he must 
do the same for all, unless it can be shown that some have forfeited 
their rights, in which case such might justly be assigned to a lower 
position. 

If this principle be a correct one, it would show that God had no 
right to create Jesus higher than angels and then to exalt him to the 
divine nature, unless he intended to do the same for all the angels 
and for all men. And to carry the principle still further, if some men 
are to be highly exalted to be partakers of the divine nature, all men 
must eventually be elevated to the same position. And why not 
carry the principle to its extreme limit, and apply the same law of 
progression to the brute and insect creation, and say that since they 
are all God's creatures they must all eventually attain unto the very 
highest plane of existence-the DIVINE NATURE. 

Perhaps none would be inclined to carry the principle— if principle it 
is-so far. Yet if it is a principle founded in simple justice, where 
could it stop short and still be just? And if such were indeed the 
plan of God, where would be the pleasing variety in all his works? 
All nature, both animate and inanimate, exhibits the glory and 
diversity of divine power and wisdom. The modest violet does not 
develop into a rose, the blade of grass does not develop into a tree, 
a bird does not develop into some other creature. But if progression 
from lower to higher natures were a part of God's plan, how inferior 
that plan would be to what it really is! If every blade of grass were 
to become a tree, or every flower a rose, and every forest warbler 
had ceased its song, what a weary, monotonous picture we should 
have! 

But such is not God's plan; for as "the heavens declare the glory of 
God, and the firmament showeth his handiwork" in wonderful 
variety and glory, much more shall his intelligent creation exhibit 
the variety and superior glory of his power. So we conclude from 
reason, from the analogies of nature, and from the express teaching 
of the Word of God. 

It is very important that we should have right ideas of justice. A 
favor should never be esteemed as a justly-merited recompense. If 
you bestow a favor, and it is received as an act of simple justice, as 
nothing more than you ought to do, you feel disappointed. An act of 
simple justice is no occasion for special gratitude, nor is it any 
proof of love; but God commendeth his great love to his creatures 
in an endless train of unmerited favors, which call forth their love 
and praise in return. 

God had a right, if he chose, to make us merely the creatures of a 
brief space of time, even if we had never sinned. Thus he has made 
some of his creatures. He might have permitted us to enjoy his 
blessings for a season, and then blot us out of existence. It is only of 



his favor that we have an existence at all, but how much greater 
favor is the redemption of the existence once forfeited by sin. 

And further, it is purely of God's favor that you are a man and not a 
beast; it is purely of favor that angels are angels, a little higher than 
men; and it is purely of God's favor that Jesus is made a partaker of 
the divine nature. It becomes all his intelligent creatures, then, to 
receive with humble gratitude whatever God may bestow. Any 
other spirit justly merits condemnation, and if indulged will end in 
abasement and destruction. It is a mark of gross ingratitude to say, 
My favor is of less value than my neighbors, and to aspire to attain 
a favor not promised. A man has no right to aspire to be an angel, 
never having been invited to that position; nor has an angel a right 
to aspire to the divine nature, that never having been offered to 
them. This was the crime of Satan which brought his abasement, 
and will end in his destruction. (Isa. 14:14.) "Whoever exalteth 
himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be 
exalted," (Luke 14:11), but not necessarily to the highest position. 

Partly from this false idea of justice, and partly from other reasons, 
the subject of election as taught in the Scriptures has been the 
occasion of much dispute and misunderstanding. That the 
Scriptures teach election few would deny, but on just what principle 
the election or selection is based is a matter of considerable 
difference of opinion, some claiming that the election is an 
arbitrary, unconditional one, and others that it is conditional. There 
is a measure of truth we believe in both of these views. 

An election on God's part is the expression of his choice for a 
certain purpose, office, or condition. We have just seen that God 
has elected or chosen that some of his creatures should be angels, 
that some should be men, that some should be beasts, birds, insects, 
etc., and that some should be of his own divine nature. We also see 
that their election to these conditions is not because of their own 
merit or demerit, but that it is purely of favor that they have 
existence in any condition. 

But let us confine ourselves to God's elections among men. None, 
we presume, would question the fact that the election of Isaac rather 
than Ishmael, of Jacob rather than Esau, and of Israel rather than 
other nations of the world, to enjoy the special favors of God, were 
unconditional elections. And Rom. 9:11 makes the very plain and 
positive statement that the election of Jacob over Esau was made 
before the children were born, so that it might be evident that the 
election was not because of the merit or demerit of either, but of 
God's unconditional choice. So also Isaac, and the nation of Israel, 
were chosen before they were born. 

"So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of 
God that sheweth mercy," or favor. (Rom. 9:16.) It was not because 
these chosen ones were better than others that God selected them, 
but it was because God had a 



R612 : page 4 



right to do as he pleased with his own, and because he chose to 
exercise that right for the accomplishment of his plans. If you 
owned a number of buildings, and chose to use one as a dwelling, 
to turn another into a store, and another into a factory, who could 
dispute your right to do so, since the buildings are your own 
property? So God asserts his right to do what he pleases with his 
various creatures. And "Who art thou, O man, that repliest against 
God? Shall the thing formed say unto him who formed it, Why hast 
thou made me thus? Hath not the potter power over the clay to 
make one vessel unto honor and another unto dishonor [without 
honor]?" Rom. 9:21. From original nothingness all were created by 
the same divine power. 

"Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, his [man's] maker: 
ASK me of things to come. Concerning my children, and 
concerning the work of my hands, command ye me? I have made 
the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched 
out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded." "Thus saith 
the Lord that created the heavens; God himself that formed the 
earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he 
formed it to be inhabited. I am the Lord, and there is none else." 
(Isa. 45:10-12,18.) None have a right to dictate to him. 

If God has established the earth, and if he formed it not in vain, but 
made it to be inhabited by restored, perfect men, who are we that 
we should reply against God and say that it is unjust not to change 
their nature and make them all partakers of a spiritual nature like 
unto the angels, or like unto his own divine nature? How much 
more becoming to come humbly to God's Word and "ASK 
concerning things to come," than to "command" or assert that he 
must carry out our ideas? 

"Lord, keep back thy servants from presumptuous sins: let them not 
have dominion over us." None of God's children, we believe, would 
knowingly dictate to the Lord; yet how easily and almost 
unconsciously we may fall into such an error. We need to look into 
the glass frequently, lest such dispositions remain undiscovered. 

The human race are God's children by creation-the work of his 
hands— and God's plan with reference to them is clearly revealed in 
his Word. Paul says that the first man (who was a sample of what 
the race will be when perfect) was of the earth, earthy; and his 
posterity, with the exception of the Gospel Church, will in the 
resurrection still be earthy- human-adapted to the earth. (1 Cor. 
15:38,44.) David says that he was made only a little lower than the 
angels, and crowned with glory and honor, dominion, etc. (Psa. 8:4- 
8.) And Peter, and Jesus, and all the Prophets since the world 
began, declare that the human race is to be RESTORED to that 
glorious perfection, and are again to have dominion over earth as 
their representative, Adam, had. 

This is what God has elected, or chosen, the human race for. And 
what a glorious portion! Close your eyes for a moment, if you can, 



to the scenes of misery and woe, degradation and sorrow, that yet 
prevail on account of sin, and picture before your mental vision the 
glory of the perfect earth. Not a stain of sin mars the harmony and 
peace of a perfect society; not a bitter thought, not an unkind look 
or word, but love welling up from every heart to meet a kindred 
response in every other heart; benevolence marking every act. Then 
there shall be no more sickness, not an ache, nor a pain, nor any 
evidence of decay— not even a fear of any such thing. Think of all 
the pictures of comparative health and beauty, of human form and 
feature, that you have ever seen, and know that perfect men and 
women will be of still surpassing loveliness. The inward purity and 
mental and moral perfection will stamp and glorify every radiant 
countenance. Such will earth's society be; and weeping, bereaved 
ones will have their tears all wiped away when thus they realize the 
resurrection work complete. 

R613 : page 4 

And this is only the change in human society. We call to mind also 
that the earth which was "made to be inhabited" by such a race of 
beings, is to be a fit and becoming abode for man. It shall no more 
bring forth thorns and briers, and require the sweat of man's face to 
yield his bread, but "the earth shall" easily and naturally "yield her 
increase." "The desert shall blossom as the rose," and the lower 
animal creation will be perfect, willing and obedient servants. All 
the grasses will not develop into trees, nor every modest flower into 
one monotonous form of beauty. No; nature with its pleasing 
variety will call to men from every direction to seek and know the 
glory and power and love of God, and mind and heart will rejoice in 
him. 

Think you that with ungrateful heart man will turn from such loving 
favor to envy an angel's estate? No, not for an instant. We call to 
mind the expression of gratitude from an only child when 
Christmas morning displayed the special evidences of a mother's 
love. Viewing his treasures with childish delight, he said, "Mamma, 
did you do all this for one little boy?" Such will be the gratitude of 
perfect human hearts. Men will not then, as they now do, with 
restless, feverish pulse and morbid desire, crave and long for 
exciting change or greater variety. No, they will have learned and 
proven that "Godliness [God-likeness] with contentment is great 
gain." (1 Tim. 6:6.) This restless desire for something new, that 
now prevails, is not a natural, but an abnormal condition, due to our 
imperfection and to our present unsatisfactory condition. It is not 
God-like to restlessly crave something new. Most things are old to 
God, and he rejoices most in those things which are old, and have 
attained their perfection. So will it be with man, when restored to 
the image of God. 

Well, says some one, will not Abraham and the Prophets, and 
others of past ages, who were so faithful to God, and who suffered 
so much for conscience sake, have a right to feel envious of the 
Gospel Church some of whom have not suffered half so much, and 



yet will be so much more highly exalted? Not at all. They will 
recognize God's right to do what he will with his own, and they 
shall be satisfied when they awake with God's likeness as Adam 
had it. (Psa. 17:15; 36:8; 63:5; 104:13; Jer. 31:12-14.) The perfect 
man will not know or understand the spiritual glory, that being 
wisely hidden from him; and he will be so absorbed and enraptured 
with the glory that surrounds him on the human plane, that he will 
have no aspirations for things unseen and not revealed. A glance at 
present experience will illustrate this-for how hardly, with what 
difficulty do those who are rich in this world's goods enter into the 
kingdom of God. The few good things possessed even under the 
present reign of evil and death so captivate the human nature that 
we need special help from God to keep our eye and purpose fixed 
on the spiritual promises. 

We notice also that the election of the Gospel Church is in a sense 
an unconditional election; for we read (Eph. 1:4,5) that it was 
chosen or elected "before the foundation of the world"— long 
enough before they were born, to prove that it was not of merit, but 
of favor. And moreover we read that "Whom he did foreknow he 
also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son;. ..and 
whom he did predestinate them he also called; and whom he called, 
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also 
glorified." 

This shows that the election or choice of the Church was a pre- 
determined thing on God's part; but mark, it is not an unconditional 
election of the individual members of the Church. Before the 
foundation of the world God determined that within a specific time 
(the Gospel Age) he would offer a special favor to those living 
during that time. And the class he then intended to favor (and no 
others) he also determined to conform to the image of His Son, who 
is "the express image of the Father's person"— that is, he determined 
to change the nature of this class from human to spiritual, and the 
highest form of the spiritual, the "divine nature." (2 Pet. 1:4.) 

And whom he thus determined to favor he called; but all who 
receive the call do not appreciate it. Some fail to make their calling 
and election sure, and therefore of the many called only a few are 
chosen. The class who actually receive the great favor offered "are 
called, and faithful, and chosen." (Rev. 17:14.) Their being called 
or invited to the high position is mentioned to show that they do not 
presumptuously aspire to it without invitation. 

"And whom he called, them he also justified." The class whom God 
calls to this high position he first redeemed and justified through 
Christ. Such believers as appreciate and accept the invitation to the 
high position, were first JUSTIFIED through faith in the Redeemer- 
-reckoned free from sin, sin being no longer imputed to them. 
Being thus divested of all condemnation, they are free to so run that 
they may make their calling and election sure. As long as we were 
in bondage to sin and death we could not move; but having by faith 
passed from death unto life, we are reckoned as free from sin as the 



world will be when actually made perfect, and therefore we may 
strive lawfully for the prize of our high calling. Since the privilege 
of running for the great prize was the only advantage to be gained 
by being justified during the Gospel Age, those who disregarded 
and did not appreciate the call are not reckoned justified. 

"And whom he justified, them he also glorified" (Gr. doxazo, 
honored.) They are honored now by being set apart for this special 
position, separated from the world, and marked or sealed with his 
Spirit; and in due time they will be more highly honored in the full 
realization of the "exceeding great and precious promises." 

All this wealth of favor predetermined on the Gospel Church was 
wholly unconditional —of God's own free will and choice. We 
never should have thought of seeking such a thing, nor dared to 
claim it on the strength of merit, nor to aspire to it without 
invitation. 

But as to whether you and I shall be of that favored class is quite 
another matter. That is conditional, and if we would be counted in 
this class we must fulfill those conditions, all of which are well 
known to us. "Let us therefore fear lest a promise being left us of 
entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it." 
(Heb. 4:1.) While the great favor is not of him that willeth, and of 
him that runneth," it is to him that willeth, and to him that runneth. 

Having thus, we trust, clearly vindicated God's absolute right and 
purpose to do what he will with his own, we would call attention to 
the fact that the principle which characterizes the bestowment of all 
his favors is the design of each for the general good of all. The 
highest exaltation is for the greatest service and blessing of all. Let 
meekness, humility and benevolence make ready the sons of God 
for their high service. 



R618 : page 4 

WHAT SIN WILL DO. 

There was but one crack in the lantern, and the wind has found it 
out and blown out the candle. How great a mischief one unguarded 
point of character may cause us! One spark blew the magazine and 
shook the whole country for miles around. One leak sank the vessel 
and drowned all on board. One wound may kill the body. One sin 
destroys the soul. It matters little how carefully the rest of the 
lantern is protected, the one point which is damaged is quite 
sufficient to admit the wind; and so it little matters how zealous a 
man may be in a thousand things, if he tolerate one darling sin. 
Satan will find out the flaw and destroy all of his hopes. The 
strength of a chain is to be measured, not by the strongest, but by 
the weakest link, for if the weakest snaps what is the use of the 
rest? Satan is a close observer, and knows exactly where our weak 
points are; we have need of very much watchfulness, and we have 



great cause to bless our merciful Lord who prayed for us that our 
faith fail not. Either our pride our sloth, our ignorance, our anger, or 
our lust would prove our ruin, unless grace interposed; any one of 
our senses or faculties might admit the foe, our virtues and graces 
might be the gates of entrance to our enemies. Oh, Jesus, if thou 
hadst indeed bought me with thy blood, be pleased to keep me by 
thy power even unto the end.— C. H. Spurgeon. 



R614 : page 4 

"THE LETTER KILLETH, BUT THE SPIRIT 
GIVETH LIFE." 

"Who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament; not 
of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit 
givethlife." 2 Cor. 3:6. 

A reckless application of Scripture without due consideration of 
the context has ever been a fruitful source of error among 
Christians, and not unfrequently proves a stumbling block even to 
those considerably advanced in the knowledge of the truth. A single 
expression of any writer or speaker, when isolated from his line of 
thought or argument, might be construed to prove the very opposite 
of what he intended. This if done intentionally would be dishonest. 
But as a general thing it is merely the result of a reckless habit. A 
single text occurs to the mind from memory, and a meaning is 
attached to it without consulting the context to see if the line of 
thought there pursued will bear it out. 

For this reason, a peculiar, and we think hurtful conclusion, has 
been drawn by many from the above words of the Apostle Paul. We 
would therefore inquire —the letter of what, killeth? and the spirit of 
what, giveth life? 

Many presume that it is the letter of God's word and are therefore 
inclined to esteem the word lightly, while they attach all importance 
to the spirit. But the word is the voice of the spirit. An esteemed 
Christian friend expressed the sentiment of this class as follows: I 
look for divine guidance in three ways: through God's spirit, his 
providences, and his word, which I esteem in the order named. And 
some evidently mistaken leadings, entirely out of harmony with the 
Word, gave sad evidence that the supposed leadings of God's spirit 
were merely the fancies of the human spirit. "Sanctify them through 
thy truth, thy Word is truth," was Jesus' prayer; and his command, 
"Search the Scriptures... for they are they which testify of me." 
Again he says, The spirit shall receive of mine [those things written 
in the Scriptures] and shall show them unto you. John 16:14. 

We have no intimation in the Scriptures that the Spirit of God leads 
his children through any other medium than that of his Word. In 
fact we have the express statement of our Lord to this effect, in 
John 16:13— "He will not speak from himself; he will speak 



whatever he may hear." (See Diaglott, R.V., Rotherham and 
Young.) 

To speak from himself, would be to speak independently of the 
Scriptures and to render them of only secondary importance. God 
could speak to his children now in visions and dreams, as he did 
before the Scriptures were completed, but since these, his "two 
witnesses," the Old and New Testaments were prepared, he has 
honored them as the medium for the communication of his will. 

We do not doubt that God sometimes impresses some scriptural 
truth or principle upon the mind both in our waking and sleeping 
hours, to thus arouse and quicken us; but if we have any strong 
impression that is not in harmony with the Word of God, we may 
be sure that it comes from another spirit, and not from the Spirit of 
God. To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to 
this word, it is because there is no light in them." Isa. 8:20. 

Just so we would also scrutinize the circumstances of life, lest that 
which is only a device of Satan, might be mistaken for the 
providence of God, and an indication of his will. We should call to 
mind the fact that in this age "the kingdom of heaven suffereth 
violence," that we are opposed by the powers of darkness at every 
step. How 

R614 : page 5 

often for instance when we would make some special effort to 
advance the truth, do we find one or a variety of circumstances 
conspiring against us. And if the adversary can only delude us into 
the idea that these circumstances are the providences of God 
indicating his will, how easily will he accomplish his purpose and 
our hindrance; whereas if we recognize their true source, as soldiers 
of Christ we will battle against adverse circumstances, and plant the 
standard of the heavenly kingdom in view of the world. 

We should not expect to conquer circumstances without 
experiencing suffering, deprivation, and loss of earthly things; often 
we shall be wounded, and sometimes partially defeated and greatly 
discouraged. But if our purpose is founded in the truth, don't let us 
be deceived into the idea that the providence of God is against us, 
but let us look to the Captain for direction as to how we may master 
the situation. While thus bearing in mind the policy and deceptive 
arts of our great opposer, we also remember the comforting 
assurances that "The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord," 
and that "Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the 
Lord upholdeth him with his hand." Psa. 37:23,24. 

Yes, circumstances which are now largely in the hand of the 
enemy— "the prince of the world," such as sickness, business 
perplexities, loss of friends, strong opposition by the enemies of 
truth, and many things which may appear merely accidental, may 
even cause us to fall for a time partially defeated in our purpose to 
glorify God. But, blessed thought! though we may sometimes thus 



fall, we shall not be utterly cast down, for "the Lord upholdeth with 
his hand." 

But without a full conviction that we are really doing the Lord's 
will in that which we strive to accomplish, it would be unwise thus 
to strive against opposition, and therefore we would inquire, Is 
there any way by which the soldiers of Christ may know and fully 
recognize the command of their Captain? In other words, How may 
we know when our steps are ordered or directed of the Lord, and 
that we are not being deceived by the enemy? The Psalmist, we 
think, gives the key to the answer, when he prays, "Order (direct) 
my steps in thy Word." (119:113.) Yes, just so we find it; the steps 
of a good man are all ordered or directed in the Word, and with "the 
law of his God in his heart, none of his steps shall slide." Psa. 
37:31. 

The Word of God furnishes principles, precepts and examples 
broad enough to indicate the Lord's will in the minutest affairs of 
life, but we must have constant recourse to it; and with full purpose 
of heart we must not only seek to know, but to obey it. 

Seeing, then, that God has thus honored his Word as the channel for 
communicating his will to men, we cannot conclude that it is his 
Word that kills, while his Spirit, acting independent of it, and as a 
superior guide gives life. If this were our belief, we should cease to 
study the Word, and look for the leadings of the Spirit through 
dreams and visions and circumstances. 

But referring again to 2 Cor. 3:6, we notice that Paul is comparing 
the Jewish dispensation with the Gospel dispensation. He shows 
that the law given to Israel, which was indeed ordained unto life, 
i.e., which guaranteed life to the obedient, was found to be unto 
death, because Israel was totally unable to keep it. The only 
condition of the law was, Obey! and he who fails in one point is 
guilty of all. If you can obey it perfectly, then you can have life. 
But though Israel with united voice said, "All that the Lord hath 
spoken we will do" (Exod. 19:8), doubtless greatly rejoicing in the 
prospect of everlasting life, yet not one was able to keep it. Why? 
Because they had only the letter of the law engraven on the tables 
of stone, and not the spirit of the law (which is love) written in their 
hearts. Therefore as death had reigned from Adam to Moses, so it 
continued to reign, for all were unable because of inherited 
weakness to keep God's perfect law. And so that glorious law 
ordained or arranged to perpetuate life, was found to be "the 
ministration of death." 

But since the Son of God took our nature, being born under the law, 
fulfilling all its requirements, and thus having a right to life, gave 
his life as a substitute or ransom for ours, we are introduced into a 
new dispensation. We are no longer under law, but under grace. 
(Rom. 6:14.) God's requirement is not now do if you would live, 
but the good news now is, that "there is now no condemnation to 



them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after 
the spirit." 

In our present imperfect condition, no matter how much we 
endeavor to keep the law, and thereby merit life, we fail; it is 
impossible. The letter of the law condemned or killed every man 
that ever lived, except Jesus; and very many, inspired by its 
promise of life, tried to keep it in all sincerity. Verily, it has been 
abundantly proven that the letter of the law killeth. 

But since we have been freed from the letter of the law by the death 
of Christ, he having fulfilled and settled our obligation, we have a 
new offer of life on a new condition, viz., if we walk after or strive 
to keep the spirit of the law. To such there is no condemnation. 
They may thus have life through Christ. The spirit of God's law is 
love. As Jesus and Paul taught, "Love is the fulfilling of the law." 
(Matt. 22:37,40, and Rom. 13:10.) We are as unable to fully keep 
the spirit of the law as Israel was, but we are only required to walk 
after or strive to keep it, and in so far as in our weakness we fail, 
the merit of Jesus supplies our deficiency. 

It is then the spirit of the law (love) manifested in us, which, 
through Christ, gives or guarantees life. Even though that spirit be 
not fully developed, "he that has begun the good work in us is able 
to complete it." Our desire and effort to keep the very spirit of the 
law is reckoned as a perfect keeping of it, while our inability to do 
so is compensated for by the sacrifice of Christ. When men are 
restored to perfection, the law of God will be written in their hearts 
(Jer. 31:33), and its spirit of love will permeate their whole being, 
and its retention will be their guarantee of everlasting life. The 
letter of the law killeth, but the spirit of the law giveth life. "Thanks 
be unto God who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus 
Christ." (1 Cor. 15:57.) 



R613 : page 5 

"AS" AND "SO." 

NEWELL. W. FIELDS. 

"As thy days, so shall thy strength be." Deut. 33:25. 

"As the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward 
them that fear him. As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he 
removed our transgressions from us. Like as a father pitieth his 
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him." Psalm 103:11-13. 

"As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round 
about his people from henceforth even forever." Psa. 125:2. 

"As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher 
than your ways. As the rain cometh down and the snow from 
heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and 
maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, 



and bread to the eater, so shall my word be that goeth forth out of 
my mouth; it shall not return unto me void, but it shall prosper in 
the thing whereto I sent it." Isa. 55:9-1 1. 

"As the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden causeth the 
things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord God will cause 
righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations." Isa. 
61:11. 

"As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father; so he 
that eateth me, even he shall live by me." John 6:57. 

"As by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to 
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift 
came upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man's 
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one 
shall many be made righteous." Rom. 5:18,19. 

"As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." 1 
Cor. 15:22. 

"As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in 
him." Col. 2:6. 

"As Christ forgave you, so also do ye." Col. 3:13. 

"He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk, even 
as he walked." 1 John 2:6. 

"Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the 
day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world." 1 John 
4:17. 



R615 : page 5 

THE PRINCE OF THIS WORLD. 

When Adam was created it was that he might be the Lord of this 
world. To him was given "the dominion" [Gen. 1:28] after "the 
likeness" of God; to be an "image" or miniature representation of 
the Lord of all. When Adam fell, he, of course, lost his birthright— if 
we may so express it. His dominion and possessions passed into the 
hands of the crafty conqueror. Since then Satan has been the Prince 
and God of this world. 

Paul calls him "the god of this world," "the prince of the power of 
the air," etc. Jesus recognized his position in the words of the title 
of this article. (John 14:30.) In the great temptation (Matt. 4:1-11), 
when Satan could neither make our Lord to doubt or tempt the 
Father, his last desperate stake was "the dominion." He evidently 
knew that the mission of the Christ was to win back "the kingdom" 
which he (Satan) now held and ruled through his minions, the 
blood-thirsty kings of earth. This offer was no farce; it was the 
climax of the temptations, the last resort of a baffled enemy. 



Hades is— not the palace, but— the prison-house of Satan. His castle 
is in the air, his dungeon is the prison-house of death. Into this he 
has been packing his victims since Adam's fall. Into this Jesus 
himself entered, but he captured the kings, and will yet bind "the 
strong man," "spoil [rob] his house," and lead forth "a multitude of 
captives." 

Sickness, disease, accidents and other mysterious dispensations of 
Providence (so-called) are but the instruments of Satan; and the 
messengers-not of light but of darkness-by which he gathers in his 
harvest. 

The grim reaper, death, is Satan's Brigadier-General-not the Lord's. 
Can a house be divided against itself? Jesus was manifested that he 
might destroy death, and him that hath the power of death, THAT 
IS the DEVIL. (Heb. 2:14.) 

The arch-deceiver, he who was a liar from the beginning, has 
carefully instructed his messengers to blame the God of love for all 
the misery that exists and comes upon the world. 

When the cherished little rose-bud baby is secretly stricken by the 
arrow of the arch-enemy, it is said to be the Lord's hand who has 
transplanted it in Paradise. A very pretty thought, if there was any 
truth in it, although even this fiction (as was intended) does not 
reconcile the parents to the act of the spoiler. Frequently it is just 
the opposite. The widow and orphan in their anguish doubt the love 
and goodness of Him whom they blame for robbing them of their 
loved protector. This is just what the deceiver wanted. 

When the prophet of the Lord would comfort the stricken he said, 
"Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears. " Why, 
Jeremiah? Are they in heaven, transported there as our and the 
Lord's jewels, to draw our hearts there, and lead us to follow them? 
Thus putting aside Jesus as our Leader and Desire? No, the prophet 
of the Lord says: "They shall come again from the land of THE 
ENEMY." 

When the hidden shaft suddenly strikes some one who had been 
apparently well before, ignorance delivers the verdict, "Died by the 
hand of God." When a promising and useful member of society 
falls by the hand of a hell-inspired ruffian, we are told to bow to the 
decision of the All-wise. 

If our Lord set up his kingdom eighteen hundred years ago and has 
been ruling ever since, would there not be an excuse for the citizens 
who sent the message: "We will not have this one to reign over us"? 
Can any one look calmly at the misery of the past six thousand 
years and not discern who has been the ruler of this world? Surely 
they would exclaim with Job: "The earth is given into the hand of 
the wicked one; he covereth the faces of [deceiveth] the judges 
thereof: if not, where and who is he [the rightful ruler]? 



Let those who have the truth stand up for the character and glory of 
the Father and of His Son, who is about to take to himself His great 
power and reign. 

Then, when the battle is over, we shall see a different order of 
things; when earth's sons may each sit fearlessly and peacefully 
under his own vine and fig-tree, rejoicing in the fruit of their own 
planting. (Micah 4:4.) 

Then there will be no more appalling accidents [?] as are now so 
common— caused frequently by a refusal to bear the expense of 
safeguards and preventatives. 

Death is everywhere. Carelessness, recklessness, covetousness, 
drunkenness or devilishness may each be the instrumentalities, but 
Satan is the director of all. Let us give the Devil his due in the 
fullest sense, and bravely stand for the honor of the name of our 
Lord, praying, "THY KINGDOM COME." 

W. I. M. 



R615 : page 5 

JEWISH HOPES. 

Referring to the future of Palestine and the hopes of the Hebrews 
centered therein, the N. York Herald says: 

"While the great Christian Powers stand with mail-clad hands to 
grasp the coveted and tempting bit (Palestine) when the moribund 
Turk lets go his hold, a historic figure steps forward and declares, 
"The land is mine!" And when the Powers turn to look at the 
Speaker they recognize the Jew— the child of the patriarch who 
lived in Palestine when it was first invaded and who would himself 
fain be present to receive it as his own when its possession is 
disputed thirty-six centuries after! 

What a wonderful coincidence! "Not so," says the Jew, "it is not 
coincidence, it is my destiny. " Let us now briefly glance at the 
position of the Jew in this question of the future Palestine. Nations 
are born from ideas. From the idea of German unity grew the 
German Empire into actual fact, proclaimed to the world in 
Versailles, with French cannon to answer amen to German prayer 
for its welfare. From the cry of "Italia irridenta" was born the new 
Italy of to-day, whose thunder will again wake Mediterranean 
shores. From the tradition of ancient Greece the modern Greece 
was created. So Christians understand how the long cherished 
aspirations of the Jew may yet be realized; and while they fully 
concede that while to the Jew above all belongs Palestine, while he 
above all is specially qualified to develop the future of that teeming 
country, while his possession of it would solve the fears of the 
jealous Powers, the establishment of the Jew in it would be an act 



of justice, and a worthy atonement for the fearful wrongs 
perpetrated upon him— the martyr of history. 

THE PROPHECY OF RESTORA TION. 

As for the Jews themselves, to say how they long for restoration is 
hardly necessary. On the 9th of their month Ab, they fast for the 
destruction of their temple and the national calamities attending 
those events. There is not a morning or evening but what they pray, 
"Gather us together from the four parts of the earth;" "Restore our 
peoples as of old;" "Dwell Thou in the midst of Jerusalem," and 
these words are uttered in every city where the Jew is found— that 
means throughout the world. Such constancy is almost beyond 
belief. Their patriotism is beyond all bounds, and to this day the 
Spanish Jew in all lands (even in this distant country), put some of 
the dust of Palestine or "tierra santa," as they call it, on the eyes of 
their dead— a pathetic evidence of their love for the sacred soil. 

"When the railway reaches Jerusalem, 

R615 : page 6 

Messiah comes," alludes to Isaiah 66:20, where the prophet in his 
vision sees the exiles returning by all manner of conveyances, 
among them what he calls "kirkaroth. " The English version 
translates it "swift beasts," which is, of course, too indefinite, or 
"dromedaries," which is certainly incorrect. Philologists are not 
wanting who derive the word from kar, "a furnace," and kar-kar "to 
sway,"— asserting that the prophet sought thus to coin a word for 
what was shown him in his vision, a train in rapid motion. "When 
Nicholas reigns redemption comes" is in allusion to Isaiah 63:4, 
from which verse Hebraists evolve, by what they term "Rashe 
Teboth," the sentence, "All Judah shall hear and behold the fall of 
Nicholas, emperor of Muscovy, on account of the oppression of the 
children of Judah, and after happening our fall will happen our real 
redemption, and near at hand for the children of Judah will be the 
good tidings of the Gishbite prophet." These and such as these are 
important inasmuch as they indicate Jewish thought. 



R615 : page 6 

THE LIBERTY OF THE SONS OF GOD. 

"The creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of 
corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God." Rom. 
8:21. 

At present none have liberty; the entire human race is under a 
fearful yoke of bondage. A bitter, relentless and merciless enemy 
holds the dominion, and leads his unwilling captives along the 
pathway of suffering down to the prison of death. By reason of this 
"the whole creation groaneth and travaileth together in pain." 



R616 : page 6 



But the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for deliverance. 
Will it ever come? Six thousand years of tyranny and suffering has 
not obliterated earnest expectation and longing hope. All do not 
hope for deliverance because of the promise of God. With many the 
hope is begotten of desire. From the very earliest ages of history 
men have hoped for a "good time coming," a "Golden Age," in 
which a balm for life's various ills should be discovered. Groaning 
in pain, they waited and hoped, though they knew not, and know 
not yet, how their earnest expectation shall be more than realized. 
In some hope has almost died out in despair, or has become vague 
and uncertain; but believers in the Word of God, clinging to his 
promise, anxiously inquire, How long, O Lord, how long must we 
wait for its fulfillment? To this inquiry the inspired Apostle replies, 
that mankind must wait until the manifestation of the Sons of God; 
and the saints must wait until the entire "body" of Christ, of which 
they are members, is complete and adopted to the higher plane. 

Again we inquire of Paul, Who are these sons of God, and how will 
they be manifested? His answer is that all those who are now led by 
the Spirit of God, and who have consequently received the spirit of 
adoption, are the sons of God, for whose manifestation the groaning 
creation waiteth (vs. 14,15). These adopted sons-adopted into the 
divine family, made partakers of the divine nature, and joint-heirs 
with Jesus— shall be manifested together with him. When he shall 
appear, then shall they also appear with him in glory. Col. 3:4. 

For this glorious appearing of the divine sons and heirs of God the 
groaning creation must wait. But, thank God! we have the glorious 
message to bear that the manifestation and the blessing are just at 
hand. At present the world does not recognize the sons of God, for 
now they, in following the footsteps of their Lord, are as he was, 
despised and rejected of men. But shortly this will be reversed, and 
mankind will recognise their exaltation and glory. Already their 
Lord and head has come to gather and glorify his chosen ones. 

The deliverance of the groaning creation, we are told, is to be into 
the same glorious liberty that these sons of God will then be 
enjoying. It will be a complete deliverance from the bondage of 
corruption. When all are fully delivered "there shall be no more 
death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more 
pain, for the former things are passed away. Rev. 21:4. 

It is the mistaken idea of some that deliverance into the liberty of 
the divine sons of God means a transforming into the same nature 
and condition. But deliverance, or liberty, has reference simply to a 
common bondage, in which both classes had been held, and from 
which both classes will be released, one class to the perfection of 
life as human beings, "a little lower than the angels," (Psa. 8:5,6), 
the other class to perfection of life in the divine nature- "so much 
better than the angels" (Heb. 1:4; 2 Pet. l:4)-that is, the bondage of 
corruption, or death. As Jesus was delivered from the bondage of 



death, and as the church will be delivered from the bondage of 
death, so likewise will the whole creation be delivered from death. 
"Now Christ has been raised from the dead, a first-fruit of those 
having fallen asleep." And just as sure as the first-fruit came, so 
surely will all the after-fruits appear. All will enjoy the same liberty 
from death, and from all its accompanying distress and sorrow. All 
tears shall be wiped away. 

But there is still something more implied in this expression, "the 
glorious liberty of the sons of God." It carries with it the idea that 
the liberty which God will grant will not be license to follow the 
bent of a depraved nature, but that it will be a blessed liberty from 
that depravity, and full freedom to follow the inclinations of a 
nature free from sin and in harmony with God, where the good of 
self and others will receive due and equal consideration. Surely that 
will be glorious liberty. Men sometimes call that liberty which is 
only Satan's license to trample on another's rights; but how different 
will be the glorious liberty of the sons of God! Though Jesus and 
his bride will be of the divine nature, while the mass of mankind 
will have a restitution to the perfection of the human nature, all will 
enjoy the same blessed liberty from the bondage of corruption 
(death), and the privilege of following the inclinations of then- 
perfect being, which will be in harmony with and well pleasing to 
God. 

One other statement of Paul in this connection— "The creature 
[mankind] was made subject to vanity [frailty- Diaglott] , not 
willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in 
hope." (v. 20.) That is, God, through the penalty of Adam's 
transgression, placed the entire race under death's dominion and 
bondage-made them subject to it. Not that man willingly came 
under the control of his captor, death, but contrary to his will and 
choice, God put him under it as a penalty for transgression. 

Yet it was not a hopeless bondage, for when God condemned and 
gave mankind into death's control, he planned his redemption and 
ultimate deliverance again to the former liberty- the liberty or 
freedom from death and pain which is the common privilege of all 
God's sons on every plane of being. In hope also that his experience 
under bondage would be of future benefit, and forever thereafter 
deter him from evil. 

For this very purpose— the delivering of the groaning creation— the 
sons of God, now being prepared, are shortly to be exalted to that 
nature and consequent position of power, which will enable them to 
accomplish the glorious work— a "RESTITUTION of all things 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world 
began." 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R616 : page 6 



NO USE. 



There is no use in putting up the motto, "God bless our home," if 
the father is a rough old bear, and the spirit of discourtesy and 
rudeness is taught by the parents to the children, and by the older to 
the younger. There is no use in putting up a motto, "The Lord will 
provide," while the father is shiftless, the mother is shiftless, the 
boys refuse to work, and the girls busy themselves over gew-gaws 
and finery. There is no use in putting up the motto, "The greatest of 
these is charity," while the tongue of the backbiter wags in that 
family, and silly gossip is dispensed at the tea-table. There is no use 
in placing up conspicuously the motto, "The liberal man deviseth 
liberal things," while the money clinks in the pockets of "the head 
of the household," groaning to get out to see the light of day. In 
how many homes are these mottoes standing— let us say hanging- 
sarcasms, which serve only to point a jest and adorn a satire! The 
beauty of quiet lives, of trustful, hopeful, free-handed, free-hearted, 
charitable lives, is one of surpassing loveliness, and those lives shed 
their own incomparable fragrance, and the world knows where to 
find them. And they shall remain fresh and fadeless when the colors 
of pigment and the worsted and the floss have faded, and the frames 
have rotted away in their joints.— Sel. 



R616 : page 6 

SPIRITUALISM AND THE CHURCHES. 

Dr. Sprecher, while pastor of the First Presbyterian church in 
Oakland, Cal., preached against Spiritualism, or at least in such a 
manner that Spiritualists could not claim him as one of their 
fraternity. But a sermon of his on Sunday evening, February 24th, 
in Calvary church, San Francisco, of which he is pastor, presents 
him in quite another aspect. It is true that in this sermon, or lecture, 
as it was called, he speaks against spirit mediums and 
materializations; but Spiritualists will care little for that while he 
endorses and pleads for all that is essential to the existence and 
growth of Spiritualism. That we are correct in this statement every 
reader must admit who has any knowledge of Spiritualism and of 
the claims upon which it is based, when he reads the following, 
which we clip from the Chronicle's report of his lecture: 

"The subject of Dr. Sprecher's lecture last evening was, 'Do the 
spirits of the departed revisit this world, and do they manifest 
themselves to men at this day?' There was, he said, an almost 
universal belief in an intermediate state of spiritual existence 
between death and the day of resurrection, during which period the 
soul was conscious, but in a different state from that upon which it 
would enter after the final judgment. This caused some doubt, but it 
was difficult to see the reason why. The Scriptures speak of angels 
and ministering spirits, and there are also instances mentioned 
therein of the spirits of the departed reappearing, while there is not 



a word which prevents a belief in the power of a spirit to revisit the 
earth if it so desired. The probabilities were all one way, and it was 
not at all unreasonable that if in the spirit world we retain the 
affection for those we leave behind, which we entertained while on 
earth, that we should desire to see them again. The speaker believed 
that the affections did not die with the body, and that our friends, 
either as disembodied spirits or as spirit bodies, may visit and 
minister to us. This belief was not Spiritualism, as the term is 
generally understood, and was not incompatible with Christianity, 
and a Christian who held such a belief should not fall into the error 
that he had 

R617 : page 6 

forsaken his faith and must therefore seek refuge in Spiritualism." 

We record our emphatic denial of the assertion that the Scriptures 
give any instances of "the spirits of the departed reappearing," and 
we invite any one to point out to us the texts wherein such 
reappearing is supposed to be given. We will examine them in our 
columns for the benefit of our readers. 

But, aside from this, we remark that the doctor is right in saying 
that the belief he announces is "not incompatible with Christianity"- 
-as he and his associates understand Christianity. But we insist that 
it comprises all that is vital to the existence of Spiritualism. And 
Spiritualists would no doubt rather have the doctor remain in his 
church and bring up the members to a recognition of spirit 
intercourse and spirit ministration, than to leave the church and 
professedly "seek refuge in Spiritualism," where his influence in 
favor of the assumed facts of that belief would not be so great as it 
now is, as pastor of a popular orthodox church. 

And Spiritualists will not care much for his avowed disbelief in the 
reliability of mediums. They are always ready to admit that there 
are impostors among the mediums, and this admission robs the 
doctor's indictment of its force. But when he claims that his 
statements will apply to all mediums, then they will confront him 
with some millions who oppose their observation and experience to 
his, many of whom have put the mediums to the severest tests, and 
are fully convinced that there was no collusion or trickery in the 
manifestations. We give the doctor's position on this point as 
reported: 

"He then turned to the second head of his discourse, and said that 
whether or not spirits did manifest themselves at the present day, 
was a question of fact which could be put to the proof. The modern 
Spiritualists assert that they can materialize spirits, and volumes on 
the subject have been written by men of science and of no science. 
If such a thing were true, it was the most stupendous subject of the 
age. It was a subject to which the speaker had paid a great deal of 
attention, and after carefully following up the records of all the 
most celebrated mediums of the world, he was unable to recall one 
who had not, sooner or later, been proven a fraud. Whenever any 



one was bold enough to seize the materialized spirit, it had turned 
out to be either the medium or an accomplice. This had occurred so 
often that there was no room for doubt in the mind of any one that 
the whole thing was an imposture. Again, if a medium could call up 
the spirits of the mighty dead they could tell us something new; but, 
although the spirits of the great masters of poetry and prose, great 
scientists and inventors, have been time and again materialized, 
they seemed to have left all their genius behind them, and know no 
more than the least gifted of mortals. And this could not be laid to 
any lack of expression or want of education on the part of the 
medium, for a great as well as a small thought could be expressed 
in defective language." 

Thousands upon thousands have with him concluded that "if such a 
thing were true, it was the most stupendous subject of the age." And 
the great majority, having a greater love for popular error than for 
unpopular Bible truth, will take the premises assumed and laid 
down by Dr. Sprecher, and logically conclude that the thing is true. 
We do not believe that mesmerism, psychology or clairvoyance can 
be explained upon natural principles. We are aware that professed 
scientists have their explanations of these things, but, as one said to 
us when closely questioned on the subject, "That is our theory of 
the matter; but whether or not it is true we cannot positively say." 
But the number who have heard inexperienced and illiterate 
mediums, while entranced, speak in language which they could by 
no means command in their normal condition, is so large that the 
last part of the paragraph quoted above will have no effect at this 
day in overthrowing their claims to "spirit inspiration." The 
following paragraph concludes the report. As it is a noteworthy 
discourse on the subject, we thus give the report in full: 

"There were many who believed in Spiritualism because they saw 
wonders which they could not account for on natural principles. But 
that was simply folly, for no medium had ever performed tricks 
equal to those of the professional jugglers of India, who disclaimed 
the agency of any supernatural power. They are simply illusions. 
Mesmerism and clairvoyance and mind-reading, which are agencies 
of mediumism, are all explainable upon natural principles, as is also 
the belief that many persons have that they see spirits. Medical 
works abound in instances of the latter, and prove that it is the 
result of an abnormal condition of the system, and that these 
supposed visions can be produced by mechanical appliances. The 
speaker had no faith in the habitual appearance of spirits, but there 
was one case in which it did seem possible for the spirit of one to 
communicate with another-at the hour of death. Many instances 
have occurred where a person has been apprised of the death of 
some dear relative or friend in that manner, and the fact of the death 
and the very hour and minute has been subsequently 

R617 : page 7 



confirmed, together with the circumstances as they appeared at the 
time. The power of the mind and will of one upon another in close 



sympathy of thought and feeling was very great, and it was possible 
that the soul in its extreme experience might communicate with a 
kindred soul. These occurrences could not be coincidences. But this 
was not Spiritualism. The communications came direct without the 
aid of a medium. The speaker concluded by warning his hearers 
against the danger of being led into grave mistakes by listening to 
the advice of mediums, who are often in collusion with those who 
sought not their welfare." 

We cannot think he has shown his reasoning powers to great 
advantage, according to this report. First, every probability, and 
facts of Scripture, he claims as proof in favor of the spirits of the 
departed reappearing. Then he states his belief that the interest of 
the departed in the welfare of the living is not lessened by their 
death. And next he attacks the mediums, clairvoyants and 
materializers as humbugs, and finally claims the possibility of one 
spirit communicating with another at the hour of death. But 
"possible" has no more place in this connection than in the other 
cases, as phenomena are presented under other circumstances 
which can be accounted for only by admitting their supernatural 
origin. And if his premises are correct, then all the phenomena 
shown by the most pretentious mediums may be true or genuine. To 
admit his premises is to admit the possibility of every claim of the 
Spiritualists to be just. 

Not long since we saw the belief expressed by a writer that Bishop 
Bowman is a Spiritualist. We heard the Bishop speak of the 
presence and ministrations of his departed in such a manner as to 
lead us to believe that he was a full believer in Spiritualism; and his 
disclaimer, immediately made, did not change our opinion, if he 
meant just what his words expressed. 

These positions of well-known ministers are the positions of hosts 
of ministers in the land who are making Spiritualism popular, and 
preparing the way for its general acceptance by the churches. The 
churches and the Spiritualists are drawing more closely together. In 
a "reception" recently given to a Mrs. Lord, in Boston, she said, as 
reported in the Banner of Light: 

"She remembered that in the audience before her were some who 
had not yet seen their way clearly to accept the light which was 
shining upon the pathway of mortals to-day. But why should the 
Christian Church deny the possibility of present as well as past 
inspiration. Though human tongues fall out of speech, would 
immortal love send back no echo across the waves of death? Could 
he who promised the full harvest forget the weeping sower? If such 
a bridge as that of Brooklyn could be reared by feeble human 
means across the pulsing tides, could not angel-minds plan and 
spirit-workers build a bridge of communion over the soundless 
waters of death? Spiritualism came to take away no one's faith, but 
to give knowledge to each and all-to make assurance doubly sure 
that the course of human life is an upward one, and the chain of 
being stretches through an eternity of progress." 



This profession that Spiritualism came to take away no one's 
Christian faith, but rather to give knowledge of that which before 
was only belief, is "a new departure" for Spiritualists, but they are 
all fast advancing to that position. All now claim that Spiritualism 
is a religion, while very many claim that it is the Christian religion 
perfected. This is their part of the "compromise," while the 
churches are admitting the return of the spirits of the dead, and their 
intercourse with mortals, which is all that Spiritualists ask them to 
admit, and the members are assured that they need not leave their 
communions because of their entertaining such belief. If anything 
more is needed to place the churches and Spiritualists on common 
ground, we cannot imagine what it is. These main points admitted, 
minor questions will settle themselves. 

These things are not unexpected to us. He who knows "what is 
man," and "who knows the end from the beginning," has placed on 
record in the "sure word of prophecy" just such a state of things. 
Miracles to deceive, yet professing a pious intention, are plainly 
spoken of in Rev. 13 and 16, as being done in the last days. Our 
Saviour, in Matt. 24, and Paul in 2 Thess. 2, speak of these things, 
and all place these deceptions 

R618 : page 7 

just before the second advent of the Lord. Why, oh why, will not 
Bible readers and professed Bible believers look at these matters 
candidly, and accept the warning message which heaven sends for 
our instruction at this time? If the multitude will follow in the broad 
way, and choose darkness rather than light, we pray that God will 
give zeal and power in the proclamation of the message, that a little 
flock, a remnant, may accept it and receive the kingdom as their 
reward. (Luke 12:31-37.)— Selected. 



R618 : page 7 

THE TRADITION OF THE MEHDI. 

Oddly enough Mohammedans are the most stubborn of adventists, 
looking forward with full assurance of faith to the second coming 
of Christ. Closely connected with this article of Moslem belief is 
the doctrine of the Mehdi, who is to prepare the way for the coming 
of Christ and is to assist him in conquering an evil world. The 
universal acceptance of this doctrine by all Moslems is the source 
of the attention now paid in the Moslem world to the claims of any 
adventurer who calls himself a Mehdi. 

Since the fame of the rebel chief of the Soudan has extended to the 
ends of the earth, it may not be amiss to group together the 
principal traditions accepted among Moslems as to those last days 
of the earth, of whose approach the coming of the Mehdi is to be a 
sign. 



The Koran forms but a small part of the basis of the Moslem faith. 
It is explained and extended by a vast array of reputed sayings of 
the Prophets. These traditional sayings are authenticated by a long 
chain of evidence, and have among most Moslems equal force with 
the Koran itself. It is in these traditions that one must look for the 
full details of the prophecies by which Moslems are taught to 
forecast the approach of the end of all things. It is true that the 
traditions are often conflicting and abound in wonders. A Moslem 
divine once said to me frankly: "I am ashamed to speak of these 
things; for when men set about making a religion they always 
forget that their work will be criticised." But the traditions are 
accepted by the masses in Turkey; and he who should openly reject 
them would be accounted as worse than a blasphemer. The 
traditions are the main source of the Moslem religion as expounded 
in Turkey. 

Mohammed is reputed to have said that the world was already in its 
last period when he entered upon his ministry. "Comparing your 
times with the times of past revelations," he said, "your epoch is the 
time between mid-afternoon and sunset. " The Jews had the 
morning, the Christians the noon, and to the Moslems was given the 
perilous period of the decline of light. The duration of the Moslem 
era is fixed by tradition at more than one thousand and less than 
fifteen hundred years. 

These signs of the end are to be of gradual development. There will 
be an increase of ignorance among the people. The exposition of 
the holy law will decline and cease. Doctors of the law will be 
wicked and oppressive. The people will drink wine. Ignorant men 
will sit in high places and be accounted wise. The fool and the son 
of a fool will become a ruler of the people, and men will give bribes 
to be delivered from his wickedness. Men will obey their wives and 
disobey their parents. It can easily be seen that the time of the end 
cannot be far off if these are its signs. New Yorkers had best look 
around them as they read among other tokens that "very high 
houses will be built, and love for musical instruments will 
increase," in the wicked last days! 

There will be so great a scarcity of honest men that every 
trustworthy man will be famous far and wide, and those who are 
accounted wise and brilliant will not possess the smallest atom of 
faith in God. The people will hate, and try to destroy all who speak 
the truth, and missionaries of Anti-Christ will preach, in all the 
world, lies acceptable to men. Finally, most terrible of all, women 
will become rebellious, and will begin to put various sorts of 
curious things on their heads, and will begin to wear tight-fitting 
dresses. We may, perhaps, agree with the pious old Moslem who, 
long years ago, grouped these "signs" together— "My brethren, the 
most of these evil customs are already in full vigor among you." 

But these lesser tokens only lead up to the greater signs, without 
which the end of the world will not come. Prominent among these 
greater signs is the appearance of the Mehdi, or "Guide." He will be 



of the family of the prophet and his name will be Mohammed, son 
of Abdulla. He will be a perfect man, full of holy knowledge, and 
he will come at a time when there is no longer a Caliph. This 
provision, by the way, the Soudan Mehdi avoids by declaring that 
the Turks are not true Mohamedans, and that, therefore, their Sultan 
cannot be recognized as Caliph. The Mehdi will become the center 
about whom all true believers will be grouped. He will himself 
believe that which is true in the faith of all religious sects, and all 
true people of God will be united in him without sectarian 
differences. All these people he will lead to Jesus Christ. For about 
the same time with the coming of the Mehdi, Moslems believe that 
Dejjal (Anti-Christ) will appear. Some seem to regard him as a 
beast, but the best authorities among the Turks declare that this 
Dejjal will prove to be a one-eyed Jew from Khorasan. On his 
forehead will be written the word Kiafir (blasphemer) in letters 
which all true believers-and they alone-can read. Seventy 
thousand Jews will follow after him, and he will go through the 
whole world, visiting all countries, during a space of forty days. It 
should be remarked, however, that of these forty days the first is to 
be as long as a year, the second as long as a month, the third as long 
as a week, and the rest each twenty-four hours long. During the 
time of this Dejjal Moslems expect that Jesus Christ will descend 
from heaven for a period of forty years. He will slay Dejjal with a 
javelin, and then the whole earth will be filled with righteousness. 
Neither man nor beast will any more know hate, but everywhere 
happiness and equality will reign. So shall begin the last stage of 
the earth's existence. Then other great signs and wonders will 
occur. Gog and Magog will overrun the earth, and by their 
oppression of the people of God will usher in the last day. Then 
they will be miraculously destroyed, and God's true people will be 
translated in the twinkling of an eye, so as to escape the horrors of 
the age of fire. 

Such is the tradition of the Mehdi and its chronological importance 
to Moslems. In Turkey, pious souls point out that the 
demoralization of the people is fully up to the mark that has been 
foretold. Immorality is rife. Men are crushed for speaking the truth. 
The one fixed rule for business is fraud. Ignorant men are put in 
high places. Courts of the holy law sell their decrees to the highest 
bidder. Women are discontented with their state of subjection, and 
they hate the uncouth envelopes which the law forces upon them in 
the place of a graceful dress. The year 1300 of the Moslem era has 
passed. According to the traditions, the world has less than two 
hundred years to live, and it is high time for the Mehdi to come. 
With an eagerness that arises from sincere faith in these prophecies, 
the Moslems of Turkey watch every obscure man who seems 
inclined to rise up and become a leader of the people. Any such 
man they are ready to hail as the Mehdi, if they can find for their 
faith the shadow of an excuse. 

There is something pitiful in the sight of these multitudes, 
conscious of hopeless corruption, so enervated that they have hope 



of renewal only in a direct intervention of God, and yet so 
convinced that this intervention can only be through some visible 
agency that they are content mutely to drift along just as they are 
rather than risk taking steps which might be disapproved by him 
that is to come. But pitiful as the spectacle 

R619 : page 7 

is, there is in it much to stir the Christian's heart. 

The followers of the false prophet are at last arriving at an epoch in 
their history when they are taught to expect enlightenment through 
Jesus Christ. Discount, because of their wrong idea of Christ, all we 
choose from this expectation of the Moslems; allow for their 
supposition that Christ will come to enforce the Koran upon the 
nations; remember their firm hope that Christ's first act on earth 
will be to put to the sword all the Christians of the present day; 
modify the picture of the faith of these people by all such 
considerations, and still you have the fact that the waiting millions 
of Islam believe the time to be drawing near when Jesus shall teach 
them the truth. To the Christian there is something thrilling in the 
thought that even now the Moslem nations are anxiously watching 
for a "guide" to lead them to Christ.— H. O. Dwight, of 
Constantinople, in N.Y. Independent. 



R619 : page 7 

TENT-MAKING IN CORINTH. 

Among the Jews in early times it was customary to teach all the 
children the full details of some useful calling.... And here now in a 
verse we learn that Saul of Tarsus had been reared to the trade of a 
tent-maker in his early years, and resumed it as an occupation 
when, as Paul the apostle, some necessities fell upon him to 
undertake the work of personal support. There will be profit in our 
contemplating him in this altogether new character as a working- 
man about his business. 

I. Let us begin with a careful examination of the singular artisan life 
he lived in Corinth. 

1. Our earliest point of notice is found in the fact that he chose a 
decent and reputable calling. This trade was an honorable one for 
the craft was composed of industrious citizens, and their products 
were useful and valuable. Now this explicity. Some occupations 
there are which no one can follow, and keep his Christian 
profession clean and clear. ... 

2. Then we must observe that Paul sought consistent partners in his 
business. God guided him when he "found" such amiable people as 
Aquila and Priscilla already established there in the strange city... 

3. But most of all, in these degenerate times of ours, we must notice 
that Paul pursued the work of his calling honestly. ...As this small, 



tired man sat there, in the midnight and the noon, sewing 
industriously till his feeble eyes ached with the overstrain, talking 
meanwhile with Aquila and his bright wife, we have not the 
slightest doubt that he always knotted his thread when he took up 
his needle, that he pulled each stitch through conscientiously as in 
the sight of God, and that he fastened the end of it when he finished 
the seam. For we do not see how those people could have had 
family prayers, unless they knew they had been "doing successful 
business on Christian principles." 

4. Once more: we must observe that Paul held his business 
cautiously in hand. No doubt his tents brought excellent prices, and 
it is likely the trade increased. But he looked on tent-making as a 
means to an end; and he did not set himself just to gain money. He 
never let his business run away with him, or interfere with his 
religious life. 

5. Hence, we are not surprised to discover that Paul used his 
opportunities wisely even when hardest at work. We do not suppose 
that Aquila and Priscilla were Christians previous to Paul's arrival 
at Corinth.... Probably Paul was the instrument in their conversion. 
Think of the glorious talks they had together! 

II. So now we reach a second question: What was the effect of this 
apostle's working at his trade upon his profession as a Christian 
preacher? We answer, It gave vast force to it. 

1 . For one thing, it illustrated his often-repeated maxims concerning 
the 

R619 : page 8 

dignity of honest labor. If an able-bodied follower of Jesus Christ 
refused to work, he had no right to eat. 2 Thess. 3:7-13. This 
vigorous and busy apostle evidently believed that there remained no 
room whatsoever for drones in a Christian hive. ...If any further 
illustration is needed than is furnished in these words already 
quoted, think of his address down there by the lonely seashore, 
when he bade farewell to the elders of Ephesus. Oh, how that scene 
rises on our minds! See the worn man as he stands there on the 
sands; every line on his face shows labor and care: he is true and 
genuine, and can be trusted. Acts 20:32-35. 

2. But now let us lay alongside of this another consideration: Paul's 
tent-work in the shop of Aquila added immeasurable force to his 
ministry, because it removed all ground of cavil as to his making a 
gain out of godliness. There was some reason for his peculiar 
solitude in this vain and fastidious city; we know he did not refuse 
money sent him from other places. It is worth our while to ascertain 
exactly what was Paul's whole doctrine on this subject. 1 Cor. 9:4- 
14. We understand from a passage so extensive and so explicit as 
this that Paul never intended to prejudice the rights of others, or 
surrender his own. He instructed his young friend Timothy to 
preach on this point. 1 Tim. 5:17,18. But when indiscreet men 



caviled, Christians must avoid the very appearance of evil. So this 
cheerful-hearted preacher laid hold of his needle, pulled the silesia 
up over his knee, and went on sewing tent-coverings five days in 
each week. He afterwards told them frankly that he used some of 
the Philippians' gifts to him to help out that season. 2 Cor. 1 1:7-12. 
And he seems rather proud and glad as he tells them so.— Chas. S. 
Robinson. 



R619 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Mechanicsville, Mo., April 13, 1884. 

"DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-.. .The Apostle, in writing about the 
Lord's Supper, says: 'Ye shew the Lord's death till he come' (1 Cor. 
1 1:26). And the Lord said: 'Do this in remembrance of me,' 
evidently meaning, Remember me in my absence. To me the 
inference seems strong that the commemoration should now cease, 
because the Lord is now present. What think you?" 

Answer. A careful reading of Paul's words quoted above, with the 
context, fails to indicate to us any prohibition of the observance 
after the Lord has come and is present. On the contrary, the 
Apostle's argument here is, that when we break the loaf, etc., we 
show our communion or participation with Christ in death, as 
members of the one loaf, the one body. Hence it is quite proper that 
we should, so long as we are in the flesh, and so long therefore as 
the sufferings of the body of Christ are not ended, and the measure 
of his afflictions not filled, it is both proper for us to fill them up 
and share the cup, and also to symbolize it. 

Concerning our Lord's words, "Do this in remembrance of me," we 
do not think he meant, remember me during my absence. He was 
present at the first supper, and if it be improper to remember his 
death except during his absence, it was equally improper to 
remember it before his absence. 

What Jesus did mean we think was this: The Passover as a type and 
a part of the law shall surely have a fulfillment. The fulfilling of it 
is now commencing. I am the anti-type of the lamb that was slain 
and eaten, and every other feature must be fulfilled— the entire type 
will be fulfilled when the kingdom of God shall have fully been 
established; when you, all my disciples who follow me, as parts of 
the first-born, shall be passed over, delivered from death, in the 
resurrection. Therefore, as oft as you eat this— commemorate the 
Passover— look beyond the type and realize in me the anti-type of 
the lamb. Do this in remembrance of me, and no longer in 
remembrance of the typical lamb. 



Q. Are Enoch and Elijah dead or living? 



A. Of Enoch very little is told us, except that he walked with God 
(Gen. 5:24), and that God revealed to him some things relative to 
the kingdom of God, will be seen by reference to Jude 14:15. Gen. 
5:24 tells us that "he was not [found], for God took him;" and Heb. 
11:5 proves that he did not die. How, or where, God took him, or 
for what purpose, is not revealed. This seems to be one of the secret 
things which Moses says belong unto God. Deut. 29:29. 

Elijah, we are told, went up by a whirlwind into heaven. The word 
here translated heaven is shamayim, meaning "heaved up," or "high 
things." It is sometimes applied to the firmament or region of the air 
(Gen. 1:8), and sometimes to the throne of God. When the latter is 
referred to, the term "heaven of heavens" is frequently used. (1 
Kings 8:27.) We must judge of its meaning in this case by its 
harmony with other Scriptures. Jesus, after his resurrection, went to 
heaven, the throne of God; but John says (chap. 3:13), "No man 
hath ascended up to heaven but he that came down from heaven, 
even the Son of Man." Hence we must conclude that the 
atmospheric heavens were the heavens into which Elijah ascended. 

It is nowhere stated that Elijah did not die; and that he ascended 
into the air until lost to sight does not prove that 

R620 : page 8 

he did die. Neither does the vision on the mount of transfiguration 
prove that he is, or was then alive, since that was only a vision— as 
Jesus said, "See thou tell the vision to no man." As Elijah was a 
type of the Church, his ascension was also typical of the ascending 
bride, soon to meet her Lord in the air— not the literal air: air is 
symbolic of the universal kingdom. Heretofore Satan has been the 
prince of the power of the air; now Christ has come to reign, and 
Satan will shortly be dethroned. Soon the overcoming Church, 
being changed from human to spiritual conditions, will meet her 
Lord in the kingdom. 

What became of Elijah's body we do not know, neither do we know 
what became of the body of Moses. Things not revealed belong to 
God. 



Q. A class of people called Sabbath or Seventh-day keepers, claim 
that the Roman Catholic Church established the First day of the 
week as a substitute for the seventh. Is this true? 

A. The claim of Romanists in this matter as in others, stands or falls 
with their other claim, that their Church was established in the first 
century by the Apostles— Peter being their first Pope. All this we 
deny, and claim that the Church whose "names were written in 
heaven," was the original and only Church established or 
recognized by the Apostles, and that is OUR CHURCH. Romanism 
was an apostasy from OUR CHURCH, as are also all other sects. 
As to the observance of the first day by our Church in early days 
and the teachings of the Apostles on the subject (who are the 



STANDARDS of our Church,) see article "The Ten 
Commandments," in the October, 1883, issue. So, then, if the early 
Church was the Church of Rome, then they say truly, but if not, the 
claim that SHE instituted the change from the Seventh to the First 
day, Sabbath, is false like many others she puts forth. 



R620 : page 8 

LIFE AT HOME. 

For all of us our life at home must constitute a great part of that 
life in which, by patient continuance in well-doing, we have to seek 
for glory, honor and immortality; for many of us it practically 
constitutes the whole. 

There are millions of women, millions of girls, to say nothing of 
little children, who have no life worth speaking of beyond the 
boundaries of the family. Whatever fidelity to God, whatever love 
for Christ, whatever justice, whatever kindness, generosity and 
gentleness they are to illustrate in their spirit and conduct must be 
illustrated there. And even men who have their business and their 
profession to follow during the greater part of the day find occasion 
in their home-life for forms of well-doing and ill-doing that are not 
possible elsewhere. I like a broad and rich life for myself— full of 
varied interests; and I should like to see the lives of most men, and 
of most women too, animated by the inspiration and refreshed by 
the free air of activities and interests outside their own home. But 
no shining achievements elsewhere can palliate the guilt of 
coldness, injustice, ill-temper in the family; and the noblest public 
virtues have roots in the gentleness, the industry, of self-sacrifice 
and the truthfulness of which only those who are nearest to us have 
any knowledge. 



R620 : page 8 

IMPORTANCE OF BEING ABLE TO 
DESPISE RIDICULE. 

I know of no principle which it is of more importance to fix in the 
mind than that of the most determined resistance to the 
encroachments of ridicule. Give up to the world, and to the ridicule 
with which the world enforces its dominion, every trifling question 
of manner and appearance? It is to toss courage and firmness to the 
winds to combat with the mass upon such subjects as these. But 
learn from the earliest days to insure your principles against the 
perils of ridicule; you can no more exercise your reason, if you live 
in the constant dread of laughter, than you can enjoy your life if you 
are in the constant terror of death. If you think it right to differ from 
the times, and to make a stand for any valuable point of morals, do 



it, however rustic, however antiquated, however pedantic it may 
appear; do it, not for insolence, but seriously and grandly, as a man 
who wore a soul of his own in his bosom, and did not wait till it 
was breathed into him by the breath of fashion. Let men call you 
mean, if you know you are just; hypocritical, if you are honestly 
religious; pusillanimous, if you feel you are firm; resistance soon 
converts unprincipled wit into sincere respect; and no aftertime can 
tear from you those feelings which every man carries with him who 
has made a noble and successful exertion in a virtuous cause.— 
Bible Banner. 



R620 : page 8 

WESLEY ON DRESS. 

If you could be as humble when you chose rich apparel (which I 
flatly deny) yet you could not be as beneficent, as plenteous in good 
works. Therefore every shilling which you needlessly spend on 
your apparel, is in effect stolen from the poor! For what end did you 
want these ornaments? To please God? No!— but to please your own 
fancy or to gain the admiration and applause of those who were no 
wiser than yourself. If so, what you wear you are in effect tearing 
from the back of the naked; and the costly and delicate food you 
eat, you are snatching from the mouth of the hungry. For mercy, for 
pity, for Christ's sake, for the honor of His Gospel, stay your hand! 
Do not throw this money away. Do not lay out on nothing, yea, 
worse than nothing, what may clothe your poor, naked, shivering 
fellow-creatures. 

Many years ago, when I was at Oxford, on a cold winter's day, a 
young maid (one of those we keep at school), called upon me. I 
said, "You seem half-starved. Have you nothing to cover you but 
that thin gown?" She said, "Sir, this is all I have." I put my hand in 
my pocket, but found no money left, having just paid away what I 
had. It struck me, "Will thy Master say, 'Well done good and 
faithful steward. Thou hast adorned thy walls with the money 
which might have screened this poor creature from the cold.' O 
justice! O, mercy! are not these pictures the blood of the poor 
maid? See their expensive apparel in the same light; thy gown, hat, 
head-dress ! " 

Everything about thee which costs more than Christian duty 
required thee to lay out, is the blood of the poor! O! be wise for the 
time to come. Be more merciful; more faithful to God and man; 
more abundantly clad (like men and women professing godliness) 
with good works. I conjure you all who have any regard for me, 
before I go hence, that I have not labored, even in this respect, in 
vain, for near half a century. 

Let me see, before I die, a Methodist congregation full as plainly 
dressed as a Quaker congregation; only be more consistent with 



yourselves. Let your dress be cheap as well as plain. Otherwise you 
do but trifle with God and me, and your own souls. I pray let there 
be no costly silks among you, how grave soever they may be. Let 
not any of you who are rich in this world endeavor to excuse 
yourself from this by talking nonsense. 

It is stark, staring nonsense to say, "Oh, I can afford this or that!" If 
you have regard to common sense, let that silly word never come 
into your mouth. No man living can afford to throw away any part 
of that food or raiment into the sea, which was lodged with him on 
purpose to feed the hungry and clothe the naked. And it is far worse 
than simple waste to spend any part of it in gay or costly apparel. 

For this is no less than to turn wholesome food into deadly poison. 
It is giving so much money to poison both yourself and others as far 
as your example spreads, with pride, vanity, anger, lust, love of the 
world, and a thousand "foolish and hurtful desires" which tend to 
"pierce them through with many sorrows." O God, arise and 
maintain thy own cause ! Let not men and devils any longer put out 
our eyes and lead us blindfold into the pit of destruction.- Sermon 
by John Wesley. 


