Jehovah Provides for Trinidad’s Needs
FROM its small beginning in 1912, the Kingdom-preaching work in Trinidad and its neighboring island Tobago has gone through several stages of expansion. The latest development​—in March 1985—​was the completion and dedication of a new branch building just outside the capital, Port of Spain. The new facilities were sorely needed, for Trinidad has experienced an increase of 79 percent in Kingdom proclaimers since the last branch facilities were constructed.
Finding suitable property on a small, heavily populated island was not easy. Land is expensive, and construction costs are also very high. Yet, Jehovah provided for all these needs. A fine, accessible site was located just off the airport highway. The brothers rallied around the project, giving splendid support. Almost every Kingdom publisher in Trinidad had some part in the construction work.
Every weekend a group from one congregation would come to assist with the work, while those from another would supply food and refreshments. Night work was done two or three times a week. The construction proceeded right on through the rainy seasons. When it was time to pour the first floor, over 350 brothers were there, passing buckets of cement by hand. Hindu neighbors were simply amazed! This afforded opportunity to witness to them.
Construction costs were met by the same wholehearted spirit. Sisters even contributed their gold jewelry, to be sold and applied toward the construction. An eight-year-old boy wrote: “I love working at the branch complex, but because my Daddy’s back is sick and he cannot do hard work, I cannot come very often. So I am sending this money that I saved to help with the work.”
Throughout the construction, Jehovah’s backing was evident. Hilary Charles, the construction overseer, recalled the time they were down to ten bags of cement and called the cement factory to get more. He said: “Cement was really hard to get. They said we could not get any until the next week. That was at about nine in the morning. At two that afternoon, I saw a load of cement come. The truck driver said: ‘The load of cement was for somewhere else, and I was told to bring it here.’ He couldn’t understand it. It was Jehovah’s hand.”
The two-story branch building is in the shape of a T, with the entrance at the top​—the south side. To the right of the attractive lobby is the Kingdom Hall, which seats about 200 people. A spacious office is to the left. The downstairs of the longer portion houses the printery, shipping department, and laundry. Upstairs are the kitchen, dining room, and living quarters​—eight bedrooms, each with its own bath. A small library and lounge are located above the office.
Saturday, March 16, was dedication day. Milton G. Henschel of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses gave the talk. “Jehovah not only knows how to provide but knows what we need,” said Brother Henschel. Yes, the new facilities were a gift from Jehovah. The session ended with an earnest prayer of dedication to Jehovah. How happy we were!
Jehovah’s Witnesses in Trinidad and Tobago rejoice over the increase given by Jehovah. And they press forward, looking for even further increase as he continues to provide for their needs as Kingdom proclaimers.

