Jesus’ Life and Ministry
More Miracles in Capernaum
THE Sabbath after Jesus called his first four disciples​—Peter, Andrew, James, and John—​they all go to a local synagogue in Capernaum. There Jesus begins to teach, and the people are astounded because he teaches them as one having authority and not as the scribes.
On this Sabbath a demonized man is present. After a while, he shouts with a loud voice: “What have we to do with you, Jesus you Nazarene? Did you come to destroy us? I know exactly who you are, the Holy One of God.”
The demon controlling the man is actually one of Satan’s angels. Rebuking the demon, Jesus says: “Be silent, and come on out of him!”
Well, the demon throws the man into a convulsion and yells at the top of its voice. But it comes out of the man without hurting him. Everyone is simply astonished! “What is this?” they ask. “He authoritatively orders even the unclean spirits, and they obey him.” The news about this spreads throughout the surrounding area.
Leaving the synagogue, Jesus and his disciples go to the home of Simon, or Peter. There Peter’s mother-in-law is very sick with a high fever. ‘Please help her,’ they beg. So Jesus goes over, takes her by the hand, and raises her up. Right away she is cured and begins to prepare a meal for them!
Later, when the sun has set, people from all over start coming to Peter’s house with their sick ones. Soon the whole city is gathered at the door! And Jesus cures all their sick ones, no matter what their diseases are. He even frees the demon-possessed. As they come out, the demons that he expels shout: “You are the Son of God.” But Jesus rebukes them and does not allow them to speak because they know he is the Christ. Mark 1:21-34; Luke 4:31-41; Matthew 8:14-17.
◆ What happens in the synagogue on the Sabbath after Jesus calls his four disciples?
◆ Where does Jesus go when leaving the synagogue, and what miracle does he perform there?
◆ What happens later that same evening?
[Full-page picture on page 9]

