From Our Readers
TV as Robbery Prevention
In your article “There Are Ways to Avoid Robbery” (January 22, 1983), you state: “A television set playing in the living room or den may also serve as a deterrent.” May I point out, as a qualified engineer, that there cannot be anything more dangerous to set a fire to a house than this technique. In fact, no electrical appliance should be left unattended.
E. S., England
The leaving on of any electrical appliance while one is away from the house does increase the fire hazard somewhat, and the custom of leaving TV sets on constantly from morning to night has contributed to more fires in homes and apartments. But fire-prevention authorities in the United States have no national policy discouraging leaving a TV on unattended for two or three hours as a crime prevention, apparently figuring that the risk of robbery is far greater than the risk of fire. It should be kept in mind that the use of home video recorders, which are sold extensively in the United States and England, as well as in many other parts of the world, is based on the idea of having the TV set and recording equipment operating for a short period of time in the absence of the householder. While this may not constitute the most dangerous fire hazard, there is an element of risk, and we believe it wise to pass this caution on to our readers.​—ED.
The Middle Years
I really appreciate the articles you put out in the magazines, especially the one on “The Middle Years” (February 22, 1983). It helped me to understand my mother better.
N. C., Alabama
Messiah’s Rule
I am a 15-year-old Jewish girl and I must commend you on your articles on the Messiah (March 22, 1983). They are just what I needed to be convinced that Jesus really is the Messiah. I have been reading your articles on and off for about two years now, and this article and the one entitled “Something Was Missing From My Jewish Heritage” (June 22, 1981) really helped me to know Jehovah and Jesus, both of whom I wish to draw closer to. The knowledge that I am not alone in my efforts to find the truth is a great source of encouragement. Please continue these wonderful articles, which give me more hope for the future than I ever had before.
H. S., Texas
Sports and Violence
I recently read your magazine on “Sports​—Why the Increasing Violence?” (May 22, 1982, English edition), and can only congratulate you. For five years I have been a (sports) umpire. Sorry to say, I must agree that brutality is increasing. I often feel that some players go onto the playing field with just the idea in mind of eliminating their opponents. In trying to do so, they ignore every rule of fairness. Many times players are encouraged by spectators to become even more brutal. Thus, it often depends upon the so-called fans whether a game is played according to the rules of fairness or they are ignored.
H. F., Germany

