Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points:
● By doing what can we fortify ourselves so as to maintain integrity?
By personally reading and studying the Bible and the Society’s Bible study aids, by avoiding bad associations, by attending meetings, by sharing in the preaching of God’s kingdom, by regular prayer.​—Pp. 527-530.a
● What does it mean to be ‘perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect’?
It means that one expresses love in a complete, rounded-out way, not narrowly confining it to one’s friends but extending it to others, even to those showing enmity toward one.​—Pp. 566, 567.
● What will aid parents to keep open the lines of communication with their children?
Talk on their level; listen to their likes, dislikes and opinions; help them to find answers to their problems; reason together; confide in them and make plans together.​—Pp. 588-592.
● Why is “dating” unwise for Christians who are not yet old enough to marry?
Because dating so often increases the pressure and pull of sexual desire at a time when this desire cannot find proper satisfaction. It “rushes” matters so that the young boy or girl’s development in the very abilities, attitudes, knowledge and balance that would later make for a very happy marriage is hindered.​—Pp. 593-595.
● Why is it that all nations will soon unavoidably collide, head on, with God?
Instead of acknowledging God’s sovereignty and following his principles as set forth in the Bible, the nations insist on domination of the earth by political governments of men; they fight God’s Messianic kingdom and direct the people’s hope toward the composite political organization, the United Nations.​—Pp. 621, 622.
● How have the clergy of Christendom demonstrated that they put their own name ahead of the name of God?
The clergy have let their lies against God stand, such as hellfire, Trinity and praying soldiers of their nation into heaven.​—Pp. 646, 647, 649.
● How can we show that we respect God’s name more than our own?
By accepting the Bible as being the Word of God; by dedicating ourselves to God through Christ; by associating with Jehovah’s people and sharing with them in witnessing to God’s name.​—P. 658.
● What is Christian maturity?
The state of spiritual adulthood, no longer being a spiritual “babe.” This maturity is attained by accepting the full range of Christian truth and sincerely endeavoring to live in harmony therewith.​—Pp. 662, 665.
● What is the relationship among those who are elders in the Christian congregation?
The elders in a congregation are coequal, all sharing in the duties of watching over the spiritual condition of the congregation. They are appointed by the Christian governing body and work under its direction.​—Pp. 691, 693.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1971.

