From Our Readers
Verbal Abuse  I wish all young people like me could appreciate the benefits of putting into practice the suggestions made in your article on verbal abuse. (June 8, 1989) By applying the Bible principles outlined therein, I now have a good relationship with my unbelieving parents.
S. C., Italy
Head Lice  I chose “Head Lice” as the subject for a school report and based it on your article. (August 22, 1989) A few days later, head lice were discovered on one of the pupils in our school. Most of my classmates firmly believed that head lice were found only on dirty people. (I thought so too until I read this article.) So my teacher read my report and dispelled their misunderstandings.
Y. N., Japan
Astrology  I have never been very interested in astrology and therefore did not feel like reading the Awake! issue on that subject. (November 22, 1989) But as I started into it, I could see what a fantastic hold this satanic way of thinking has on a large part of mankind. I was deeply thrilled by the clear reasoning and felt a real appreciation for the insight it gave me.
J. A., New Zealand
Oil  The article “Oil at Your Service​—Maybe!” (November 22, 1989) was very interesting and informative. I especially liked how you wrote it from the viewpoint of a droplet of oil. It was easy to understand and got right to the point!
J. W., United States
Blood Controversy  I read the article “Doctors Tried to Take Our Daughter Away” and could only cry with happiness for the Deskins and their daughter [who escaped having blood forced upon her]. (October 22, 1989) My daughter, Dana, suffered serious burns and had to be hospitalized. The blood issue came up. Despite my most strenuous efforts to resist, blood was forced on Dana. I can therefore truly relate to how the Deskins must have felt during their trial. They are to be commended for their faith in Jehovah God.
D. C., United States
Discovers “Awake!”  I was waiting my turn in a barbershop when I looked for a magazine to help me pass the time. Before I realized it, I had spent several minutes reading a magazine called Awake! I was truly surprised to find myself deeply involved in the subtle beauty of the message contained in its variety of articles.
H. P. C., Brazil
Special Needs  Thank you so much for the article on handicapped ones. (August 22, 1989) We have a daughter in a wheelchair, and it takes much time to get ready for Christian meetings and to get in and out of our car during our door-​to-​door ministry. We make it to meetings on time and enjoy the spiritual food so much, but no one really knows how much effort it takes just to be there. Jehovah gives us the strength; if he didn’t, we couldn’t make it.
S. A., United States

