Announcements
GOD’S SPIRIT ESSENTIAL TO MATURITY
Maturity is the mark of one who has left elementary doctrine and has progressed to the stature of being constant and unwavering in his stand for truth. During April Jehovah’s witnesses everywhere will encourage Christian maturity by offering The Watchtower on a subscription of 24 issues for $1. This journal, presenting Bible truth in understandable and stimulating form, is of invaluable help in attaining maturity. Why not subscribe and encourage others to subscribe? Three booklets are given free. Should you wish to help others appreciate the great value of the Bible in this critical time, send for 200 of the pocket-size tract entitled “How Valuable Is the Bible?” You can hand this tract out everywhere. The cost is 25c for 200.
A “SCHOLARLY WORK”
Speaking about the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures a publication called The Catholic Biblical Quarterly of Washington, D.C., said the following: “This compact, well-printed volume, buttressed with footnotes and chain references, as the editors call them, has all the appearances of a scholarly work.” Have you as yet examined a copy of this splendid Greek Scripture translation? Its clear, vigorous style will please you. Bound in green leatherette, and measuring 5ʺ x 7 5⁄16ʺ x 1ʺ, the cost of this volume is only $1.50 postpaid. Send for your copy today.
ATTEND THE MEMORIAL IN 1953
As announced in more detail in the February 1 and March 1 issues of The Watchtower, the Memorial date for 1953 is Monday, March 30, after 6 p.m., Standard Time. All persons dedicated to Jehovah, and those interested in the New World society, should assemble that evening. Contact the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses for further information. A report of total attendance at each gathering, and the number partaking of the emblems, should be made to the Society immediately following the observance.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 26: Singing Fighters.
Week of May 3: A Singing Lesson.

