page 2 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



R1486 : page 2 

YOUR PROMPT RESPONSES. 



Thanks, dear friends, for the promptness with 
which so many of you are responding to our 
request to know whether or not you desire the 
WATCH TOWER visits during 1893. Your welcome 
letters are just pouring in upon us. This 
together with the other extra work of this season 
has quite overpowered our office force. 
All are busy, but all are insufficient. We usually 
send a card of acknowledgment for all 
sums of two dollars or more where books, etc., 



are not ordered (leaving the date on the address-tag 

to indicate the receipts of smaller 

sums). But as we are quite unable to do 

this at present we know that you will kindly 

excuse us. We cannot at present find time even 

to give the ordinary newspaper receipt on the address-tag 

this receipt we will endeavor to give 

to all on our next issue. 

Just a word of answer now, therefore, to all 
your letters at once, to say that we greatly enjoy 
the testimonies which so many of them give, 
of your clearness of mental vision on spiritual 
subjects; of your devotion to the Lord, and to 
the Truth, and to us, as their servants and yours. 
God bless you! 

The donations to the Tract Fund accompanying 
the above mentioned letters (which must 
be acknowledged in like manner) have been 
unusually large, and the newly filled out "Good 
Hopes" for 1893 are very numerous. The interest 
thus manifested is greatly appreciated by us, 
as well as by the Master, in whose name we receive 
and in whose service we use them. Be assured 
that every self-denial of an earthly sort these may 
cost you will be more than compensated for in 
spiritual favors. We regard this increase in 
your free-will offerings as a sign, either of much 
more prosperous times than before or else of a 
richer spiritual growth in appreciation of the 
lengths and breadths, the heights and depths of 
the love of God. We believe it to be the latter; 
and we praise God on your behalf.— 
Phil. 4:17. 

THE PREVAILING TYPE OF PREACHING. 



The Rev. Robert R. Proudfit, of Highlands, 
N.J., has withdrawn from the Presbyterian 
Church. His reasons are these: 

"While humbly receiving the Scriptures of 
the Old and New Testaments as containing the 
Word of God, I decline to subscribe to a merely 
human declaration of their contents, even 
though that declaration be so able and so venerable 
as the Westminster standards. 

"I further decline to be called 'reverend' 
as being too much like being called 'rabbi,' 
against which our Lord expressly enjoined his 
disciples. 

"Again I decidedly prefer not to be identified 
with any particular denomination of the 
followers of Christ, such names and the spirit 
which they engender seeming to me unscriptural 
and baneful rather than beneficial. It is 



sufficient for me to be a 'companion of all 
them that fear God.' 

"Finally, I suspect that the world and the 
visible church are somewhat surfeited with 
preaching, at least of the prevailing type. Like 
the army of the Potomac early in 1862, the 
church has been abundantly, perhaps excessively, 
organized and drilled."— Selected. 

R1491 : page 2 

BACK TO THE HOLY LAND. 



There is a report from Jerusalem that Baron 
Edmond de Rothschild has completed negotiations 
with the Turkish government for the 
establishment of Jewish colonies on the Rothschild 
lands in Palestine, and also for permitting 
Russian Jews to settle there.— New York Sun. 



page 2 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in Bible House Chapel, 
Arch Street, Allegheny, Pa. Readers and friends 
will be warmly welcomed. Preaching in English 
every Sunday afternoon at 3:30 o'clock. 

Preaching in German at 10:30 a.m. 



R1485 : page 3 

VOL. XIV. JANUARY 1, 1893. NO. 1. 

RETROSPECTIVE AND PROSPECTIVE. 



At the threshold of each new year it seems 
but natural to look about us— backward at the 
year just gone, and forward to the year drawing 
on— reviewing our conflicts and God's mercies 
past and, with hope as our telescope, prospecting 
the future. 

From your letters and otherwise, dear readers, 
fellow-servants of our King and fellow-heirs 
of his glory, we know something of the trials 
temporal and spiritual which have bestrewn your 
paths; but we know much more of how the 
grace of God has blessed you all spiritually 



through Christ. And we earnestly trust that, 
with us of the TOWER Office, you can apply to 
yourselves the words of the poet— 
"Looking back, I praise the way 
God has led me, led me day by day." 

Our day is peculiar in many respects. Not 
only is it a day of blessings, advantages and 
conveniences beyond any other, but it is a day 
of dissatisfaction and discontent beyond any 
other. Not only is it a day of greater light and 
understanding respecting the Lord's plan, but 
it is a day in which the great Enemy of the 
truth is permitted to spread before the awakening 
nominal and real Church more sophistical 
delusions in the name of "new light" than 
ever before. Not only is it true that a man or 
woman has five times the opportunity for usefulness 
in God's service, ever before enjoyed, 
but it is also true that business, worldly pleasure 
and ambition are five times as active and 
powerful to keep us back from this possible 
usefulness. It behooves us, therefore, not only 
to get awake to our present privileges, blessings 
and opportunities, but to keep awake to 
them. He who does not realize that this will 
require a constant battle with selfishness, within 
and without— with the World, the Flesh and 
the Devil— is very liable to fall into the snare 
in learning of it. 

Nevertheless it is possible, even now, for the 
intelligent Christian to have absolute contentment, 
to escape the errors of our day and to 
keep himself actively in the love and service of 
God. This blessing, with the peace that passeth 
all understanding, is, however, only for the 
few: for those whose faith is resting in the 
perfect work of Christ— in the ransom which 
he gave— and who are fully consecrated, heart 
and body, to the Master's will and work and way 
in every matter. Such he does not leave in 
darkness and doubt in this day when the hearts 
of the worldly-wise are "failing them for fear 
and for looking after those things coming upon 
the earth," but to them are fulfilled the promises 
—"He will show you things to come;" "Ye 
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make 
you free"— free from the bondage of error, 
free from the bondage of fear, and from those 
other bondages of creeds of men and of social 
and religious societies into which fear is driving 
many under the plea of "Union." 

But while we do well, dear friends, to remember 
gratefully the mercies of the past year and 
to rejoice in the grace sufficient with which it 
was so richly supplied, it is wise for us to look 
carefully to our steps for the year beginning. 



R1485 : page 4 

While we did not fall last year, some did. Our 
trials and testings may be more severe during 
the year beginning, and unless we feel our own 
insufficiency and look to our Master continually, 
we shall be liable to depart from humility, 
to become puffed up with pride and haughtiness, 
the sure precursors of a fall. And again, if 
we look merely to our own weaknesses we will 
become so discouraged as to yield readily to 
the adversary's assaults. Our only safe position 
will be to feel humble and to realize our 
insufficiency, but to trust implicitly and always 
to him who has promised that he will never 
leave us, nor forsake us. (If there be any breach 
between us, if any leaving and forsaking, it will 
be on our part, not his.) We can safely trust 
our all to him who assures us that "All things 
shall work together for good to them that love 
God (with all their hearts)— to those called according 
to his purpose." We need have no 
fear of the ultimate results, so long as we find our 
wills fully submitted to our Master's will, and 
our hands and thoughts filled with his work. 
We may have full confidence, and may rest in 
peace upon the promise, "He will not suffer you 
to be tempted above that ye are able, but will, with 
the temptation, provide also a way of escape." 

"Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary, 
the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, 
seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist 
[by standing] steadfast in the faith, knowing 
that similar afflictions are being accomplished 
in your brethren in the world."— 1 Pet. 5:8. 

The more we realize that we are in the harvest 
—the winnowing and testing time— the 
more we should each seek to follow the Apostle's 
advice, "Make straight paths for your feet lest 
that which is lame be turned out of the way." 
Each of us has learned some of his weak or 
vulnerable points of character, and each should 
seek, not only to strengthen these weak points 
but also specially to fortify himself against 
temptations and besetments of the adversary 
upon those weakest points, lest he thereby be 
turned out of the straight and narrow way. 

This means a circumspection of your affairs 
in general: home affairs, business affairs, all, 
should be ordered and systematized with a view 
to protect your own weak points to the Lord's 
praise and to the good of yourself and others. 
See that your heart is fully given up to the 
King, and then, with the wisdom which he will 
supply those who seek it, divide your time and 



talents among your various duties so as to spend 
and be spent more to the honor of the Lord 
and to the service of his truth, and you will 
find yourself liberally repaid in spiritual favors. 

We suggest to all WATCH TOWER readers as 
a motto and watch-word for 1 893 the words of 
the great Apostle Paul— 

"Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you 
like men, be strong. Let all your deeds be done 
inlove."-lCor. 16:13,14. 

THE POLITICAL OUTLOOK. 



Dissatisfaction and unrest tell the story of 
the entire civilized world. The growth of intelligence 
is making the world more unhappy 
daily, because selfishness is the basis or principle 
upon which every fresh degree of enlightenment 
must be erected; for the world knows 
not of the other basis, upon which the new 
nature builds, the basis of Love. Consequently, 
intelligence makes possible gigantic Trusts, 
Pools and swindling schemes on the part of 
many who occupy places of power; and the 
same intelligence permits those less favorably 
circumstanced to detect the frauds, to see their 
own comparative disadvantage so far as a rapid 
or fraudulent accumulation of wealth is concerned. 
Hence the gradual unrest. None but 
real saints of God know what full rest there is 
in Christ— the result of having the Christ-basis 
—Love for God and men— substituted for 
selfishness. 

We clip the following on this subject from 
a New York Tribune editorial, and call special 
attention to its closing sentence:— 

"And yet how far from realization is this 
noble idea of peace to-day. That Europe is 
an armed camp is a hackneyed truism. England 
holds millions of Oriental peoples under her 
sway, not by the bond of brotherhood, but by 
the iron hand of force. France is rent into 
factions by a great national scandal, in which 
many of her honored sons figure as despoilers 

R1486 : page 4 

of the widow and orphan. The tragedy of the 
great anti-Semitic persecution is not yet played 
out in Russia, and in some other European 

R1486 : page 5 

countries the echoes of its cry of hate are 



ominously distinct. Nor has the shadow of 

gaunt famine yet ceased to fall athwart the land 

of the Muscovite. At the same time, a social 

unrest unparalleled in history has taken possession 

of the nations of Europe, and has found 

a lodgment even in our own land. Its dominant 

note is a profound dissatisfaction with 

things as they are, not always rational or intelligent, 

but based on certain facts which no 

candid investigator will deny. This unrest is 

constantly leading to the social insurrection 

known as anarchy, and to the industrial wars 

known as lockouts and strikes. It may not be 

that the present social system is disintegrating; 

but it is certainly true that it contains within 

itself movements and elements which are symptomatic 

of a change in its character. And 

whether that change shall come by evolution 

or revolution depends largely on the wisdom 

and discretion of those who now hold the 

places of influence and power in the world. 

These are the facts that confront us this morning 

as we repeat the angels' song of peace and 

good will. Does not the situation suggest to 

us rather those words of the Master, recorded 

in holy Writ, I came not to send peace, but 

a sword'? 

"Nor is the prophetic dream of brotherhood, 
for which Christmas stands, realized in the 
churches. The great Roman Catholic Communion 
in this country is stirred to its depths 
by controversies that vitally affect its very life 
and character. Every Protestant denomination 
is touched with the same unrest that is affecting 
social life. Old traditions and dogmas are 
in process of reconstruction, and new views are 
forcing themselves to the front. As a result of 
all this, there is strife to-day between those 
who join in singing the praises of the Babe in 
Bethlehem, and multitudes of good men are 
arrayed against each other in a deadly conflict 
of opinion." 



After the conflict will come rest, and after 
the battle will come peace. Happy those who, 
in this enigmatic age, in spite of so much that 
is calculated to puzzle and sadden us, have 
such a clear prevision of the future that they 
can see the coming triumph of truth over error, 
of good over evil, in every land and clime." 



R1486 : page 5 



EXALTATION VIA HUMILITY. 



"Let him that would be greatest among you be servant 
of all. ...One is your master, even Christ, and all 
ye are brethren. "--Matt. 23:10,11. 

Pride is selfishness gone to seed. The selfish 
spirit greedily gathers to itself as much as 
possible of all that it esteems good and valuable 
—wealth, learning, honor, fame and distinction 
among men. A measure of success in 
the acquisition of these treasures further leads 
the selfish soul to a feeling of self-complacency, 
independence and indifference to the well-being 
of others, which, gradually but rapidly developing 
into arrogant and self-assertive pride, 
will continue to ripen with every gleam of the 
sunlight of temporal prosperity. As selfishness 
continues to ripen it swells itself to ridiculous 
proportions and delights to vaunt itself, and 
gloats over its imagined importance and worthiness 
of honor and praise. 

Who can love such a disposition? It is utterly 
unworthy in all eyes save its own. 
No wonder, then, that it is written, "God 
resisteth the proud and giveth his favors to the 
humble." And again, "Pride goeth before 
destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall." 
How could it be otherwise? for these inflated 
values must at some time come down to a solid 

R1487 : page 5 

basis: wind will not always pass current for 
worth, and the punctured bubbles of earthly 
vanity will reveal the true status of every individual. 
And well will it be in the cases of 
those in whom the humbling realization does 
not awaken a spirit of rebellion and strife 
against God, which must inevitably end either 
in contrition or in destruction. 

How much easier and how much wiser is the 
course of humility. The humble spirit seeketh 
not its own, is not puffed up, and does not attempt 
to speculate on inflated values, does not 
think of self more highly than it ought to 
think, but thinks soberly— neither overrating 
nor underrating its own acquirements or 
achievements. Humility strives always to do 
business on a solid basis, though it strives lawfully 
to acquire a real worthiness and to achieve 
the true glory of the divine commendation and 
favor. 



The man who underrates his worth comes 
much nearer the truth than the man who overrates; 
for the fact is that no member of the 

R1487 : page 6 

fallen race, however favorably he may compare 

with some of his fellows more bruised by the 

fall, has anything whereof to boast. Consider, 

for instance, how meager is the aggregate of 

human knowledge in every direction. As a 

race we are unable to trace our own history for 

centuries from the beginning, or to account 

for our origin, or to prognosticate our destiny. 

We are unable to fully comprehend the deep 

philosophy of our physical and mental organisms. 

There are mysteries within us and all 

around us which the wisest men cannot fathom; 

and only those narrow souls whose world of 

thought is bounded by the horizon of their own 

temporal interests ever vaunt their learning or 

wisdom, or feel that they have aught of which to 

boast. Their fellow-men may call them great 

and wise and reverend, but they know too well 

how small and ignorant they are and how unworthy 

of reverence, realizing that beyond the 

ken of their short vision are vast unexplored 

fields of knowledge. The truly noble soul feels 

humbled upon the borders of the vast unknown, 

thankfully accepts the divine revelation as to 

his nature, origin, destiny, etc., and patiently 

awaits the Lord's good time for a fuller understanding 

of all the mysteries of his wondrous 

grace. Pride of wealth or of fame is of still more 

ignoble character. Wealth selfishly hoarded 

and enjoyed certainly adds no degree of merit 

to the possessor, whether he inherited or acquired 

it; and fame among fallen men only 

proves that he who gained it has not to any 

considerable extent outstripped the popular limit 

of advancement. At best he is only abreast 

of his times. The man who has outstripped 

the current of popular thought is never a popular 

or famous man. Every such one has had 

to attest his true moral courage by facing popular 

opposition and enduring the popular reproach; 

or, in other words, by humbling himself. 

In view of these considerations we see how 
just and wise is the divine rule for abasing the 
proud and exalting the humble, and how sound 
our Lord's counsel to his disciples, to cultivate 
the spirit of humility and to avoid even the appearance 
of pride. Observing the growth and 
manifestation of this spirit among the Pharisees, 
who did all their works to be seen of men, 
who loved the uppermost rooms at feasts and 



the chief seats in the synagogues, and to be 
called of men Rabbi, Rabbi, he said, "But be 
not ye called Rabbi; for one is your Master, 
even Christ; and all ye are brethren"— or, in 
the language of to-day, Be not ye called Reverend 
Doctors of Divinity, and let there be no 
distinctions of clergy and laity; for one is your 
truly reverend Lord and instructor, even Christ, 
and all ye are brethren. "Let him that would 
be greatest among you be servant of all;" for 
the divine rule is that "whosoever shall exalt 
himself shall be abased; and he that shall 
humble himself shall be exalted." 

God's plan, viewed as a whole, shows that 
the exaltation of any individual or class of his 
creatures is always for the purpose of blessing 
others who are not so exalted. Thus, for instance, 
the exaltation of our Lord Jesus and his 
Church is for the blessing of all others; so also 
was the election and special favor to Israel to 
result in blessings to the nations not so favored. 

Such a rule, it will readily be seen, is the 
prompting of the highest benevolence and of 
the fatherly love of God for all his creatures 
of every name and order, and manifests the 
depth of his wisdom as well as his love, both in 
rewarding the truly worthy and in bringing 
righteous and benevolent power forward for the 
accomplishment of righteous and benevolent 
ends. Thus in benevolent service and mutual 
love he will in due time bind together in one the 
whole family in heaven and in earth, through 
the mediation and service of the greatest of all 
servants, Jesus Christ. 

Let us heed this counsel of the Master, and 
let us humble ourselves under the mighty hand 
of God, that he may exalt us in due time. 
(1 Pet. 5:6.) We have already done so to some 
extent in refusing to own as our masters the 
various heads of the great nominal church. We 
own neither Luther, nor Calvin, nor Knox, 
nor Wesley, nor Campbell, nor any other man 
or body of men, as our master; nor do we own 
the pope of Rome as our pope, our Father: 
God is our father, and his anointed Son is our 
Lord and head. To them, and not to our brethren, 
let us look for the reward of faithfulness: 
"For," says the Apostle (Heb. 6:10), "God 

R1487 : page 7 

is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor 
of love which ye have shown toward his name, 
in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do 
minister." 
It is indeed no easy matter to tread the pathway 



of humility, to continually check the human 

aspirations and to keep the sacrifice on 

the altar until it is fully consumed. But thus 

it is that we are to work out our own salvation 

to the high calling with fear and trembling, lest 

we come short of worthiness for the prize of 

the high calling promised to the faithful overcomers 

who tread closely in the footsteps of 

our blessed Forerunner,— who was meek and 

lowly of heart. -Phil. 2:8,12. 

It is when we are thus humble and faithful 
that the Lord makes us his chosen vessels 
to bear his name to others. Thus emptied of 
self, he can fill us with his spirit and with his 
truth, and we can go forth strong in the Lord 
of hosts and in his mighty power to do valiant 
service as soldiers of the cross. 



R1491 : page 7 

AT CLOSE OF DAY. 



If you sit down at set of sun, 

And count the acts that you have done, 

And, counting, find 
One self-denying act, one word 
That eased the heart of him who heard, 

One glance most kind, 
That fell like sunshine where it went— 
Then you may count that day well spent. 

But if, through all the livelong day, 
You've cheered no heart by yea or nay; 

If through it all 
You've nothing done that you can trace, 
That brought the sunshine to one face; 

No act most small, 
That helped some soul at trifling cost- 
Then count that day as worse than lost. 
—Selected. 



R1487 : page 7 
IN OUR DAY. 



"Beware, therefore, lest that come upon you which is 
spoken of in the prophets: Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, 
and perish; for I work a work in your days, a work 



which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare 
it unto you. "--Acts 13:40,41; Isa. 29:14; Hab. 1:5. 

This prophecy was one of sufficient importance 
to be recorded by two of the Lord's 
prophets, Isaiah and Habakkuk; and from the 
Apostle Paul's reference to it in speaking to 
the people of his day, which was the end or 
harvest of the Jewish age, we see that it had an 
application to that peculiar time. And since 
that age with its harvest and all its peculiar 
circumstances was, as we have seen (MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., Chapter vii.), a type of 
the Gospel age and its harvest, we recognize 
this prophecy, as well as the other prophetic 
features of the context, as having a yet fuller 
and more special application to the present 
time— the harvest period of the Gospel age. 

It is true to-day, as it was in the harvest of 
the Jewish age, that there are many despisers of 
the truth— especially of the truth due and now 
coming to light in this, our day. But, nevertheless, 
the Lord's great work goes steadily forward: 
he is doing "his work, his strange work, 
and bringing to pass his act, his strange act." 
(Isa. 28:21,22.) It is indeed a strange work 
to those unacquainted with the Lord's plan, 
which sets aside all human theories and plans, 
and pursues a course in direct opposition to 
them all. The world looks on and beholds 
this work of the Lord, and with fear and trembling 
as to the final outcome they regard its 
wonderful progress. And not only the world, 
but the vast majority of his professed followers, 
too, who have not been living on such intimate 
terms with the Lord as to be led into a 
clear knowledge of his wonderful purposes, regard 
the future with fearful forebodings, and 
his present "strange work" as an innovation 
rather than as a preliminary preparation for the 
glorious reign of the Prince of peace; for they 
wist not that this is "the day of his preparation" 
spoken of by the Prophet (Nahum 2:3), 
for the setting up of Christ's kingdom. 

Before that kingdom can be fully established 
in the earth, all power and authority, of whatever 
sort it be, which belongs to this present 

R1487 : page 8 

order of things, must pass away. As a consequence 
of this preparation for Christ's kingdom, 
which is now nigh, even at the door (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., The Time is at 
Hand), we behold the shaking of the nations 
and the trembling of the very foundations 



of the whole structure of human society 

as at present organized unwittingly under Satan, 

"the prince of this world." The great crisis 

of this world's affairs has not yet been reached, 

but the preparations for that crisis are progressing 

steadily both in civil and in ecclesiastical 

circles. And if we would be among those who 

are truly wise we will apply, not only our heads, 

but also our hearts, unto the instruction of the 

R1488 : page 8 

"sure word of prophecy that shineth as a light 
in a dark place until the day dawn;" for it is 
written (Dan. 12:10) that "none of the wicked 
shall understand, but the wise [not according 
to the wisdom of this world, which shall perish 
(Isa. 29:14), but with the wisdom of meekness 
which confesses human ignorance and relies 
solely upon the wisdom which cometh from 
above: they] shall understand." 

Those who thus rely upon God, and are simple 
hearted enough to take him at his Word, 
view his present work in the light of his glorious 
plan: they see light in his light: they realize 
the necessity for the great scourge of 
trouble which shall shatter all human ambition 
and pride and humble the nations in the dust. 
They see, too, the deformities of human theories 
and the fallacy of human arguments and 
the futility of all human schemes for the uplifting 
and blessing of the world, as they view 
them in contrast with the divine plan of the 
ages which God is working out. (See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. I.) In consequence of this 
superior vantage ground from which, as children 
of God, we are permitted to view "the 
work, the strange work" of our day, we are not 
at all surprised to see all systems of men tottering 
to their final overthrow; nor are we dismayed 
as we are brought to realize that their 
utter destruction is sure. 

But what do we see, as from God's standpoint 
we look out over "his work, his strange 
work," in this our day? We see, first of all, 
that which interests us most, viz., that the Lord 
is gathering together his saints and separating 
them as wheat from the tares— as loyal, devoted 
children of God from a great multitude of mere 
professors. (Psa. 50:5.) We see that such are 
being wonderfully led by a path which hitherto 
they knew not, enabling them to comprehend 
the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the love of God as manifested in his 
wonderful plan of the ages. 

Secondly, we see the binding together of the 



various companies of tares into great denominational 

bundles and labeled with various sectarian 

names. (Matt. 13:30.) Thirdly, we see the 

present heavens (the ruling religious powers of 

the world— viz., Roman Catholicism and Protestantism) 

beginning to roll together as a scroll. 

(Isa. 34:4.) That is, each is retaining its own 

distinctive features, yet both are coming closer 

together in mutual recognition, sympathy and 

co-operation— rolling together just as a scroll 

does, from the two ends. Any one at all familiar 

with the trend of thought in ecclesiastical 

circles to-day will mark this rolling together 

of the heavens. Protestantism is very 

solicitous, for instance, for Roman Catholic cooperation 

on the subject of Sunday legislation 

and various other proposed reforms, and to this 

end is constantly courting the favor of Rome. 

Presbyterians are anxious to expunge from their 

creed that clause which recognizes the Papacy 

as the "Man of Sin;" Methodists speak of it as a 

"great Christian camp," and Protestants of 

every name and order are doing homage to 

what they are pleased to call the mother church, 

all unconscious apparently of the fact that the 

Lord calls it a harlot church and the mother of 

harlots. (Rev. 17:1-5.) Union! is the watchword 

to-day throughout the length and breadth of 

Christendom, so called. In union is strength, 

they say; and strength to brave the coming 

storm, of which they all feel apprehensive, is 

what they all feel the need of. Singly and alone 

they realize that they are unprepared to meet 

the great time of trouble of which the Prophet 

Daniel declares that it shall be "a time of trouble 

such as never was since there was a nation." 

(Dan. 12:1.) And consequently they are all 

willing to make any compromise necessary to 

secure what they call Christian unity. They 

R1488 : page 9 

want so-called Christianity to make an imposing 
appearance before the world in numerical 
strength. And Papists are none the less anxious 
than Protestants, though, seeing the anxiety 
of Protestants, they prefer rather to stand 
back and be courted than to take the initiative 
in this movement. But they are quite willing 
for policy's sake to speak now of the Protestant 
heretics as their "separated brethren," and 
Catholic priests are quite willing to sit side by 
side on the platform with Protestant clergymen 
in religious gatherings. 

In no particular instance is this disposition 
of the heavens to roll together more manifest 



than in the proposed religious congresses 

which are to convene in Chicago during the 

season of the great International Exposition. 

There it is proposed to gather together for religious 

conference and co-operation, not only 

the representatives of all the creeds of Christendom, 

but of heathendom as well; and many 

are the religious enthusiasts who seem disposed 

to persuade even the heathen that they are 

Christians if in any degree they manifest the 

Christ spirit, which they define simply as a disposition 

of love to God and love to man. 

In seeking a basis of union it is also clearly 
observable that Christians of every name and 
order are willing, for the sake of what they call 
Christian Unity, to drop out of their creed the 
only true foundation of Christianity, viz., the 
doctrine of the ransom. Such are some of the 
indications of the rolling together of the ecclesiastical 
heavens, or ruling religious powers. 

Fourthly, we see the elements of the earth- 
civil society— getting ready for the final conflagration 
when, it is said, "the elements shall 
melt with fervent heat" (2 Pet. 3:10-12)-the 
heat of human passion and wrath. We see the 
angry nations armed to the teeth and impoverishing 
their treasuries to equip themselves for the 
emergencies of the near future, while statesmen 
and politicians everywhere view the situation in 
civil affairs as extremely precarious, and are 
put to their wits' ends to devise ways and means 
for the protection of civil government against 
the dangers that threaten it from the growing 
dissatisfaction among the masses of the people. 
This was very manifest in the policy of Prince 
Bismarck of Germany in his course with reference 
to the church of Rome, when, a few years 
ago, he sought to rid Germany of Popish influence; 
but finding subsequently the necessity 
of that influence for the preservation of civil 
authority in Germany, he retraced his steps from 
considerations of mere political policy. 

We see, further, that men in every condition 
of life are banding together to resist others of 
opposing sentiments, so that the appearance of 
the world to-day is that of a great battle-field 
where mighty hosts of contending parties are 
definitely mustering their forces and preparing 
for a desperate conflict. Such has been the 
condition of things for a few years past, and 
the perfecting and equipping of these organizations 
will be the work of a few more years; 
and then will follow the world's crisis— a crisis 
in which all the powers of light and darkness 
will struggle for the ascendancy; and the result 
will at first seem to be disaster and utter ruin, 



until above the wreckage of all human law and 
order the power and authority of the Prince of 
Peace begin to be recognized. 

Such is the outlook of our day as viewed in 
the light of the holy apostles and prophets; 
but the conservative Phariseeism of to-day shakes 
the cautious head and says, Nay, it is not so; 
we cannot be on the eve of a new dispensation 
and of a revolution so stupendous, involving 
the whole present social structure, both civil 
and religious; for Lo, "all things continue as 
they were from the beginning." (2 Pet. 3:4.) 
And in their zeal to bolster up the tottering 
structures of priestcraft and statecraft, whose interests 
are so closely allied, they array themselves 
in bitter opposition to the present great 
work of the Lord and the promulgation of the 
truth concerning his plans and purposes. And 
as the heralds of the divine purpose spread 
abroad these tidings, and the great work of the 
Lord in this our day is shown to be along the 
exact lines of his revealed purposes and for the 
utter destruction of the present order of things, 
the opposition increases and both the truth and 
its advocates are despised and rejected. And, 
strange to say, many of God's children are 
among the despisers, having partaken of the 
spirit of this world and become lukewarm and 

R1488 : page 10 

indifferent to God's truth, while they have 
sought out many incongruous theories and devices 
of their own and consecrated their lives 
to these human purposes. 

It is to such that the words of our text are 
addressed— "Beware, therefore, lest that come 
upon you which is spoken in the prophets." 
What is that? It is spiritual blindness and 
darkness; "For the wisdom of [even] their wise 
men [even the honored and learned doctors of 
divinity, the leaders and representatives of nominal 
Christianity] shall perish, and the understanding 
of their prudent men shall be hid." 
"The priest and the prophet [the leaders and 
teachers] have erred through strong drink [being 
intoxicated with the spirit of the world]: 
they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of 
the way through strong drink; they err in 
vision, they stumble in judgment," and hence 
cannot discern the wonderful plan and work 
of the Lord in this our day.— Isa. 29:14; 28:7. 

Greatly to be dreaded indeed is this spiritual 
blindness which shuts out from view the glorious 
vision of God's wonderful plan of the ages 
and the work of the Lord— his "strange work" 



—in this our day, and its glorious outcome 
when his wrath is overpast. Such despisers of 
the truth, however highly they may be esteemed 
among men, must fail to enter into the reward 
of the faithful overcomers of this age, who are 
to live and reign with Christ a thousand years. 
-Rev. 3:21; 20:6. 

Let us, then, beware of that spirit which despises 
the instruction of the Lord, and when 
in his providence some human instrumentality 

R1489 : page 10 

is raised up in God's own time and way to declare 
the divine plan and work, let us rejoice 
and be glad. No human instrumentality has 
anything in this matter whereof to boast: the 
work is the Lord's, and the highest honor that 
any man can claim is to be his mouth-piece, 
his messenger. The prophecies concerning 
present truth were all securely closed up and 
sealed until this time of the end (Dan. 12:9), 
and no wisdom or learning could break those 
seals until God's due time had come. Let us, 
therefore, as we now behold the work and plan 
of the Lord, "lift up our heads and rejoice," 
remembering, as the Psalmist expresses it, that 
"God is our refuge and strength, a very present 
help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear 
though the earth [society as at present organized] 
be removed, and though the mountains 
[kingdoms] be carried into the midst of the sea 
[though they be engulfed in a sea of lawlessness 
and anarchy]; though the waters thereof [the 
ungovernable masses of humanity] roar and be 
troubled, [as we see them now and shall see 
them much more so, and] though the mountains 
[kingdoms] shake [with fear and dread 
and with an uncertain stability] with the swellings 
thereof. "-Psa. 46:1-3. 

With joy we have seen the light of truth 
breaking, and with joy it is our privilege to 
view every prophetic fulfilment, whether it be 
in the advancement of the truth, or in the cumulation 
and culmination of the troubles of this 
evil day; for every step of the Lord's great 
work brings us nearer the glorious outcome of 
everlasting peace not many days hence. 



R1489 : page 10 

A MOMENTOUS STRUGGLE BEGUN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose you 
herewith another editorial from the New York 
Sun of Dec. 15th, 1892, on the Prof. Smith heresy 
case. It is of the same purport as the Dr. 
Briggs case, and points clearly to the inevitable 
dilemma of the future, either to give up the Bible 
or give up the creeds. The Sword of Truth is 
certainly doing its work effectually now, exactly 
as you have interpreted the Scriptures. How 
easily would the acceptance of the truth of the 
Bible settle all their disputes if they could but 
see it. Yours, J. C. BELL, JR. 

"At last a Presbyterian heretic has been found 
guilty. He is the Rev. Dr. Smith, a professor 
in the Lane Theological Seminary of Ohio and 
a prominent minister of the Presbyterian church. 

"The charges against him were substantially 
the same as those on which Dr. Briggs is now 
undergoing trial in New York. That is, he 
has taught that scientific Biblical scholarship 
proves that there are errors in the Scriptures. 

R1489 :page 11 

Like Dr. Briggs and many other distinguished 
and nominally orthodox Biblical critics, he rejects 
the Mosaic authorship of the first five 
books of the Bible, upon which, according 
to the Rev. Dr. Birch, the authority of the 
Gospel rests, and generally in his teachings he 
has been in agreement with this modern school 
of criticism. 

"On Monday the Cincinnati Presbytery pronounced 
such doctrine to be contrary to the 
doctrine of the Bible itself and of the Westminster 
Confession, and it condemned Dr. Smith 
to suspension from the Presbyterian ministry 
until he renounces and recants his heretical 
teaching. Of course, he will not purchase his 
restoration at that price: and he will not be 
tempted to make the humiliating submission 
by fear that he will be burned at the stake. 
Even if the constituted Presbyterian authorities 
refuse to tolerate his doctrine, he knows 
that he can get toleration for it elsewhere, and 
even among Presbyterians themselves. The 
Cincinnati Presbytery convicted him by a small 
majority only, though his teaching is opposed 
to the Westminster Confession in both its spirit 
and its letter, and is utterly subversive of the 
Presbyterian faith in the Bible as held for generations 
past. 

"If it is thus made apparent that Dr. Smith 
has sympathizers with his views even in the 



conservative Cincinnati Presbytery, how must 

it be here in New York, where leading Presbyterian 

ministers and laymen have expressed 

their agreement with Dr. Briggs so openly? 

What does his suspension amount to under 

such circumstances? Because of his condemnation 

as a heretic by the one party he is all 

the stronger with the other party. If the Presbyterian 

Church drives him out as a heretic, 

he is only the first of a great company of its 

ministers whom in justice it must condemn to 

go out with him. 

"Dr. Smith will appeal from the Presbytery 
to the Ohio Synod and thence to the General 
Assembly, thus keeping alive an issue of tremendous 
importance to the Presbyterian Church. 
Unless the sentiment of both of these appellate 
courts changes radically meantime, there is no 
probability of his obtaining a reversal of the 
judgment from either of them. The great majority 
of the General Assembly has been strongly 
opposed to such views as his for two years 
past, and there are no indications that the opposition 
will be less next spring. It is more 
likely to become more intense. Even at the 
risk of dividing the denomination, the Presbyterians 
must hold their ministry to the teachings 
of their doctrinal standards, for it is better 
to split than to go to pieces altogether. If the 
Bible is not the perfect and absolutely true 
Word of God received by inspiration from 
heaven, Presbyterianism has no foundation of 
divine authority: it rests on human reason. 

"That is the issue, and the Presbyterian Church 
must meet it squarely and decide it positively. 
It may be confused by subtle theologians like 
Dr. Briggs and Dr. Smith, even in their own 
minds, but really it is the issue between faith 
and agnosticism. The conviction of Dr. Smith 
is only the beginning of the most momentous 
struggle in the whole history of Protestantism." 



At this writing the decision of the New York 
Presbytery in the case against Dr. Briggs is announced 
as decided in his favor. Thus has the 
Presbytery of New York— one of the most influential 
religious bodies in the world— decided 
and proclaimed to the world its disbelief in the 
Bible as the inspired Word of God, and its 
conviction that the few Bible statements which 
measure up to Nineteenth century ideas should 
be treated respectfully for that reason, and that 
the remainder should be regarded as legends 
and old wives' fables. Truly the wisdom of this 



world is foolishness with God.— EDITOR. 



R1489 :page 11 

"ALWAYS FOR ALL THINGS. 



"And be not drank with wine, wherein is excess; but 
be filled with the Spirit, speaking to yourselves in psalms 
and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody 
in your heart to the Lord; giving thanks always for 
all things unto God and the Father in the name of our 
Lord Jesus Christ; submitting yourselves one to another 
in the fear of God."— Eph. 5:15-21. 

From the contrast here instituted between 
being drunken with wine and being filled with 
the Spirit, as well as from the fact that Christians 
and not worldlings are here addressed, 
we understand the wine to be used as a symbol 
of the spirit of the world. And the Apostle 
here warns the children of God not to become 
intoxicated with the spirit of the world, but 
counsels us, on the contrary, to be filled with 
the Spirit of God. It is not enough that we 
banish from our hearts the spirit of the world, 
but we must keep filled with the holy Spirit of 

R1489 :page 12 

God, else the spirit of the world will come in 
unsolicited and take possession. 

The spirit of the world— the disposition and 
sentiments of the world on every subject— we 
find all about us, and the inclination of our 
natural mind is in the same direction: it is the 
mind of the flesh, the carnal mind, the selfish 
mind. To partake largely of this mind or disposition 
is to become intoxicated with it; and 
this intoxication stupefies the spiritual senses 
and beclouds the reasoning faculties, and so 
greatly mystifies the vision of truth that its 
clear discernment is impossible. But the spirit 
of Christ has the very opposite effect: it is the 
spirit of love and of a sound mind, whose 
healthful tendency is to illuminate the understanding 
and to invigorate every noble faculty 
of the soul. 

The effect of such spiritual invigoration and 
illumination is that of joy and peace and praise; 
and when two or three such meet their hearts 
naturally flow together; and while they make 
melody in their hearts together to the Lord, 
they often delight to express themselves in 



psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, and in 
prayers of thanksgiving to God the Father, in 
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Nor do such ever find themselves so beset 
with the cares and vexations of the present life 
that they can find no cause for thanksgiving; 
for, being graciously enlightened by the spirit 
of God, they know that all things, however 
vexing or perplexing or trying they may be, 
are working together for good to them that 
love God— to the called according to his purpose; 
and therefore it is their privilege to rejoice 
at all times and under all circumstances, 
and their pleasure always to give thanks to God 

R1490 : page 12 

for all things. 

As for days of national thanksgiving, we, as 
citizens of the heavenly kingdom, have no special 
need of them; for every day should be with 
us a day of thanksgiving for all things— for the 
prosperity of our "holy nation" under the 
righteous authority of Christ our King, for its 
peace and joy and its glorious hope, for its 
privileges of spiritual enlightenment and blessing, 
for the perfection of its laws and the shaping 
of its course and destiny, and for the needed 
discipline as well, which is to prepare it for its 
future exaltation and glory. Let the people 
of the world and less enlightened Christians 
give thanks, as doubtless many of them do, out 
of a sincere heart, for the common blessings of 
this present life— for the air and sunshine and 
rain, for bountiful harvests and for seasons of 
comparative peace with the nations abroad. 
Yes, blessed be God, out of his abundant mercy, 
these rich blessings are common to all— to the 
just and to the unjust— and it is well that the 
attention of all men should be called to mark 
and consider them. But they tell of no special 
favor to any of the nations or kingdoms of 
this world, all of which, as soon as the appointed 
"times of the Gentiles" are fulfilled, 
must give place to the universal Kingdom of 
God. (See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chap, 
xiii.) God's supervision of these in the present 
time is not any interference in their chosen 
course, but simply an overruling of their free 
course so that they may not interfere with, but 
rather that they may ultimately minister to, his 
own wise ends, in the same sense as it is said 
that He maketh even the wrath of man to 
praise him. 

And while the world thus marks and rejoices 
in, and in some cases returns thanks to 



God for, the truly glorious common blessings 
which our loving and benevolent Father showers 
alike upon the evil and the just, let our hearts 
not only rejoice in these things, but also in the 
higher spiritual favors bestowed upon the sons 
of God, giving thanks always and for all things 
unto God the Father in the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

Truly this is a happy frame of mind to be in, 
and those who can do this at all times and under 
all circumstances have reached an enviable 
altitude of Christian character and experience. 
All about us are trials and vexations on every 
hand, and the man or woman who has become 
so superior to these that he takes cognizance 
only of the end to be gained by this refining 
process, and who therefore patiently and even 
thankfully submits to the painful ordeals in hope 
of the glorious end designed by Divine Providence, 
may also confidently rejoice in hope of 
the final reward of the overcomers. 

R1490 : page 13 

Along with this beautiful frame of mind produced 
by the indwelling spirit of God, the 
Apostle also links the grace of humility or submission 
—"submitting yourselves one to another 
in the fear of God." Where the spirit of 
joy and thankfulness reigns pride finds no place, 
but each, in lowliness of mind and in the fear 
of God, submits himself to the other for helpful, 
loving counsel or criticism, to the end that 
so, by mutually taking heed to the word of the 
Lord and seeking to measure up to all its requirements, 
the bride of Christ may make herself 
ready for the marriage. 

It is in view of the urgent necessity of sober 
watchfulness and attention to the will of the 
Lord regarding us that the Apostle calls upon all 
who are to any extent intoxicated and stupefied 
by the spirit of the world, saying, "Awake, 
thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, 
and Christ shall give thee light."— Put away 
the worldly spirit and awake to the importance 
of being filled with the spirit of God, and look 
to him for the light that will surely follow, with 
its blessed, invigorating and health-giving 
influences. 

"See then that ye walk circumspectly" [carefully, 
picking your steps. Oh, how carefully we 
must tread this narrow way!] not like ignorant 
persons, but as wise men, securing the 
season for yourselves [taking advantage of your 
opportunities] because the days are evil. [The 
times are perilous, and only by sobriety and the 



wisdom of meekness shall we be able to walk 
this narrow way to its glorious terminus.] 

"Wherefore," he adds, "be ye not unwise, 
but understanding what the will of the Lord 
is." And may the will of God and the joy 
and peace of God fill our hearts and leave no 
room for the spirit of the world to intrude upon 
us. 



page 13 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1490 : page 13 

JOSHUA THE TYPICAL HIGH PRIEST. 



I. QUAR., LESSON IV., JAN. 22, ZECH. 3:1-10. 

Golden Text— "Seeing then that we have a great High 
Priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus, the Son of 
God, let us hold fast our profession."— Heb. 4:14. 

Although this chapter is not stated to be a 
vision, that is the inference. It will be remembered 
that a mixed multitude of those who 
trusted in God's promises, out of all the tribes, 
had returned from Babylon to the Holy Land. 
They had endeavored as best they could to restore 
the temple and its services, and Joshua 
was the High Priest; but withal their matters 
were in but a poor condition, very unlike the 
former glory of Solomon's time. The object 
of this vision was in part, no doubt, to encourage 
the then fainting hearts of Israel, and 
to lead them to trust in the acceptableness of 
their humble arrangements for God's service. 

However, the vision's special significance is 
as a prophecy, in which the literal Joshua, of 
the prophet's time, has nothing whatever to do. 
Our interpretation of the vision, briefly stated, 
would be about as follows:— 



Joshua typified the entire "Church of the 
first-born ones" during the present life— beset 
and opposed by their adversary, Satan. Our 
Lord Jesus is represented by the head and his 
consecrated followers by the body of the typical 
High Priest. All are opposed by the same 
adversary, for "He was tempted in all points like 
as we are, yet without sin." The body of Joshua 
was represented as clothed in filthy garments 
—which represents the fact that "all our [the 
Church's] righteousness is as filthy rags." 

The change of raiment typifies the removal 
of our sins and the providing instead of Christ's 
righteousness in and through God's arranged 
way— Christ's sacrifice— which was not then 
made known. The announcement of the angel 
to the cleansed Joshua (verse 7) corresponds to 
the Church's high-calling to the divine nature 
and Kingdom of God after its members have 
been justified by faith in Christ. 

VERSE 8 addresses Joshua separately from the 
under priesthood (—his body— just as our Lord 
and the royal priesthood under him— his body 
—are sometimes addressed separately), telling 
them that they are not the reality, but merely 
types of the true Christ. "Hear now, O Joshua 
the high priest, and thy companions, sitting 
before thee, for they are sign-men [or types]. 
For, lo, I am about to bring in my [real] Servant 

R1490 : page 14 

the Sprout"— a fresh sprout— one not of the 
old Adamic stock, blighted and dying because 
of original sin, but a new sprout, having fresh 
vitality: holy, harmless and separate from sinners, 
and yet a man— "the man Christ Jesus." 

Using another symbol, a stone, the Chief 
Corner Stone, to represent this coming One, 
verse 9 declares: "Behold the stone that I have 
laid before Joshua [the type]. Upon that one 
stone rest seven eyes [perfect or divine wisdom, 
seven representing perfection and an eye representing 
knowledge]. Behold, I will engrave 
the engraving thereof, saith Jehovah of hosts. 
[God is superintending the engraving of his 
character and law upon all the "living stones" 
of the Church— the body of Christ— as surely 
as he superintended the trial development of 
our Lord, the Chief Corner Stone: as it is written, 
They shall be all taught of God.]— 
1 Pet. 2:4-7. 

"And I will remove the iniquity [unfruitfulness, 
etc., as well as sin] of the land in one 
day [the Millennial Day— "a day with the 
Lord is as a thousand years" with men]. "In 



that day, saith Jehovah of hosts, ye shall call 
every man his neighbor, under the vine and 
under the fig tree." 

The Golden Text is very appropriate. Our 
Lord, the Captain of our salvation, has been 
proved perfect through obedience to the things 
which he suffered; and now, in the completing 
of his body-members, he stands not only as our 
Redeemer, to make us fit to stand trial under 
the high-calling; and also as our Example of 
how to overcome, but more: he, as our High 
Priest, makes good our unintentional shortcomings, 
and also stands ready to succor all 
his consecrated members— promising that we 
shall not be tempted above that we are able to 
bear, because he will provide, for such, ways 
of escape. 

R1490 : page 14 

ZERUBBABEL THE TYPICAL BUILDER. 



I. QUAR., LESSON V., JAN. 29, ZECH. 4:1-10. 

Golden Text— "Not by might, nor by power, but by 
my spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts."— Verse 6. 

This, like the vision of the preceding lesson, 
was doubtless intended to encourage the Israelites 
living at the time it was given; but, like 

R1491 :page 14 

it also, its chief lesson belonged not to them, 
but to us. -1 Pet. 1:12. 

The golden candlestick (literally, lamp) with 
seven branches (or burners) is the same as that 
which, in the typical Tabernacle and Temple, 
shed the only light of "The Holy." The same 
seven lamps in one are brought to our attention 
in the Book of Revelation (1:20), and there 
explained to symbolize the Church of Christ 
during the present time. The seven represents 
perfection or completeness; hence as a whole 
the lamp-stand represents all the true saints or 
light-bearers in all the various phases of the 
Nominal Church development— Rev. 2:1,5. 

The oil represents the holy spirit which, burning 
in the true believers, causes the illumination 
of the sanctified in Christ Jesus. 

The two olive trees from which the olive oil 
proceeds to the seven lamps we understand to 
be typical of the Scriptures of the Old and New 
Testaments— God's two witnesses. The holy 



spirit is "the spirit of the truth;" and God's 
Word is truth! God explained this to Zerubbabel 
(verse 6), saying, "Not by an army nor 
by force but by my spirit [the spirit of the Truth 
—the spirit or influence of God given through 
his exceeding great and precious promises, etc. 
—the olive trees— (2 Pet. 1:4) the Word], saith 
Jehovah of hosts. Who art thou, O great mountain 
before Zerubbabel? Thou shalt become a 
plain, and he shall bring on the headstone with 
shoutings of, Grace, grace unto it." 

A mountain symbolizes a kingdom; and the 
one here represented as an obstruction before 
Zerubbabel typifies Satan's kingdom— the dominion 
of evil under the Prince of this world. 
Zerubbabel typifies Christ. His name signifies 
"a shoot [or sprout] out of Babylon." Literally, 
he was a son or shoot out of David and 
Jesse (as our Lord also is called), and secondly, 
as a sprout out of Babylon [confusion], he was 
a further type of Christ, who was out of, and 
yet separate from, sin and all mixture of evil. 
Undoubtedly the people of that day understood 
Zerubbabel to be the branch or shoot mentioned 
in the vision of Chapter 3:8, not realizing that 
Zerubbabel and Joshua were but types of Christ, 
in whom the two offices of King and Priest 
would be combined. 

VERSES 9,10 blend the type and the antitype. 
Zerubbabel had begun the rebuilding of the literal 
Temple, and the people understood that it 
would be completed by him. They might not 
then despise the humble beginning of the work, 
but rejoice to see it progress under his direction 
—realizing that the seven eyes (i.e., the perfect 
wisdom of God which holds survey of all the 
earth) were superintending the work. 

The real application of these verses is to 
Christ, who began the construction of the true 
Temple of God— "which temple ye are." His 
earthly ministry and the work of his followers 
have all along seemed small and weak, and far 
from what might be expected by any respecting 
so great a Temple for so grand a purpose. 
But those who realize the situation from God's 
standpoint can rejoice in the outcome, realizing 
the Lord's promise that "the day of small 

R1491 :page 15 

things," the day of suffering, the day of trials, 
will soon give place to the Millennial Day of 
joy, perfection and blessing. The despised 
"little flock," whom the world knows not, even 
as it knew not its Master, will soon be glorified 
with him, and share his Kingdom. The 



poor, rich in faith, and those that are nought, 
and that are despised, and that are foolish according 
to the wisdom of this world, are soon 
to be gloriously manifested as the Sons of God, 
the body of Christ and the embodiment of divine 
wisdom and power and love, that as his 
Kingdom they, with Christ their Lord and Head, 
may, as the "Sun of Righteousness," shine forth 
in blessing and life to the groaning creation— 
already redeemed by the precious blood. 



page 15 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The TOWER, to 
which I subscribed some time since, comes regularly 
to hand, and is much enjoyed by myself 
and wife. I note that you like to hear from 
subscribers, and I thought it might not be uninteresting 
to you to learn that I am one of 
those into whose hands "Food for Thinking 
Christians" [now out of print] fell, in London, 
about the year 1881. I had several years previously 
given up as entirely unscriptural and 
ridiculous the wretched dogma of eternal torment 
and the inherent immortality of mankind. 
I remember well your book being loaned to 
me by a friend, and my taking it home, sitting 
up all night and literally devouring its contents. 
Unfortunately it was read too quickly 
for perfect digestion and assimilation, but looking 
back, I can see now that it was not altogether 
seed sown by the wayside. I have been 
wandering about among the sects all these years 
since, "seeking rest and finding none," becoming 
successively a Methodist, a Disciple, a 
Baptist and again a Methodist. I have been 
clinging to the latter church, because it seemed 
to me that it had more love and zeal than some 
of the other denominations, but I have had no 
sympathy whatever with the erroneous doctrines 
I knew it to be teaching. 

A year ago, in Baltimore, it was my good fortune 
to meet a Baptist brother who had been 
reading the DAWNS. He kindly lent me the 
volumes, one after another. I again swallowed 
their contents— getting through the three books 
in a little over a week, besides verifying most 
of the passages. I can scarcely tell you the 
change they have wrought in my whole religious 



life. I have been set to thinking as I have 
never thought before; and the blessed Word of 
God, which has to a large extent hitherto been 
a sealed book to me, is now unfolding to my 
mind in a truly wonderful manner. It is now 
my only study, and I have renounced all worldly 
ambition in order that I can find out fully 
what is the will of God concerning me, and 
that I may learn how best to do it. Many 
times in the past I have felt sick at heart at the 
thought that it seemed impossible to learn the 
truth fully, in view of the extraordinarily divergent 
teachings of the numerous sects, all 
claiming to expound the Bible aright; but it 
has been my humble and constant prayer to 
the good Lord to lead me into the light; and 
now, thank God, I feel that my prayer, to a 
very large extent, has been answered, and I am 
still trusting to the same leadings of the energizing 
and illuminating Spirit of God, praying 
fervently that the Word may yet become a 
"Lamp unto my feet and a light to my path." 

I am glad to tell you that I was found by 
Brother Hewes some two months ago, when he 
called at my house selling DAWNS. Since then 
myself and wife have been meeting regularly 
at his house for study of the Word, singing and 
prayer, and these meetings have been wonderfully 
profitable to us. I have read, re-read and 
am still reading DAWNS with increasing interest 
and profit, and so is my dear wife; and we 
do feel that you have been the means, in the 
Lord's hands, of disseminating the needed light 
upon much of Scripture hitherto hidden, but 
now due to be revealed, and we are abundantly 
thankful to him therefor. 

Yours in the one hope, W. J. C . 



Wisconsin. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am impelled to 
write and thank you for the last TOWER, especially 
the article, "Obedience Better than Sacrifice." 
It has been a great blessing to me, 
not only in awaking me to a realization of my 
own condition, but also in aiding me to regain 
at least a partial footing in the way of light and 
peace. The devil has surely been leading me 
by a quiet and subtle way into a condition of 
lethargy and doubt that found me, on awaking, 
nearly in the "outer darkness." 

No doubt from a spirit of pride and overconfidence 
I was easily assailed. He began by 
persuading me that many of the expressions used 
in the TOWER, as regards false doctrines, were 



uncalled for. While I did not feel in sympathy 

page 16 

with such doctrines and theories, yet I can 
see now that he was leading me as an "angel 
of light," very stealthily but surely in this and 
other ways. I had partially realized it as I had 
begun to lose that rest and peace which should 
be ours; but your article seemed to be sent of 
God to awaken me, and lead me back. I assure 
you, dear brother, I feel my own unworthiness 
and weakness, and for a time I hardly 
dared to look up; but I know he is willing to 
help me. 

Just at the proper time the devil caused the 
enclosed article on "Inspiration" to come in 
my way, and I seemed in just the condition for 
it to cause a disturbance— a doubtful spirit. 
How thankful that I was awakened before it 
was too late! 

My object in writing you is not only to 
thank you, but to ask you to pray for me. I 
need it. Pray that I may be given a spirit of 
humility and strength to obey, and that my own 
will and pride may be subdued. Oh, I am so 
anxious. Your article was indeed to me "a 
word in season." I thank God for it! How 
forcibly I have learned to know the meaning 
of Paul's words, "Let him who thinketh he 
standeth take heed lest he fall." Pray for me! 

Sincerely, C . 



Michigan. 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., DEAR BRETHREN: 

...Robed in his righteousness, I am looking 
forward to be clothed upon with a glorious 
body, to have this mortal put on immortality, 
to when there will be no more a law in the 
body at variance with the law of the mind; but 
alas ! before I am made meet for an entrance 
upon this inheritance of the saints in light, how 
much cleansing from the filthiness of the flesh, 
how much washing with water by the Word, I 
need; how much refining before the dross is 
all consumed, and how little will there be left. 
Nothing left but the will to be one with the 
members of his anointed body— one in Him. 
Yours in our blessed Redeemer, 
W. C. BROWN. 



Ohio. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed please 
find $1.00 for the TOWER for '93. It can never 
be more appreciated than it has been, for it is 
more precious to me than its weight in fine 
gold. It has been like a mirror in aiding me 
to adjust the robe which my Master has given 
me, that I might appear at the royal marriage 
of the King— where (if I hold out faithful unto 
the end) I hope to meet you. I see so much 
to be done, by way of adorning the robe; 
and all I can do makes me realize all the 
more that it is all of Christ and nothing of self; 
yet I love to "wait upon the Lord." Yea, I 
would rather be a door-keeper in the house of 
the Lord than to dwell in a palace. 

It seems as if I am now a mere drone in the 
bee-hive of earnest workers, but I leave that all 
to the Master of the harvest. He knows my 
heart. Paul tells us, "Having done all, stand;" 
and here is the standing in which patience is 
to have her perfect work. I find it requires 
strength from above to do this. I have done all 
I could, and now I am just resting with childlike 
confidence in my Lord, for he has answered 
my petition for strength to so do. 
Yours in the blessed hope, 
MRS. S. H. RAY. 



Canada. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose you 
a dollar for renewal of TOWER for 1893. Being 
a newspaper publisher of over thirteen years 
experience, I know the value of prompt renewals. 
The dollar in advance saves interest, saves 
disappointment and worry, and gives the sender 
an easy conscience. I would not do without 
the TOWER if I had to live on two meals a day 
until I saved the money to pay for it. Its 
teachings are priceless to the true child of God. 
May its influence for good increase from year 
to year, and be the means of scattering light 
and truth to the uttermost parts of the earth. 
J. E. A 



Illinois. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I should like, if 
possible, to express to you my love and thankfulness 
for the blessings I have received through 
the reading of ZION'S WATCH TOWER during 
the year just closed. Many times have I been 
seemingly cold and despondent when the TOWER 
would come so full of rich food that in reading 



it the fire of zeal would glow in my heart, 
and I would feel like shouting praises to God, 
the Father, who has prepared such great things 
for his children. All praise to God, who gave 
his Son to die for us— and not for us, only, but 
also for the whole world— and to Christ, our 
blessed Redeemer. 

May his favor ever abide with you and Sister 
Russell, that you may hand out meat in due 
season during the year just ahead. A happy 
new year to you both, is my prayer. I am 
glad to feel that I am remembered by you at 
the throne of grace, that the grand truths may 
become more clear to me. 

Yours, in the Redeemer, J. F. SHEHORN. 



"With the heart man believeth unto righteousness; 
and with the mouth confession is 
made unto salvation." 



page 18 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 



December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



DAILY FOOD CALENDAR FOR 1893. 



We imported a lot of calendars for this year, 
but not nearly sufficient to meet the orders received 
from our readers. An increasing number 
seem to appreciate the convenience of having 
these calendars (tearing off one date each 
day)— exhibiting a new text with each new date. 

We have succeeded in procuring a large lot 
of such calendars, still handsomer than our 
own importation, from a New York importer: 
and as the season is now somewhat advanced 
we got them at a great bargain, and can supply 
them to you at about one-third the usual price, 
including postage, viz., FIFTEEN CENTS EACH. 

Those who can spare this sum from other 
necessities cannot make much better use of it 
than to have one of these calendars in their 
dining room and have the Scripture verse committed 
to memory at the breakfast table. It 
may sometimes help direct the thoughts of an 
entire family into good channels for the day. 
Besides thus furnishing the mind with spiritual 
Daily Bread, it lays up a store of precious 
promises for future use. "Thy Word was found, 
and I did eat it." 

THE ADDRESS-TAG RECEIPTS. 



We are still greatly behind in our office work, 
thanks to your loving promptness in renewing 
your subscriptions. (These, and especially the 
accompanying kind words of your letters, 
greatly encourage us in the service, corroborating 
the assurance of the Word that "our labor 
is not in vain in the Lord," and add to our 
strength and courage amidst discouragements 
and difficulties raised up by the world, the flesh 
and the devil.) We trust you will excuse our 
inability to get the date on your address-tag so 
changed as to furnish you a receipt for subscription 
moneys sent in recently. We will 
attend to this as soon as possible. 



YOUNG'S ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE. 



Orders for this work are delayed, waiting 
for a new, revised edition, now in preparation. 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



The anniversary of our Lord's Last Supper, 
on the eve of his crucifixion, falls this year 
upon Thursday, March 30th,— after six P.M. 
At that hour begins the fourteenth day of the 
first month, (old) Jewish reckoning. 

As usual, the Church meeting at Allegheny 
will celebrate it by commemorating our Lord's 
death. As usual, also, a protracted meeting 
for Bible Study will precede the memorial; 
and, as usual, friends from far and near will be 
invited to join in both, as may suit their convenience. 
These meetings will convene on 
Tuesday, March 28th, at 2 P.M., in Bible House 
Chapel, Allegheny (just across the river from 
Pittsburg), and be followed, on the 31st, by a 
Colporteurs' Meeting. Fuller particulars will 
be given in the February 15th WATCH TOWER. 

R1497 :page 18 

OUR CRITICAL READERS. 



Few journals, if any other, have such critical 
readers as has ZION'S WATCH TOWER. And we 
are glad of this. Prove critically all that is 
offered you, by us and by others, by the Word 
of the Lord; and let us know whenever you 
find a discrepancy. We will be pleased to 
correct an error. 

We refer more to a number of letters received 
calling attention to our comments on verses 15 and 16 
of the Bible Study for Dec. 25th, in 
our issue of Dec. 1st, '92. These letters were 
nicely expressed; and inquired whether the 
"Shepherds," and the "Wise men" who visited 
the infant Jesus, were identical; and if so our 
proofs. We answer, No: it was merely "a slip 
of the pen" on our part which thus blended 
into one the two classes. 

page 18 

THE SYRIAC NEW TESTAMENT. 



Orders for this translation are for the present 
delayed awaiting a new edition which the publisher 
advises us is now on the press. Orders 
will be filled in rotation as received as soon as 
possible. Our price is $2.00, including postage. 



R1491 :page 19 

VOL. XIV. JANUARY 15, 1893. NO. 2. 

A WORD TO METHODISTS. 

FROM BISHOP FOSTER. 



The following earnest and solemn words 
from Bishop Foster have appeared in various 
Methodist Journals, and in tract form. He certainly 
gives his trumpet no uncertain sound. 

"The Church of God is to-day courting the 
world. Its members are trying to bring it down 
to the level of the ungodly. The ball, the 
theatre, nude and lewd art, social luxuries with 
all their loose moralities, are making inroads 
into the sacred inclosure of the Church; and 
as a satisfaction for all this worldliness, Christians 
are making a great deal of Lent and 
Easter and Good Friday and Church ornamentations. 
It is the old trick of Satan. The 
Jewish Church struck on that rock, the Romish 
Church was wrecked on it, and the Protestant 
Church is fast reaching the same doom. 

"Our great dangers, as we see them, are assimilation 
to the world, neglect of the poor, 
substitution of the form for the fact of godliness, 
abandonment of discipline, a hireling 
ministry, an impure gospel, which, summed 
up, is a fashionable church. That Methodists 
should be liable to such an outcome, and that 
there should be signs of it in a hundred years 
from the "sail loft," seems almost a miracle 
of history; but who that looks about him today 
can fail to see the fact? 

"Do not Methodists, in violation of God's 
Word and their own Discipline, dress as extravagantly 
and as fashionably as any other class? 
Do not ladies, and often the wives and daughters 
of the ministry, put on "gold and pearls 
and costly array?" Would not the plain dress 
insisted upon by John Wesley, Bishop Asbury, 



and worn by Hester Ann Rogers, Lady Huntington, 

and many others equally distinguished, 

be now regarded in Methodist circles as fanaticism? 

Can any one going into the Methodist 

Church in any of our chief cities distinguish 

the attire of the communicants from that of the 

theatre and ball goers? Is not worldliness 

seen in the music? Elaborately dressed and 

ornamented choirs, who in many cases make 

no profession of religion, and are often sneering 

skeptics, go through a cold, artistic or operatic 

performance which is as much in harmony 

with spiritual worship as an opera or a theatre. 

Under such worldly performance spirituality is 

frozen to death. 

"Formerly every Methodist attended class-meeting 
and gave a testimony of experimental 
religion; now the class-meeting is attended by 
very few, and in many churches it is abandoned. 
Seldom do even the stewards, trustees and 
leaders of the church attend class-meeting. 
Formerly nearly every Methodist prayed, testified 
or exhorted in prayer meeting; now but 
very few are heard. Formerly shouts and 
praises were heard; now such demonstrations 
of holy enthusiasm and joy are regarded as 
fanaticism. 

"Worldly socials, fairs, festivals, concerts, and 
such like, have taken the place of the religious 
gatherings, revival meetings, class and prayer-meetings 
of earlier days. 

"How true that the Methodist Discipline is 
a dead letter. Its rules forbid the wearing of 
gold, or pearls, or costly array; yet no one 
ever thinks of disciplining any of its members 
for violating them. They forbid the reading 
of such books and the taking of such diversions 

R1492 : page 19 

as do not minister to godliness; yet the 

church itself goes to shows and frolics and festivals 

and fairs which destroy the spiritual life of 

the young as well as the old. The extent to 

which this is now carried on is appalling. 

"The early Methodist ministers went forth 
to sacrifice and suffer for Christ. They sought, 

R1492 : page 20 

not places of ease and affluence, but of privation 

and suffering. They gloried, not in their 

big salaries, fine parsonages and refined congregations, 

but in the souls that had been won 

for Jesus. Oh, how changed! A hireling 

ministry will be a feeble, timid, truckling, time-serving 



ministry without faith, endurance and 
holy power. Methodism formerly dealt in the 
great central truth. Now the pulpits deal 
largely in generalities, and in popular lectures. 
The glorious doctrine of Entire Sanctification 
is rarely heard and seldom witnessed to in the 
pulpits." Methodist Exchange. 



That the good Bishop is not unduly alarmed 
about the actual state of Methodism is manifest 
to every observer who is not stone blind. 
Here are two items out of many that might be 
culled from both the religious and secular press 
substantiating the Bishop's charge. They read 
as follows:— 

"CHURCH BOWLING ALLEYS AND BILLIARD 
PARLORS. 



"The Christian Nation is our authority for 
the statement that 'Mr. H. W. Knight, before 
a recent gathering of Methodists at the Bible 
House in this city (New York), said that, as an 
adjunct to the churches, buildings should be 
constructed with bowling alleys and billiard 
parlors and the like to counteract the influence 
of the rum shops.' 

"A great many questionable things are done 
in many of the churches, ostensibly in the name 
of religion, but we were hardly prepared to get 
the announcement that things had come to 
such a pass that the Methodist Church would 
even consider such a proposition. A point 
made very prominent in the founding of that 
church was the idea of plainness and an entire 
separation from all worldly folly, but, having 
grown to be a large body and consequently 
popular, it is ready to entertain the proposition 
of having a gambling annex attached to its 
churches. 

"Several instances are on record where young 
men have gained their first lessons in gambling 
at church socials and festivals. If they have 
thus learned these lessons at occasional gatherings 
of the church for festivity and silly games, 
how will it be when a permanent establishment 
that can be visited at any time is erected in 
connection with the churches? We have 
searched in vain for the divine commission, 
Go ye into all the world, and, for those who will 
not hear the gospel, erect bowling alleys and 
billiard parlors in connection with the churches, 



in order that they may be entertained. 

"We know that this move will not meet the 
approval of the large majority of the members 
of the Methodist Church, but we are sorry to 
see that such is the tendency in the minds of 
many in the various churches at the present 
time; and while this is going on, should there 
not be a people who are seeking their power, 
not from some questionable means of worldly 
policy, but from the great source of all power, 
the world's Redeemer?"— Elder A. O. Tait. 

"The Voice," of New York, has also the 
following: ~ 

THE REV. DR. F. A. LLACY GIVES ADVICE. 



"The pastor of a Methodist Episcopal church 
in a city noted for its beer-brewing interests 
has been so greatly stirred by The Voice's 
Church and Saloon editorials that he was constrained 
to seek counsel of a brother minister 
of his acquaintance, asking advice as follows:— 

'"Dear Brother: My soul is stirred within 
me as I see this city wholly given up to the 
brewing interests. It would really seem that 
our churches are bowing to the liquor oligarchy. 
What are we to do— stay in the pulpit 
and keep silence, or preach Prohibition and 
take the consequences— abuse, non-support and 
persecution?'" 

The response to this we give below: 

'"My Dear Young Friend: Your difficulty 
is one quite common to comparatively inexperienced 
ministers. I can fully sympathize 
with you in feeling as though you would like 
to fire broadsides of Gospel truth into the sin 
and iniquity that besiege the world on every 
hand. I used to feel that way myself in my 
early ministry, when I had occasional fits of 
'enlargement of the conscience,' as I call it. 
It will require great care properly to suppress 
such impulses, and to keep the reins well in 
hand, so that you can manage the often none 
too pious men on whom you have to depend 
to supply the money for carrying on the Lord's 
work on an adequate scale. 

'"The preaching of the Gospel in a way not 
to offend has become a science, which it behooves 
a young minister to study well. It has 
taken centuries to evolve this science in its 
present perfection. We are wiser than the 
early Christians and those of the Middle Ages, 
who injudiciously butted their heads against 
the brass walls of prejudice. They preached 



against particular sins, and incurred unnecessary 
displeasure, when they might have preached 
the Gospel as the never-failing remedy for all 

R1492:page21 

sin, without specifying, and thus have secured 
the respectful attention and endorsement even 
of the most hardened sinners. 

'"It requires great wisdom and discretion 
to preach the Gospel in the present day in the 
way that most of the influential churches want 
it preached. The day of fishermen preachers 
is past. The young man who would serve a 
wealthy pulpit acceptably to-day must bring 
into it education, culture and refinement, and 
must show great deference to the opinions of 
the men who are looked up to, and who have 
influence in the church and in the 
neighborhood. 

'"Regarding the particular question about 
which you inquire, you should be careful to 
make a broad discrimination between, for instance, 
a wealthy brewer and a wicked dive-keeper, 
who may, in the natural course of 
business, handle the former's wares and be under 
business obligations to him. Your congregation 
will probably stand by you in anything 
you may say about saloon-keepers, especially 
about those who conduct disorderly and disreputable 
resorts, but it would not do to imperil 
influence for good by attacking a respectable 
wholesale dealer, or classing him in the same 
category with common saloon-keepers. 

'"Then, as to Prohibition, you know that 
question has so many bearings, especially in its 
political aspects, that it is well to feel your way 
very carefully before committing yourself to it 
unqualifiedly. You can safely say that you 
sympathize with the objects had in view by those 
earnest and excellent people who have become 
so discouraged in their attempts to keep the 
business within respectable limits that they even 
propose to do away with it entirely. I said 
that myself recently and it was heartily endorsed 
by a wealthy wholesale dealer, whose wife is a 
member of my church, and who is himself one 
of the best paying members of my congregation. 
Moreover, several Prohibitionists thanked 
me for my courageous stand against the liquor 
power. 

'"Now, my dear brother, I have great hopes 
for you. I know of no young man in the denomination 
who stands a better chance for ecclesiastical 
preferment than yourself, if you will 
but follow the dictates of your own sober judgment 



guided by a few such considerations as I 
have mentioned. Whenever I can help you in 
any way, command me, and believe me, 
Ever sincerely your brother in Christ, 
F. A. Llacy.'" 



But Methodists are not alone in these matters. 
Here is another item of similar import:— 

CHURCHES AND SALOONS. 



"There is considerable discussion in Pittsburg 
religious circles over the sermon last 
Sunday of the Rev. W. S. Rainsford, D.D., 
pastor of St. George's Episcopal Church, New 
York, in which he advanced some very radical 
views as regards the regulation of saloons. 
Dr. Rainsford, in substance, said that he had 
given the saloon question a great deal of study 
and that he had come to the conclusion that 
it is impossible to suppress saloons, at least in 
large cities, and the best thing the church can 
do is to make a compromise and countenance 
the establishment of places by Christian men, 
where beer, light wines and coffee can be sold. 
He also favored the opening of the places on 
Sunday during certain hours, and thinks the 
attachment of reading rooms would make them 
attractive. Dr. Rainsford thought that these 
places properly conducted would in a great 
measure aid the cause of temperance and lessen 
the consumption of spirituous liquors." 



The foregoing arraignments by Bishop Foster, 
not only Methodists, but Presbyterians, 
Baptists, Episcopalians and members of all denominations 
may well ponder, for they apply to 
all alike. They come from one of the oldest 
bishops in the Methodist denomination. Had 
they come from one outside of Methodism they 
might be regarded as malicious reproach, but 
coming as they do from one high in official 
capacity within the denomination, they must 
be regarded as his honest convictions in view 
of the broad observation of Methodism as a 
whole which his position as bishop furnishes. 

Its confessions ought indeed to be startling 
to every Methodist particularly, and to others 
in so far as they realize the same conditions. 
The Bishop accuses the membership of the 



R1493 : page 21 

Methodist church (1) of trying to bring the 
church down to the level of the ungodly by 
encouraging "the ball, the theatre, nude and 
lewd art, and social luxuries with all their loose 
moralities." What a charge! what a confession! 
Can the spirit of Christ, the love of the 
truth, or the joys of hope and of communion 
with God dwell in hearts that are so led of the 
spirit of the world? But does the Bishop 
mean that only a few such have crept into the 
Methodist church, while the great majority are 

R1493 : page 22 

otherwise minded? Evidently not, for he speaks 

of the membership of the Methodist church as 

a whole. He seems to see plainly that the 

whole Methodist field is overrun with tares, and 

that the true wheat— the saints who are actuated 

by the spirit of Christ— are numerically so insignificant 

as to be unworthy of mention. 

(2) He accuses them of trying to make satisfaction 
for this worldliness by giving more attention 

to the outward forms of godliness— the 
keeping of Lent and Easter and Good Friday, 
and attending to church-decorations, etc.— in 
other words of having "a form of godliness 
without the power." 

(3) He shows how the early zeal, enthusiasm, 
sobriety, consistency and devotion of Methodism 
have given place to pleasure-seeking with 

the world— how they are now "lovers of pleasure 
more than of God." 

But what word of commendation has he for a 
faithful ministry that bravely endeavors to stem 
this fearful tide of worldliness in the ranks of 
Methodism? None whatever. On the other hand, 
his testimony agrees with that of the Prophet 
Isaiah (28:7. See also S.S. Lesson on Isa. 28:1-13, 
in TOWER of Jan. 15, 1892), that the ministry 
as well as the membership have become 
intoxicated with the spirit of the world, and are, 
therefore, as far out of the way as the people. 
He speaks of them as "a hireling ministry- 
timid, truckling, time-serving, without faith, 
endurance and holy power;" says they have 
forsaken the great central truth of Christianity 
and deal in generalities and popular lectures. 

What an arraignment of Methodism. Doubtless 
the good Bishop would make some honorable 
exceptions among the ministry, as well as 
among the membership of Methodism, were he 
not speaking here of his outlook over Methodism 



as a whole. This can only be understood 

as his general view of the rank and file both of 

the ministry and membership of the great 

Methodist organization. In his estimation and 

from his specially favorable standpoint of observation, 

having a full acquaintance with the 

workings of the whole system and necessarily 

a large personal acquaintance with both the ministry 

and the membership, he plainly describes 

the rank and file of both as "tares"— mere 

imitation Christians, Christians in outward appearance, 

but not at heart. And, pointing to 

the fact that the society is only a little over a 

hundred years old, he declares that such a fall 

from the original devotion and zeal of Methodists 

for God "seems almost a miracle of history," 

and adds, "But who that looks about him 

to-day can fail to see the fact?" 

It is high time, in view of these things, that 
any of the Lord's true people who still abide 
in the midst of Methodism and who support it 
with their influence, their presence and their 
means, should awake and consider what the 
Lord would have them do. We are now living 
in "the harvest" or "end" of the Gospel 
age, when the wheat and the tares which the 
Lord allowed to grow together all through the 
age must be separated. (Matt. 13:30.) The 
great mass of tares is to be bound yet more 
tightly than ever in bundles preparatory to the 
burning (symbolic) in the great time of trouble 
predicted by the Lord and the prophets and 
the apostles to occur within this harvest period, 
and which therefore can be only a very few 
years in the distance. 

The sickle which the Lord is making use of 
to accomplish the separation is the truth due 
in this harvest period— the truth concerning 
the divine plan of the ages, showing both 
scripturally and philosophically the glorious 
outcome of the work of redemption in the grand 
"restitution of all things, spoken by the mouth 
of all the holy prophets since the world began" 
(Acts 3:19-21); and showing also the "high 
calling" of the Gospel Church— not the mixed 
company of wheat and tares which constitute 
the nominal gospel church, but the true and 
faithful saints," whose names were "written in 
heaven," and which have never been "blotted 
out" because of unfaithfulness: "The Lord 
knoweth them that are his." The divine plan 
of the ages shows how those called, chosen and 
faithful" ones (Rev. 17:14) are to be joint-heirs 
with Christ, how they are to reign with 
him over the earth for a thousand years, and 
how they with him constitute the promised 



"Seed of Abraham" which is to bless all the 
families of the earth.— Rom. 8:17; Rev. 5:10; 
20:6; Gal. 3:16,29; Gen. 28:14. 

R1497 : page 23 

THE TRUE CHURCH. 



One Sabbath morn I roamed astray, 
And asked a pilgrim for the way: 

"O, tell me, whither shall I search, 
That I may find the one true Church?" 

He answered, "Search the world around; 
The one true Church is never found. 

"Yon ivy on the abbey wall 

Makes fair the falsest church of all." 

But fearing he had told me wrong, 
I cried, "Behold the entering throng!" 

He answered, "If a Church be true, 
It hath not many, but a few!" 

Around a font the people pressed, 

And crossed themselves on brow and breast. 

"A cross so light to bear," he cried, 
"Is not of Christ the Crucified! 

"Each forehead, frowning, sheds it off: 
Christ's cross abides through scowl and scoff!' 

We entered at the open door, 

And saw men kneeling on the floor; 

Faint candle, by the daylight dimmed, 
As if by foolish virgins trimmed; 

Fair statues of the saints, as white 
As now their robes are, in God's sight; 

Stained windows, casting down a beam, 
Like Jacob's ladder in the dream. 

The Pilgrim gazed from nave to roof, 
And, frowning, uttered this reproof: 

"Alas! who is it understands 

God's temple is not made with hands?" 



II. 



We walked in ferns so wet with dew 

They plashed our garments trailing through, 

And came upon a church whose dome 
Upheld a cross, but not for Rome. 

We brushed a cobweb from a pane 
And watched the service in the fane. 

"Do prayers," he asked, "the more avail, 
If offered at an altar rail? 

"Does water sprinkled from a bowl, 
Wash any sin from any soul? 

"Do tongues that taste the bread and wine 
Speak truer after such a sign?" 

Just then, upon a maple spray, 

Two orioles perched, and piped a lay, 

Until the gold beneath their throats 
Shook molten in their mellow notes. 

Resounding from the church, a psalm 
Rolled, quivering, through the outer calm. 

"Both choirs," said I, "are in accord, 
For both give praises to the Lord." 

"The birds," he answered, "chant a song 
Without a note of sin or wrong: 

"The church's anthem is a strain 
Of human guilt and mortal pain." 

The orioles and the organ ceased, 
And in the pulpit rose the priest. 

The Pilgrim whispered in my ear, 
"It profits not to tarry here." 

"He speaks no error," answered I; 
"He teaches that the living die; 

"The dead arise; and both are true; 
Both wholesome doctrines; neither new." 

The Pilgrim said, "He strikes a blow 
At wrongs that perished long ago; 

"But covers with a shielding phrase 
The living sins of present days." 



We turned away among the tombs— 
A tangled place of briers and blooms. 

I spelled the legends on the stones: 
Beneath reposed the martyrs' bones, 

The bodies which the rack once brake 
In witness for the dear Lord's sake, 

The ashes gathered from the pyres 

Of saints whose zeal our souls inspires. 

The Pilgrim murmured as we passed, 
"So gained they all the crown at last. 

"Men lose it now through looking back 
To find it at the stake and rack. 

"The rack and stake are old with grime; 
God's touchstone is the living time." 



III. 



We passed where poplars, gaunt and tall, 
Let twice their length of shadow fall. 

Then rose a meeting-house in view, 
Of bleached and weather-beaten hue. 

Men plain of garb and pure of heart 
Divided church and world apart. 

Nor did they vex the silent air 
With any sound of hymn or prayer. 

God's finger to their lips they pressed, 
Till each man kissed it, and was blessed. 

I asked, "Is this the true Church, then? 
He answered, "Nay, a sect of men: 

"And sects, that lock their doors in pride 
Shut God and half his saints outside. 

"The gates of heaven, the Scriptures say 

R1497 : page 24 

Stand open wide by night and day. 

"So, then, to enter, is there need 
To carry key of church or creed?" 



IV. 



Still following where the highway led, 
Till elms made arches overhead, 

We saw a spire, and weathercock, 
And snow-white church upon a rock— 

A rock, where centuries before, 
Came sea-tossed pilgrims to the shore. 

My sandals straightway I unbound, 
Because the place was holy ground. 

I cried, "One church at last I find, 
That fetters not the human mind." 

"This church," said he, "is like the rest; 
For all are good, but none are best." 



V. 



Then far from every church we strayed— 
Save Nature's pillared aisles of shade. 

The squirrels ran to see us pass, 

And God's sweet breath was on the grass. 

I challenged all the creeds, and sought 
What truth, or lie, or both, they taught. 

I asked, "Had Augustine a fault?" 

The Pilgrim gazed at Heaven's high vault, 

And answered, "Can a mortal eye 
Contain the sphere of all the sky?" 

I said, "The circle is too wide." 
"God's truth is wider!" he replied. 

"Though Augustine was on his knee, 
He saw how little he could see; 

"Though Luther sought with burning heart, 
He caught the glory but in part; 

"Though Calvin opened wide his soul, 
He comprehended not the whole. 

"Not Luther, Calvin, Augustine 
Saw visions such as I have seen." 

While yet he spake, a rapture stole 
Through all my still inquiring soul. 

I looked upon his holy brow, 
Entreating, "Tell me, who art THOU?" 



But such a splendor filled the place, 
I knew it was the Lord's own face! 

I was a sinner, and afraid! 

I knelt in dust, and thus I prayed: 

"O Christ the Lord! end thou my search, 
And lead me to the one true Church." 

He spake as never man may speak— 
"The one true Church thou shalt not seek. 

"Seek thou, forevermore, instead, 
To find the one true Christ, its Head!" 

The Lord then vanished from my sight, 
And left me standing in the light. — Sel. 



R1495 : page 24 

SOME CONGREGATIONALISTS WAKING UP. 



An evidence of growth of public opinion on 
the subject of eternal torment was recently afforded 
in the Plymouth Church, Brooklyn, of 
which Henry Ward Beecher was formerly pastor. 
The Church takes up special collections 
for Missions, and it was decided recently that 
for the year 1893 no moneys should go into 
their usual Missionary channel, the "American 
Board of Foreign Missions," unless at the specific 
request of contributors; but that instead 
all should go to a missionary in Japan known 
to hold views in opposition to eternal torment. 
This motion was made by the present pastor, 
and only one person voted against it— a Mr. 
Bliss, whose name suggests his composure and 
joy even though all others of the race were in 
torment. 

One gentleman present, Dr. Raymond, speaking 
on the subject at that meeting, expressed 
his convictions very earnestly. As reported 
in the New York Tribune, he said: 

"I am sick and tired of going to the American 
Board in sufferance to aid in supporting 
missionaries who believe out and out in the 
damnation of all the heathen, and that damnable 
heresy that God doesn't love the heathen. 
I am tired of the whole miserable humbug, and 
I won't give a cent to spread the news of damnation. 
I won't let the damnable doctrine be 
disseminated by my money. That God is love 



is good news, but it is made stale old stuff by 
these men who drag a Juggernaut car over the 
heathen and want us to feed the beasts that 
haul it. It is my Christian duty not to give to 
any concern that will teach the heathen that 
their fathers went to hell." 



R1493 : page 25 

OUR LORD'S SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 

NO. I. MATT. 5, 6, 7. 



This sermon of our Lord is characteristic of 
the great Teacher who spake as never man 
spake. It is wonderful alike for its simplicity, 
its clearness, its depth and its comprehensiveness. 
It is entirely devoid of anything like oratory; 
for evidently its object was to instruct, 
rather than to play upon the emotions of his 
hearers. Indeed, it is specially noticeable in all 
our Lord's public ministry that his methods of 
teaching were calculated to keep reason on the 
throne, and not to permit it to be overpowered 
by an unduly wrought emotional nature. In 
this his methods are in marked contrast with 
many of those in vogue to-day. We note also 
that his words were simple and easy to be understood, 
and that they appealed strongly both 
to the judgment and to the heart. 

The sermon was addressed, not to a promiscuous 
congregation of saints and sinners, but 
to his earnest and faithful disciples who had 
left all to follow him— who had forsaken business 
and business prospects and home and 
friends and reputation, and who, in lieu thereof, 
had cheerfully accepted the reproaches that 
fell upon the Master, as well as the necessary 
toils and privations incident to such a life. 
Consequently its teachings apply, not to the 
world, nor to mere professors of Christianity, 
but only to those consecrated souls who have 
likewise left all to follow the Master whithersoever 
he goeth. The occasion was one of those 
seasons when, wearied with exhaustive labor, 
he withdrew from the multitudes who sought 
his healing touch and anxiously listened for the 
wonderful words that proceeded out of his 
mouth— "And seeing the multitudes [and being 
too weary to minister to them] he went up 
into a mountain, and having sat down, his disciples 
came up" (verse 1), and he opened his 



mouth and taught them. 
THE BEATITUDES. 



A comparison of verse 3 with Luke 6:20 seems 
to indicate that the parenthetic phrase, "in spirit," 
was Matthew's comment, and not our Lord's 
exact words, which, according to Luke, were 
"Blessed are ye poor; for yours is the kingdom 
of heaven." The reference we therefore 
regard as applying to those who follow their 
Lord, who, though he was rich, for our sakes 
became poor, that we through his poverty might 
be made rich. Blessed are such poor ones— 
those who become poor in any sense of the 
word, whether financially or socially or otherwise, 
by sacrificing themselves for the blessing 
of others. True, we may have very little to 
sacrifice, but nevertheless, blessed are all the 
sacrificers. 

The comforting words of verse 4 remind us 
of a similar expression of our Lord— John 16:20 
—"Verily, verily, I say unto you that ye 
shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice; 
and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow 
shall be turned into joy." (See also 2 Cor. 1:7; 
Isa. 61:2,3.) It is those in Zion who 
mourn over and lament the mighty power of 
evil in the high places both of church and of 
state, and who, setting themselves in opposition 
to it, incur the reproaches both of the 
world and of lukewarm, nominal Christians. 
Blessed are all who so mourn; for in due time 
they shall be comforted in receiving the reward 
of the righteous and in beholding the final 
triumph of righteousness and truth. 

Verses 5,10,11. The blessed meek ones of 
verse 5, who shall inherit the earth, are the 
same class who, according to verses 10,11, are 
bold and courageous enough to withstand evil 
and error and to champion righteousness and 
truth: they are meek in the true sense in submitting 
themselves fully to the Lord, and bold 
in defence of his truth and his way, even the 
endurance of persecution for righteousness' sake. 
Blessed are all such meek, persecuted and falsely 
accused ones; for they shall inherit the 
earth: theirs is the kingdom of heaven. By and 
by they shall reign with Christ in his throne. 
Rejoice, all ye, and be exceeding glad, for great 
is your reward in heaven. 

Verse 6 promises the satisfying portion of 
truth and righteousness in due time to all that 
hunger and thirst after righteousness. Verse 7 



R1493 : page 26 

promises a merciful judgment to all those who 
exercise the same, and is thus the strongest incentive 
toward as lenient judgment of our fellow-men 
as circumstances will permit. 

Verse 8. "Blessed are the pure in heart; 
for they shall see [Greek, horao, discern] God." 

R1494 : page 26 

To be pure in heart is to have pure, sincere 
motives and desires. Those so disposed come 
to the divine revelation with reverence and 
meekness; and such, and such only, are prepared 
to see the breadth and scope of the 
wonderful plan of God, and how far it transcends 
the narrowness of human theological 
creeds and philosophies. Having no films of 
prejudice or vain philosophy before their eyes, 
and no clouds between themselves and God, 
with delight they discover in his wondrous 
plan of the ages the worthy lines of his truly 
glorious character— his wisdom, justice, love 
and power. 

Verse 9. God is pleased to own the peacemakers 
as his children. These are they who 
have first themselves found peace with God 
through faith in the precious blood of Christ, 
and who thereafter devote their energies toward 
bringing others into this blessed rest of 
faith and peace with God, and who further 
seek to show by word and example how a heart 
at peace with God always seeks peace with fellow-men 
under all circumstances where the 
sacrifice of the principles of righteousness are 
not involved. All such peace-makers are the 
blessed sons and heirs of God. 

Thus, first of all, the great Teacher bids us 
rejoice in counting over our blessings, showing 
us that even here in this wilderness state our 
table is indeed bountifully spread and our cup 
runneth over with blessings. 

THE CHURCH, THE SALT OF THE EARTH AND 
THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD. 



Verse 13. "Ye are the salt of the earth," 
etc. The virtue of salt is its power to season 
and to preserve from decay and putrefaction, 
which power the true disciples of the Lord are 
here said to exercise over the masses of mankind 
in general. This, however, is not because 



we have this power in and of ourselves: 
it is the spirit of the truth, the spirit of Christ 
in us through the knowledge of the truth and 
obedience to it, transforming the old creature 
into the new creature in Christ. 

According to these words of our Lord, it is 
by the influence of such persons, directly and 
indirectly, that the world has been kept from 
sinking to greater depths of ignorance and sin. 
When the spiritual life of the Church has ebbed 
low, the world has always suffered in consequence. 
For example, remember the dark ages 
and then the opposite effect of what is known as 
the Great Reformation. When spirituality revived 
in the hearts of God's people, the whole 
world began to wake up, and to receive some 
droppings of the shower of blessing. In the 
lives of God's people men see the moral distance 
between virtue and vice, and reason of a 
coming judgment when each will receive the 
reward that is meet, and they are thereby either 
shamed or persuaded to better and nobler 
lives. 

But the possibility of losing this savor of 
truth and righteousness is also intimated: that 
is, we may retain the outward forms of godliness 
and lose its real power, its spirit or disposition, 
and thus become false representatives 
of the truth— hypocrites. And in such a case 
the question is an apt and suggestive one: "If 
the salt have lost its savor wherewith shall it 
be salted?" Or in other words, If the truth 
have lost its power over us, to what other power 
shall we look for the savor of the spirit of 
truth? "Sanctify them through thy truth," 
was the Lord's prayer, and if the truth ceases 
to avail for our sanctification and we turn from 
it, the implication is that nothing else will do 
it. And those who utterly repudiate its power 
are thenceforth "good for nothing," and their 
end is destruction. See also Heb. 6:4-8; 
10:26,27. 

Verse 14. "Ye are the light of the world," 
etc. The whole world walks in the valley of 
the shadow of death, and the Lord's disciples 
alone have the light of life, the blessed truth 
of redemption and full restitution— the good 
tidings of great joy for all people. "Let your 
light shine," says the Master. Let it dispel 
the nightmare which haunts so many minds— 
of a fiendish and all-powerful God whose purpose 

R1494 : page 27 

is to torment eternally nearly all of his intelligent 
creation. Let the light chase this and 



every other superstition back to the dark source 
whence it came. Do not hide your light, but set 
it forth prominently and keep it trimmed and 
burning, that its gracious beams may reach as far 
as possible through the gloom of ignorance and 
superstition. And, thank God, the time is coming, 
and is now not far distant, when all the light-bearers 
shall be exalted to power and great 
glory; for it is written, "Then shall the righteous 
shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of 
their Father." And when this heavenly city, 
the New Jerusalem, is thus set upon a hill [in 
the kingdom] it cannot longer be hidden; but 
its glory shall lighten the whole world. Praise 
the Lord for his mercy and grace! 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1494 : page 27 
FULNESS OF JOY. 



"These things write we unto you that your joy may be 
full."-l John 1:4. 

Joy may be regarded as the effervescence or 
overflow of true and genuine happiness; and 
it is our Heavenly Father's good pleasure that 
his children should be so full of happiness as 
to bubble over all the time. To this end he 
has prepared a table before them, even in the 
presence of their enemies, and filled their cup 
of happiness full, even to running over. (Psa. 23:5.) 
This table of good things is his precious 
truth, to which we, who were poor condemned 
creatures under sentence of death, but 
sincerely penitent and desiring to return to 
God, have been graciously invited. 

There, most prominently spread out before 
me, lies a most precious document: it is my 
pardon, sealed with the precious blood of Christ 
and signed by the great Sovereign of the Universe. 
It reads, "For God so loved the world 
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in him might not perish, but 
have everlasting life." And thereto is appended 
this emphatic assertion, challenging 
contradiction— "It is God that justifieth: who 
is he that condemneth?" (John 3:16; Rom. 8:33,34.) 
"What?" I exclaim, "Does that 
mean me?" Yes, says the document, if you 
are one of the world— one of the condemned 
posterity of Adam— and willing to accept this 



free gift of God through Jesus Christ his Son, 
then this pardon is yours. And you need no 
one else to tell you so. Do you not hear? 
"It is God that justifieth. Who is he that 
condemneth?" 

With tears of gratitude I gladly accept the 
favor; and, truly, if there were nothing more 
on the table we might well say, Our cup is full. 
But no: there is more, much more; and, drying 
my tears, I see that side by side with this 
blessed document lies another which guarantees 
full restoration, to all the willing and obedient, 
of all the rights, privileges and blessings originally 
granted to our father Adam, but which he 
long ago forfeited, not only for himself, but 
for all his posterity. It reads, "Times of Refreshing 
[or renewing] shall come from the 
presence of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus 
Christ,. ..whom the heavens must retain till 
the Times of Restitution of all things, which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy 
prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) 
Praise the Lord! I exclaim; that fixes 
a definite time when the blessings of liberty 
from sin and death shall begin to be actually 
realized. 

O! how we rejoice; and even though we still 
wear the prison uniform of a diseased and dying 
body, and still abide within the prison wall 
of this present dying condition, we rejoice in 
hope of the glorious day of release. 

But while clasping and holding and rejoicing 
in this precious hope, realizing that I am 
now recognized as a child of God and that in 
due time I shall be attired and blessed accordingly, 
my eye catches sight of a beautiful card. 
With trembling hand and a vague suspicion that 
this may be still another message of divine love, 
I lift it and read, "Hearken, O daughter, and 
consider and incline thine ear; forget also 
thine own people and thy father's house: so 
shall the King greatly desire thy beauty; for 
he is thy Lord, and worship thou him."— 
Psa. 45:10,11. 

R1494 : page 28 

Was ever a proposal of marriage couched in 
more delicate and beautiful phrase? With 
astonishment I read it again and again. Surely 
it can mean nothing less than this: I am 
invited by the King of kings to become the 
bride of his royal Son— his only begotten Son 
and heir of all things. And since clothed with 
the imputed robe of his righteousness, which 
hides all the unrighteousness of my own robes, 



I am really considered beautiful in the eyes of 
the King, I am told, so that he desires to make 
me his bride— if I am willing for his dear sake 
to forget my own people and my father's 
[Adam's] house— the world in general, with all 
its hopes, aims and ambitions. 

And while I gladly accept the offer and hasten 
to make ready for the glorious consummation, 
I find on this same bounteous table explicit directions 
as to how I may fit myself to behold 
the King in his beauty— of how I must appear 
in this precious robe of his righteousness which 
now makes me beautiful in his eyes, and that I 
may work out upon it the "fine needle work" 
(pains-taking embroidery) of an actual righteousness. 
Then, too, there are encouragements 
to perseverance in overcoming the world, to 
faithfulness in making ready for his appearing 

R1495 : page 28 

and to watchfulness against any snares by the 
way. Then there are warnings of the dangers 
and hardships of the pathway which are permitted 
to prove my love and loyalty by my faithful 
endurance. And there are copious promises 
of grace sufficient for every time of need. 
And there is line upon line to assure and reassure 
my faith of my Heavenly Father's good 
pleasure to thus exalt me to joint-heirship with 
his Son and to make me meet for such exaltation 
by making me also a partaker with him of 
the divine nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) Then there 
are precious secrets for those thus elected of 
God— with reference to the time and manner 
and circumstances, etc., of the Lord's appearing 
and to the glory and honor and blessing 
of the coming inheritance and the blessed 
mission of the coming kingdom. Ah! surely, 
Lord, "thou hast prepared a table before me in 
the presence of mine enemies: my cup runneth 
over," and I rejoice with joy unspeakable and 
full of glory. 

Ah, says the inspired Apostle who wrote 
some of these things, and who saw the Lord and 
heard his teachings when he was here in the 
flesh— "These things write we unto you that 
your joy may be full. That which we have seen 
and heard declare we unto you, that ye also 
may have fellowship with us (fellow-heirs of the 
same promises); and truly our fellowship is 
with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ." 
(1 John 1:4,3.) O what condescension on 
the part of the divine Father and Son and what 
favor toward us! We all are one— one family 
—the divine royal family whence universal 



blessing shall shortly flow to all creatures in 
heaven and in earth. 

But hold: there may be some who unworthily 
claim this honor while really they have no part 
nor lot in the matter. The only conditions 
upon which we can claim these precious promises 
are those of faith and obedience. And if 
we are still trusting in the finished redemptive 
work of Christ, and obedient to the heavenly 
calling, we are walking in the light of God's 
promises and instruction. And since in God 
is no darkness at all, and he has promised to 
guide us continually by his spirit through his 
Word, we cannot walk in darkness while we 
follow his leading. And in thus following 
where he leads and hearkening to his voice, and 
in making known our wants and our gratitude 
and love in prayer, which he has promised always 
to hear and heed, we have sweet fellowship 
with him and with his dear Son, our Lord 
Jesus. And not only so, but we have sweet 
fellowship also with all saints who are faithfully 
traveling in the same way. 

"This, then," says the Apostle, "is the message 
which we have heard of him and declare 
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no 
darkness at all." If we have fellowship with 
him we are walking (progressing) in the light 
—in the light which divine truth sheds about 
us and in the light of his approving 
countenance. 

"If we say that we have fellowship with 
him, and walk in darkness [walk contrary to 
his truth] we lie [for God does not lead his 
children that way], and do not the truth." 
Ah, there is the trouble. If any walk in darkness 
[away from the truth and toward error] it 
is not God's fault, but their own, in not obeying 
the truth. Dearly beloved, let us walk in 
the light. 



page 29 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1495 : page 29 
DEDICATING THE TEMPLE. 



I. QUAR., LESSON VI., FEB. 5th, EZRA 6:14-22. 

Golden Text— "I was glad when they said unto me, 
Let us go into the house of the Lord."— Psa. 122:1. 

The time of this lesson is about five years 
after that of the last two lessons. The Temple 
had been finished, although the wall of 
the city of Jerusalem was yet far from completed, 
and had been for a time abandoned. 

VERSE 14 evidently refers, not only to the 
rebuilding of the Temple, but also to the 
city wall; because it mentions the commandment 
of Artaxerxes as well as those of Cyrus 
and Darius. King Artaxerxes' command 
went forth long after the Temple was finished, 
and had reference merely to the city 
wall, completed over fifty years after the 
completion of the Temple. 

VERSES 15,16 draw special attention to 
"the house" of God, the Temple. This structure 
was undoubtedly built according to the 
specifications of King Cyrus, and if so was 
sixty cubits high and sixty cubits long (Ezra 6:3): 
it was therefore of larger dimensions 
than that of Solomon, although greatly inferior 
to it in ornamentation. Its dedication 
was, therefore, a very notable event with 
the people returned from Babylon, not one of 
whom, probably, had seen Solomon's Temple, 
which was destroyed about ninety years 
previous. 

VERSES 17-22 describe the elaborate ceremony 
with which the Temple was dedicated, 
although it was all as nothing compared 
with the dedication of Solomon's Temple; 
however, the people now were poor in comparison, 
and certainly did nobly and generously, 
their circumstances considered. This 
suggests to our minds the consecration of the 
living Temple, and how the offering of themselves 
to the Lord, on the part of the "living 
stones," is pleasing and acceptable to 
God through Christ, none the less on the 
part of those who have few talents than of 
those who have many. 

One point of this lesson specially worthy 
of note, by those who have fallen into the 
error of supposing that Israel and Judah 



were never re-united after their separation 

in the days of Rehoboam, and who claim 

that the ten tribes, styled "Israel," were all 

lost and that only the two tribes, Judah and 

Benjamin, styled "Judah," returned to Palestine 

after the Babylonian captivity, is that 

the people of Judah and Benjamin are not 

mentioned in this narrative, while the Levites 

are mentioned and the people as a whole 

are referred to as "children of Israel;" and 

it is specially stated (verse 17) that the sin-offering 

was of "twelve he-goats according 

to the number of the tribes of Israel." 

What better evidence could we have that 

all the twelve tribes were represented among 

these returned captives than this fact that 

the sin-offering was for all the tribes? 

None; except that our Lord and the Apostles 

in their day repeatedly addressed the 

descendants of those people as "Israel" and 

"Israelites." 

The Golden Text is frequently misapplied 
by Christian people to some earthly structure 
of wood or brick or stone. Let us see 
in it the real house of God— the Church of 
living stones, being fitted and prepared for 
the indwelling of God by his spirit. Let us 
rejoice to enter into this, the antitypical 
house of God, soon to be glorified. Let us 
rejoice to have our names written among 
its members— "written in heaven."— 
Luke 10:20. 

The time chosen for the dedication was 
the beginning of the Jewish year; hence in 
connection was the celebration of the Passover 
feast. 

R1495 : page 29 

NEHEMIAH'S PRAYER. 



I. QUAR., LESSON VII., FEB. 12, NEH. 1:1-11. 

Golden Text— "Lord, be thou my helper."— Psa. 30:10. 

VERSES 1-3. Nehemiah was an Israelite 
of the tribe of Judah. He was of one of those 
families which had not returned to Palestine 
under Cyrus' decree of about ninety years 
previous. He was an influential man, a 
Counselor to King Artaxerxes; for such is 
the significance of the title, "Cup-bearer" 
(verse 11). His attention was called to the 
pitiable condition of the returned Jews by 



R1496 : page 29 

his brother and certain others of his tribe 

R1496 : page 30 

who had returned to Babylon. The seventy 
years intervening between this lesson and 
the last had not been years of prosperity, 
but of adversity, to the Israelites, both in 
Jerusalem and in Babylon. Their enemies, 
taking advantage of the weaknesses of Ahasuerus, 
who reigned during the interim, had 
attacked the partially rebuilt walls and gates 
of the city of Jerusalem and had wrecked 
the former and burned the latter, which were 
of wood: and at Babylon, as we learn from 
the Book of Esther, a plot for the complete 
extermination of the Israelites had almost 
succeeded under the guidance of their enemies 
led by Haman— but had been prevented 
by divine interposition. 

VERSES 4-11. Nehemiah's subsequent 
history proves him to have been a great man 
—a man of wisdom and of executive ability 
—and his conduct as here related testifies 
to the same; for he at once sought the Lord, 
desiring of him wisdom and grace that he 
might act aright— that he might perform 
what he felt to be his duty toward his people 
—"Israel." 

In this we have a lesson which every real 
Christian's experience corroborates. Let 
nothing be done through strife or vain-glory 
(i.e., for self-glorification or honor), but let 
all things be done for the Lord's glory. 
And whoever is seeking service from such 
a motive will surely seek the divine wisdom 
to guide into the divine will and work. 

Prayer is not to be entered into with a 
view to changing the divine will and getting 
it to conform to our imperfect ideas, 
but rather to bring our hearts and minds and 
conduct into conformity to the divine will, 
assured that therein is our greatest and truest 
happiness. Nehemiah's prayer was of 
this proper sort. He confesses the justice 
of the Lord's chastisement of Israel for their 
sins. He properly includes himself with 
the others of his nation. He recalls the fact 
that God's dealings were just— in exact fulfilment 
of the covenant made with that 
nation. (Lev. 26:33, etc.; Deut. 4:25, etc.; 
28:64.) Then he refers to the Lord's promises 
in the same connection, That if Israel 



would repent he would return his favor to 
them.-Deut. 30:4; 9:29; Isa. 11:12. 

Nehemiah was so deeply in earnest that 
he continued his prayers and supplication 
after this manner for several days; not that 
the Lord needed urging on the subject, but 
that the subject was growing upon Nehemiah's 
mind and heart. Gradually he was 
made earnest and strong enough to take an 
important part in the answering of his own 
prayer, as is shown by verse 1 1 . His petitions 
closed, not with a boastful feeling that 
he had thought out a plan for Israel which 
would bless them and cover himself with 
honor, but with a plan which he believed 
to be of God, and upon which he desired 
God's blessing. He was about to bring the 
matter which was so close to his heart to 
the attention of the King Artaxerxes, and 
he prayed, "Prosper, I pray thee, thy servant 
this day, and grant him mercy [favor] in 
the sight of this man"— the king. 

Let us each follow this same course. "In 
all thy ways acknowledge him [God], and 
he shall direct thy paths."— Pro. 3:6. 



R1496 : page 30 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



page 30 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I did not sign the 
free will offering or "Good Hopes" sent me 
last year because I could not promise as much 
as I would like for the cause; but as I have put 
aside a little each week, I send it to you to day, 
and will continue the same plan for next year, 
only hoping to do better. 

When I read in the TOWER of the Brother 
who was wandering, I tell you, my dear Brother, 
it struck me hard. I love the dear Savior, 
but I often feel cold and distant, that I am cast 
off. When I go to prayer my mind wanders, 
and my heart becomes full of evil thoughts. 
I do not want to have such feelings, but it seems 
I cannot rid myself of them. I know I have a 
strong self-will which I try to overcome, but it 
seems I cannot. I feel all the while that something 
is saying to me "You need a change of 
heart;" and yet the more I try to do and be 



good, the more evil is present with me. Oh, 
how I would love to feel free and be rid of this 
feeling that troubles me so ! I would love to 
come out boldly and work for the Master. Oh, 
I hope I may yet be able to overcome, and that 
my soul may yet enter fully into his rest. 
Yours in Christian love, M. B . 



R1496 : page 30 

New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-As you know, 
I am engaged during week days in examining 
titles to real estate, and from this I 

R1496 : page 31 

derive my only income. I have for a long 

time desired to enter the ranks of the colporteurs, 

but circumstances have prevented 

me, and I have been obliged to await the 

Lord's due time. The door of opportunity 

for greater service seems to have opened 

now, for I have been enabled to effect an arrangement 

whereby I can use three days 

each week in spreading the truth, and devote 

the other three days to business. This 

will involve a considerable reduction of my 

income from the latter source, but I have 

no doubt that the Lord will provide sufficient 

for my expenses. Pray that I may be 

used always by him according to his will. 

The work is progressing very satisfactorily 
in New York, and interest in the truth 
now due is growing very perceptibly. 
Wishing you, Sister Russell and all the dear 
members of the Body at Allegheny a happy 
new year of joy and peace in Christ, I remain, 
Yours in him, E. C. M 



page 3 1 

Maryland. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose a 
letter which is an evidence that the good 
work is quietly but surely going on. The 
writer is one of six who have become interested 
through Brother Benner, who himself 
has seen the light only about twelve months. 
If all would go to work as those dear Brethren 
the work would go on just as it should. 
Yes, let us all be constantly watching for 



opportunities to bring the truth to the attention 
of all having ears to hear. 

While there is a good number of our brethren 
and sisters giving their entire time to 
this great work, yet there are many of us 
who are so situated that we cannot give all 
our time, yet we can all do something and so 
help the cause along— especially since we 
know that the "harvest" day is rapidly passing, 
and the night of confusion and trouble 
approaching, wherein no man can work. 
It will soon be too late to share in the good 
work; and, knowing the time, "It is high 
time to awake out of sleep; for now is our 
salvation nearer than when we first believed. 
The night is far spent, the day is at hand: 
let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, 
and let us put on the armor of light." 
(Rom. 13:11,12.) Yes, let us assist those 
who are willing to cast off the works of darkness 
(false doctrines), and help them to put 
on the armor of light (truth), in which we 
have been rejoicing, and which will enable 
us to stand in this evil day. 

With kindest regards to yourself and Sister 
Russell, and all who love the truth, 

Your brother in the service, H. WEBER. 

Following is the letter referred to- 
West Virginia. 

F. Benner, Esq., Dear Brother:— I received 
the package of tracts, for which accept 
many thanks. Will use them in the 
best way I can. You may have the books 

sent to J. S. W as soon as you can, as 

he is anxious for them. I would indeed like 
to meet Brother Weber, as you suggest; but 
cannot say when, as I am now here only at 
night. I hope to meet him soon. I am 
very much interested in this new light that 
has come to us, and hope and believe that it 
will be shed abroad throughout the entire 
world in God's "due time." 

But how hard it is to get people to turn 
away from the creeds of their various 
churches that are keeping them in old ruts, 
while the light is shining on more and more 
unto the perfect day. I have not heard yet 
what my father thinks of "The Plan of 
the Ages." I am expecting to meet him 
soon. Am anxious to get his idea of it, and 
if he is not convinced, I want to prove its 
truth to him. I would like to see you and 
have a talk. 

With best wishes for yourself and family, 
I remain, Yours in the faith, 



W. M. WATKINS. 



R1496 : page 31 

Maine. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The arrival 
of the TOWER reminded me to forward 
to you the dollar for the year '93, for 
I should feel sad without the wholesome food 
it gives. Never in the experiences of almost 
half a century have such blessed views of 
God's great and grand designs so filled my 
soul with joy. I studied "theology," and 
graduated in 1858; and as I now look back 
upon those years they appear very unprofitably 
spent. Oh, such a jumble as my soul 
brought from the Institution! calling it faith, 
and trying to steady myself upon it, and calling 
on others to accept the same and risk 
their eternal interest upon it. But thanks 
be to God for his unspeakable gift! I now 
can and do rest wholly upon the blood of 
Jesus. I feel exceedingly unworthy, and I 
am quite sure the feeling can never become 
greater than the fact of unworthiness; but 
our blessed Lord is worthy, and through his 
merits we are called children and heirs. God 
is dealing very tenderly with me and mine. 

R1496 : page 32 

I am trying to induce my Christian friends 
to read MILLENNIAL DAWN, and some of 
them seem to enter into the spirit of the 
books, while others, after reading till some 
superstition is exposed, return them with 
some disparaging remark. But it matters not. 
Indifference to God's truth will not destroy 
its vitality, or it would have been dead long 
ago. I stated in a recent social meeting my 
belief in a present Christ, and called attention 
to some of the huge errors that burden 
honest souls and hinder their prayers. Some 
appeared reflective, but incredulity sat graven 
upon most faces. My soul loves and rests on 
the glorious truths that our Lord is present, 
and that the sealing process is in progress. 

I have no language to describe the beauty 
and majesty of the truth as it now stands 
forth; and I hope to be able to do something 
to aid the work of the TOWER TRACT SOCIETY 
this summer. God is greatly blessing 
me in spirit, while in temporal things I suffer 
for nothing. Blessed be his name! 



May the blessing of God attend you and 
your colporteurs, is the prayer of your brother 
in Christ, W. F. EATON. 

It is well for us to remember, dear Brother, 
that milk is for babes and strong meat 
for those of full age, as the Apostle expresses 
it. (Heb. 5:12-14.) Was it not pretty 
"strong meat" for your newly interested 
friends, for you to tell them of our Lord's 
presence and the harvest work now in progress? 
I suggest that the simpler forms of truth 
be given first, and the "deep things" of the 
divine plan as your hearers develop interest, 
and capacity for them. This will be following 
the example of the Great Teacher, who 
told the plan of God only as it became 
"meat in due season," and who once said 
to his disciples, "I have many things to tell 
you, but ye cannot bear them now." It will 
also be obeying his instructions to us to be 
"wise as serpents, but harmless as doves." 

The part of the plan best calculated to arrest 
and interest an error-blinded child of 
God will be the foundation— the "Ransom 
for all." He has recognized our Lord's sacrifice 
as the ransom for the Church only. 
Show him that it was for ALL and is to be 
testified to all, in God's due time. (1 Tim. 2:4-6.) 
Next show the effect of the testimony 
in this and the next age— now a justification 
by faith, then an actual justification 
(or making perfect), by restitution process 
(Acts 3:19-21), for all who accept that 
ransom and its concomitant blessings. 

Next your hearers will be prepared to learn 
of the Gospel age "high-calling," by route 
of the "narrow way" of self-denying sacrifice, 
to joint-heirship with Christ in the Millennial 
Kingdom which, by God's arrangement, is to 
"bless all the families of the earth." 

Next show your hearers what the Scriptures 
teach concerning our Lord's resurrection-body 
and the manner of his second 
coming— that it will not be as a human being 
but as a spirit being; that flesh and 
blood has no part in the spiritual Kingdom 
of which he is the head; and that even the 
saints "must be changed" (1 Cor. 15:51) 
from mortal to immortal, from animal bodies 
to spirit bodies, before we can be like him 
and see him as he is. (1 John 3:2.) Not 
until all these points, with their Scriptural 
proofs, have been clearly seen by your hearers 
will they be ready to hear appreciatingly 
anything about the Lord's parousia (presence) 



and the harvest work now in progress 
—and this may require days or weeks or 
months, according to the receptiveness of the 
student and his previous familiarity with the 
Word. 

However, unless very skilful as a teacher, 
it is generally best to call attention to reading 
matter bearing upon the plan, as for instance 
the successive volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. After they have read carefully, 
then talk on the subjects, helping them over 
any parts misunderstood or not clearly seen 
by them. Every one who attempts to teach, 
in any capacity, represents the Lord, the 
Head and teacher of his body, the Church; 
and, as such representative, should feel his 
responsibility, and should continually seek 
divine wisdom that he may "speak as an oracle 
of God." Go on, dear Brother, and God 
bless you! I desire by the above comment 
merely to increase your usefulness and that 
of other readers by counseling wisdom in 
the handling of the sword of the spirit— 
the Truth.-EDITOR. 



page 34 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



EXTRA COPIES OF THIS ISSUE. 



Anticipating that extra copies of this double 
number may be desired by our readers for 
friends, we have published a larger quantity 
than usual, and will supply our readers such extra 
copies at half price,— five cents per copy. 
If desired we will post them for you, direct to 
your friends. 

THE SPRING MEETING. 



In our last issue we announced that the Lord's 
Memorial Supper, commemorative of his death, 
will be celebrated on its anniversary this year, 
as usual, by the Church at Allegheny, in Bible 
House chapel, Arch street, on Thursday evening, 
March 30th, at 7:30 P.M. To this all who 
believe in the merit of our Lord's sacrifice for 
our sins, finished, once for all, at Calvary, and 
who are consecrated to the Lord in thought, 
word and deed, will be made cordially welcome. 

This much of the notice is confirmed and repeated; 
but the notice that in connection with 
this Memorial there would be a General Meeting 
for Bible Study, is hereby canceled. 

Our application to the Railroads for excursion 
rates has from year to year past met with increasing 
objections and limitations which become 
burdensome. This year we are asked to 
pay the expenses of a railroad agent— eleven 
dollars for the first day and six dollars each for 
succeeding days, to see to the numbers in attendance, 
and to endorse all the returning, reduced-rate 
tickets. And then, if the proper 
certificates number less than one hundred, no 
reduction of rates would be allowed. The attendance 
from abroad is usually more than this, 
but many purchase other tickets than those 
specified— mileage, etc. 

Concluding that excursion rates from all parts 
to Chicago will be very cheap during the Summer 
(especially in August and September), and 
that a larger number would be served by having 
a general meeting there and then, than here, 
this year, we accordingly wrote the Railroad 
people declining their restricted offer of excursion 
rates to Allegheny this Spring. 

We trust that our decision will commend itself 
to all of our readers. Arrangements for 
the Chicago Convention will be effected for 
some date probably not far from September 1st, 
and will be such as will enable attendants to 
spend a few days in Bible Study, with profitable 
intermissions in which to learn some valuable 
lessons, by noting some of the wonderful 
inventions of this wonderful era which the Lord 
speaks of as "the day of his preparation"— 
preparing for the blessing of the world under 
the Millennial reign of righteousness and love. 

R1498 : page 34 

CHRISTIAN HOME-SCHOOLS WANTED. 



One or two Sisters who have children dependent 



upon them for support write that they 
could probably provide better for them if they 
were in the Colporteur work than they can 
now do— besides having the privilege of using 
their time and strength in the blessed service 
of carrying spiritual food to the Lord's starving 
people. 

The question therefore arises: Are there 
others of the consecrated so situated that they 
cannot engage in the more public work, but 
who could have a share in it by caring for 
such children? The mothers in question could 
not afford to pay large sums for boarding, etc., 
but could pay something. 

If it occurs to any of the mothers "of this 
way" that they would like to offer such a 
home, let such, before offering, consider carefully 
whether the conditions of her home are 
suitable; whether the influence of other members 
of the family would be favorable; whether she 
would care not only for the physical but also for 
the moral health of those entrusted. Then let 
any who believe that they see their way clear to 
thus offer their services correspond with us. 



R1498 : page 35 

VOL. XIV. FEBRUARY 1 & 15, 1893. -DOUBLE NUMBER. NOS. 3 & 4. 

WHAT SAITH THE SCRIPTURE ABOUT HELL? 



THE AWFUL THEORY OF MEN.-ITS INCONSISTENCIES.- 

ITS BANEFUL RESULTS. -THE TRUE SCRIPTURE TEACHING. 

-HELL IN THE OLD TESTAMENT-"SHEOL."- 

HELL IN THE NEW TEST AMENT-"HADES. "-"GEHENNA." 

-"TARTAROO."-"THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS." 

-"WAILING AND GNASHING OF TEETH."- 

"THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS. "-"KOLASIN"- 

"EVERLASTING DESTRUCTION."-"THE LAKE OF 

FIRE AND BRIMSTONE."-"TURNED INTO HELL." 

-GOD'S VERDICT.-"THE SECOND DEATH." 



Some will say, "I don't care to think about 
the awful place, for I don't expect to go there 
—I have no interest in it." Yet, if the "orthodox" 
view of it be true, that all except the 
saints of God go there,— that hell is the penalty 
for Adam's sin, that all of Adam's posterity 
are under that penalty except those few 
faithful believers in Christ who escape it,— 



then it follows that you, and I, and all, ought to 
be deeply interested in finding out all we can 
about that which is represented as the surest 
and most awful and most general calamity to 
which our poor race is exposed. If you and I 
do expect to escape, we should be anxious on 
behalf of the others; for in proportion to the 
world's population even in this enlightened 
day, the faithful believers in Christ are but as 
one out of a thousand. Nor will it do to excuse 
one's self with the idea that "My friends 
and relations will all escape." You know that 
many, yea, most of your friends and relatives 
are not faithful believers; and, as you look 
back over the pages of history, it is not a great 
way back that you find that your great-great, 
grandparents were heathen idolaters who knew 
not of the Redeemer, and hence could not have 
been justified by faith in him. Besides, are 
not all mankind our relatives? and are not all 
brethren?— children of one common father, 
Adam? 

Subjects like slavery, intemperance, pestilence 
or epidemics, affecting only a part of the 
human family, we see hundreds, yes, thousands, 
of men and women spending time and talent 
and money in examining, and in arranging for 
the relief and safety of their fellows. Yet there 
is no comparison between human slavery, etc., 
and everlasting torture in misery and anguish, 
which human tongue, we are told, cannot describe. 
The most terrible human sufferings of 
the present, which soon end life and thus bring 
relief, are really pleasurable moments in comparison 
to what we are told of hell, which, besides, 
will never end while the years of eternity roll. 

Now what is being done about this monstrous 
evil before which all others combined 
pale into insignificance— anything? 

Oh, yes, there are thousands of clergymen 
who are supposed to have studied all about 
this awful subject, who weekly meet with about 
two millions of the fourteen hundred millions 
of the earth's present population, to consider 
this very subject which they claim is all-important. 
They meet in comfortable and elegant 
buildings, expensively attired, and are entertained 
by music and oratory; and if the subject 
they claim as the all-important cause of 
their assembling is mentioned at all, it is to 
assure the hearts of those present that they have 
nothing to fear; for though God will deal most 

R1498 : page 36 

awfully with others, he will deal kindly with 



them, and instead of delighting to torture 
them to all eternity, God will be glad to have 
such genteel people as attend their entertaining 
church services and participate in the usual 
suppers, fairs, etc., to adorn heaven. Why 
will God thus favor them? Not because of 
good works, they admit; nor because of great 
faith, we would claim, for they know little of 
God or his Word, and hence cannot believe 
much or firmly. Their hopes must therefore 
be built mainly upon their morality, because 
they are civilized, and specially because they 
have joined an earthly church and assented to 
a creed which they do not know, nor understand, 
nor believe— in a word because they are 
thus deceiving themselves and others with a 
form of godliness without the real power thereof. 
Do these people really believe 

THIS AWFUL DOCTRINE 

concerning hell? Surely not! To us their 
actions speak louder than words. They even 
count the "Salvation Army" people fools and 
fanatics, because they, less intelligent and less 
learned, believe the story of the clergy about 
this awful place they describe hell to be, and 
honestly act out their belief. 

Of all the people in the world to-day who 
profess to believe this awful doctrine of eternal 
torment, the "Salvation Army" alone acts 
reasonably and consistently. And their wildest 
freaks and fancies are tame compared with 
what might be expected if they were fully convinced 
of the truth of the doctrine. The men 
and women who have ever fully believed the 
doctrine are undoubtedly those hundreds who 
have gone insane from sympathy with their 
fellows: the effort to save others from everlasting 
torture unbalanced their reason. We cannot 
imagine how sincere believers of this terrible 
doctrine go from day to day about the 
ordinary affairs of life, or meet quietly in elegance 
every Sunday to hear an essay on the 
peculiar subjects often advertised. Could they 
do so while really believing all the time that 
fellow mortals are dying at the rate of one 
hundred a minute, and entering 

"That lone land of deep despair," where 
"No God regards their bitter prayer." 

They could not complacently sit there and 
think of those hurrying every moment into 
that awful state described by the good, well-meaning, 
but terribly deluded man, Isaac 
Watts (whose own heart was infinitely warmer 
and larger than that he ascribed to the great 



Jehovah), when he wrote that sweet (?) hymn, 
which, thank God, sensible people have ceased 
to love, and almost ceased to sing:— 
"Tempests of angry fire shall roll 

To blast the rebel worm, 
And beat upon the naked soul 
In one eternal storm." 

Surely men and women believing thus would 
rush frantically to the heathen and to all unbelievers 
everywhere, would describe hell, and 
make people join their churches or set them 
crazy with fear, or both. Mothers, fathers and 
children have become insane from anguish, 
when their loved ones have been caught in a 
burning building, though they knew that their 
pain would endure but a few minutes; yet they 
pretend to believe that God is less loving than 
they, and that he can look with indifference, 
if not with delight, at billions of his creatures 
enduring an eternity of torture far more terrible, 
which he prepares for them and prevents 
any escape from, forever. Not only so, but 
they expect that they will get literally into 
Abraham's bosom, and will then look across 
the gulf and see and hear the agonies of the 
multitudes (some of whom they now love and 
weep over), and will be so changed (become so 
like their present idea of God), so hardened 
against all pity and so barren of love and sympathy, 
that they will delight in such a God and 
in such a plan. 

It is wonderful that otherwise sensible looking 
and acting men and women, who love 
their fellows, establish hospitals, orphanages, 
asylums, and societies for the prevention of 
cruelty to even the brute creation, are so unbalanced 
mentally that they can believe and 
subscribe to such a doctrine, and yet be so indifferent 
about investigating the subject of 
"everlasting torture." 

Only one exception can we think of— those 
who hold the ultra-Calvinistic doctrine; who 
believe that God has decreed it thus, that 

R1498 : page 37 

all the efforts they could put forth could not 
alter the result with a single person, and that 
all the prayers they could offer would not 
change that awful plan they believe God has 
marked out for his and their eternal pleasure. 
These indeed could sit still, so far as effort for 
their fellows is concerned, but why sing the 
praises of such a God and such a plan. They 
who hold this view of their own unconditional 
and unalterable election could surely afford to 



be honest, since they think that they could 
not be rejected. Why should not these, instead 
of singing the praises of such a plan and 
keeping quiet, hide their faces in shame 
for their God, express their true heart-sympathy 
for the people, and, instead of singing, weep 
and lament. It would be far more creditable 
to their faith and their hearts;— would it not? 

Why not rather begin to doubt this "doctrine 
of devils," this blasphemy against the 
great God, hatched in the "dark ages," when 
a crafty priesthood thought it right to do evil, 
that good might result. The doctrine of eternal 
torment was introduced by Papacy to compel 
pagans to join her system and support her 
priesthood. It flourished at the same time that 
"bull fighting" and gladiatorial contests were 
the public amusements most enjoyed, when the 
Crusades were called "holy wars," and when 
men and women were called "heretics" and 
slaughtered for thinking or speaking contrary 
to the teachings of Papacy; at a time when the 
sun of gospel truth was obscure, when the 
Word of God had fallen into disuse and was 
prohibited to be read by any but the clergy, 
whose love of their neighbors was often shown 
in torturing heretics to induce them to recant 
and deny their faith and their Bibles— to save 
them, if possible, they explained, from the more 
awful future of heretics, eternal torture. They 
did not borrow this doctrine from the heathen, 
for no heathen people in the world have a doctrine 
half so terrible, cruel, fiendish and unjust. 
Find it, whoever can, and show it up in all its 
blackness, that, if possible, it may be shown 
that the essence of barbarism, malice, hate and 
ungodliness, has not been exclusively appropriated 
by those whom God has most highly 
favored with light from every quarter, to whom 
God has committed the only oracle— his 
Word. Oh! the shame and confusion of face 
that will cover many even good men (who 
verily thought that they did God service while 
propagating this misrepresentation of the devil), 
when they awake in the resurrection, to learn 
of the love and justice of God, and when they 
come to know that the Bible, for which some of 
them would lay down their lives, does not teach 
this God-dishonoring, love-extinguishing, truth-beclouding, 
saint-hindering , sinner-hardening , 
damnable heresy. 

But we repeat that in the light and moral 
development of this day, sensible people do not 
believe this doctrine. However, since they 
think that the Bible teaches it, every step they 
progress in real intelligence and godlikeness of 



mind, which hinders such belief, is in most 

cases a step away from God's Word, which they 

falsely accuse of this teaching. Hence this second 

crop of evil fruit, which the devil's engraftment 

of this error is producing. The intelligent, 

honest thinkers are thus driven from 

the Bible into vain philosophies and sciences, 

falsely so-called, and into skepticism. Nor do 

the "worldly" really believe this doctrine. 

It does not restrain from crime: theft, murder, 

suicide, immorality and drunkenness are more 

common by far in the countries where this 

doctrine is taught, than in other lands. Mohammedan 

and Buddhist countries are much 

more moral than those misnamed "Christendom." 

True, some instances are known where 

murderers nearing death's door, under pressure 

of fear or sickness, confess a faith under the 

teaching that to doubt it is to make sure the 

penalty. But their lives of disregard, as well 

as their profanity, show that if this doctrine 

ever restrained men, it does not now. 

But did the error not do real good? Have 
not many been brought into the churches by 
the preaching of this doctrine in the past? 

No error, we answer, ever did real good, but 
always harm. Those whom error brings into 
a church, and whom the truth would not move, 
are an injury to the church. The thousands 
terrorized, but not at heart converted, which 
this doctrine forced into Papacy, and which 
swelled her numbers and her wealth, diluted 

R1498 : page 38 

what little truth was held before, and mingled 
it with their unholy and ignorant sentiments, 
so that, to meet the changed condition of things, 
the "clergy" found it needful to add error to 
error, and to resort to methods, forms, etc., not 
taught in the Scriptures and useless to the truly 
converted whom the truth controls. Among 
these were pictures, images, beads, vestments, 
candles, grand cathedrals, altars, etc., to help 
the unconverted heathen to a form of godliness 
more nearly corresponding to their former 
heathen worship. 

The heathen were not benefited, for they 
were still heathen in God's sight, deluded into 
aping what they did not understand or do from 
the heart. They were tares to choke the wheat, 
without being profited thereby themselves. 

The same is true of those who assume the 
name "Christian" to-day, who are not really 
at heart converted by the truth, but merely 
frightened by the error, or allured by promised 



earthly advantages of a social or business kind. 

Such add nothing to the true Church: by their 

ideas and manners they become stumbling-blocks 

to the truly consecrated, and by their 

inability to digest the truth, the real food of 

the saints, they lead even the few true pastors 

to defraud the true sheep in order to satisfy 

the demands of these goats for something pleasing 

to their unconverted tastes. No: in no 

way has this error accomplished good, but in 

every way harm. Let us now inquire:— 

WHAT DOES THE BIBLE TEACH? 

Seeing, then, the unreasonableness of man's 
view, let us leave human creeds and dogmas 
and come to the oracle of God, that we may 
hear his own Word on this subject, fully convinced 
that 

"Blind prejudice is sure to err, 
And scan his Word in vain. 
God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain." 

In the first place, let none forget that the English 
translation of the Bible was not inspired, 
but that the inspired Scriptures, which "holy 
men of old wrote as they were moved by 
the holy Spirit," were written, the Old Testament 
in the Hebrew and the New Testament 
in the Greek language. We know, further, 
that the translators were not inspired of God 
so as to prevent mistakes creeping in; for all 
scholars recognize some mistakes in the English 
translations. 

Admitting that the translators were honest 
men who reverently desired to serve God and 
the Church by giving English readers a faithful 
translation from the original, all who have a 
knowledge of more than one language, and who 
have ever tried translating from one to another, 
well know they had a difficult task, the range 
of both languages making it often possible to 
translate a word by any one of several words, 
all having slightly different shades of meaning; 
besides which the idiomatic differences, the 
peculiarities in the construction of sentences 
in both languages, must be taken into account. 
This makes it necessary for a translator frequently 
to use his judgment both in deciding 
which of several words he would best use, and 
also as to their arrangement to reproduce faithfully 
the original thought. And, if the translators 
have certain false ideas fixed in their 
minds, they are almost sure at times to color 
their renderings, without wrong intention. 

Now, no matter how little hell is talked or 



thought or sung about to-day, there is no other 
point of doctrine more firmly held by Christian 
people, who feel sure that to deny hell would be 
to deny the Bible, and yet who know little of 
what the Bible says about hell. So, in coming to 
the English Bible to examine the subject, do not 
forget to exercise charity toward the translators 
when we show that their translation has helped 
forward the wrong ideas generally held. You 
will be far more justifiable in feeling unthankful 
toward the "pastors" and "shepherds," 
whom you have for years helped to support and 
educate. But remember that not all ministers 
know of the errors of the translators. Not all 
deliberately cover and hide those errors from 
the people who are paying them for the information. 
Many, the great majority, indeed, do 
not know, having merely swallowed the theories 
of their seminary professors. It is the professors 
and learned ones who are most blameworthy. 
These have kept back the truth about 
"hell" for several reasons. Firstly, there is 

R1498 : page 39 

a sort of understanding or etiquette among 
them, as among physicians, that if they wish to 
maintain their standing in the "profession" 
they "must not tell tales out of school"— 
must not divulge professional secrets to the 
"common people," especially to the "laity." 
Secondly, they all fear that to let it be known 
that they have been teaching an unscriptural 
doctrine for years would bring disgrace and 
disreverence upon them, their denominations 
and their schools, and unsettle confidence in 
their wisdom. And oh! how much depends 
upon confidence and reverence for men, when 
God's Word is so generally ignored. Thirdly, 
they know that many of the members of their 
sects are not constrained by "the love of 
Christ" (2 Cor. 5:14), but merely by the fear 
of hell, and they see clearly therefore that to 
let the truth be known would soon cut loose 
the names and the dollars of many in their 
flocks; and this, to those who desire to make 
a fair show in the flesh (Gal. 6:12), would be 
terrible in the extreme. 

Nevertheless, it has for some years been seen 
that knowledge is increasing among the people 
(Dan. 12:4), and the "Revised English Version" 
of the Bible was gotten out— in great 
part to patch up this hell doctrine. But the 
revisers had not the courage to come out and 
give a correct translation: that, as we have 
shown, would be too serious a matter to be 



thought of; so they merely refused to translate 
the word at all, and put the Hebrew word 
sheol and the Greek word hades into the English 
text. They well knew that the English 
reader would know little difference between 
"hell" and sheol or hades, and would soon 
come to use them synonymously. And this is 
the case. The learned professors and pastors 
consider, therefore, that they are justified by 
the course of the revisers, though they never 
explain the meaning of the Greek word hades; 
but by their use of the word, without saying so 
directly, they give their confiding flocks to understand 
that it means a place of torture, a 
lake of fire. But what will be the judgment of 
the Great Jehovah, whose character and plan 
are traduced by the blasphemous doctrine 
which this mistranslated word helps to support? 
Will he commend them? Will he justify their 
course? Will the Chief Shepherd call these 
his beloved "friends?" Will he make known 
unto them his further plans (John 15:15), that 
they may misrepresent them also, to preserve 
their own dignity and reverence? Will he continue 
to send forth "things new and old," 
"meat in due season" to the household of 
faith, by the hand of these unfaithful servants? 
Nay, such shall not continue to be his mouth-pieces: 
he will spew them out of his mouth. 
(Rev. 3:16.) He will choose instead, as at the 
first advent, from among the laity— "the common 
people"— mouth-pieces, and will give 
them words which none of the chief priests shall 
be able to gainsay or resist. (Luke 21:15.) 
And, as foretold, "the wisdom of their wise 
men shall perish, and the understanding of 
their prudent men shall be hid."— Isa. 29:9-19. 
Consider first, then:— 

HELL IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

The word "hell" occurs thirty-one times in 
the Old Testament, and in every instance it is 
sheol in the Hebrew. It does not mean a lake 
of fire and brimstone, nor anything at all resembling 
that thought: not in the slightest degree! 
Quite the reverse: instead of a place of 
blazing fire it is described in the context as a 
state of "darkness;" instead of being a place 
where shrieks and groans are heard, it is described 
in the context as a place of "silence;" 
instead of representing in any sense pain and 
suffering, or remorse, the context describes it 
as one of forgetfulness. "There is no work, 
nor device, nor knowledge, in the grave [sheol] 
whither thou goest."— Eccles. 9:10. 



The meaning of sheol is, the hidden state, 
as applied to man's condition in death, in and 
beyond which all is hidden, except to the eye 
of faith; hence, by proper and close association 
the word was often used in the sense of 
the grave— the tomb, the hidden place, or place 
beyond which only those who have the enlightened 
eye of the understanding can see resurrection, 
restitution of being. And be it 
particularly noted that this very same word 
sheol is translated "pit" and "grave" thirty-four 
times in our common version by the same 

R1498 : page 40 

translators*— more times than it is translated 
"hell;" and twice, where it is translated 
"hell," it seemed so absurd, according to the 
present accepted meaning of the English word 
"hell," that, in the margin of modern Bibles, 
the publishers explain that it means grave. 
(See Isa. 14:9 and Jonah 2:2.) In the latter 
case, the hidden state, or grave, was the belly 
of the fish in which Jonah was buried alive, 
and from which he cried to God. 

BELOW WE QUOTE ALL THE PLACES WHERE SHEOL 
IS TRANSLATED HELL. 

(1) Amos 9:2.— "Though they dig into 
hell, thence shall mine hand take them." [A 
figurative expression; but certainly pits of the 
earth are the only hells men can dig into.] 

(2) Psa. 16: 10.— "Thou wilt not leave my 
soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy 
One to see corruption." [This refers to our 
Lord's three days in the tomb. See Acts 2:31; 
3:15.] 

(3) Psa. 18:5 and 2 Sam. 22:6— margin.— 
"The cords of hell compassed me about." [A 
figure in which trouble is represented as hastening 
one to the tomb.] 

(4) Psa. 55:15.— "Let them go down quick 
into hell"— margin, "the grave." 

(5) Psa. 9:17.— "The wicked shall be turned 
into hell, and all the nations that forget God." 
[This text should read, "The wicked shall be 
re-turned into hell"— into the state of death— 
the "second death." See explanation of this 
passage farther on in this issue.] 

(6) Psa. 86:13.— "Thou hast delivered my 
soul from the lowest hell"— margin, "grave." 

(7) Psa. 116:3.— "The sorrows of death compassed 
me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon 

me." [Sickness and trouble are the figurative 
hands of the grave to grasp us.] 



(8) Psa. 139:8.-"If I make my bed in hell, 
behold, thou art there." [God's power is unlimited: 
even those in the tomb he can and 

will control and bring forth.] 

(9) Deut. 32:22.— "For a fire is kindled in 
mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest 

hell." [A figurative representation of the destruction, 
the utter ruin, of Israel as a nation— 
"wrath to the uttermost," as the Apostle 
called it, God's anger burning that nation to 
the "lowest deep," as Leeser translates the word 
sheol here.] 

(10) Job 11:8. -"It [God's wisdom] is as 
high as heaven; what canst thou do? deeper 
than hell [than any pit]; what canst thou 
know?" 

(11) Job 26:6. -"Hell [the tomb] is naked 
before him, and destruction hath no 
covering." 

(12) Prov. 5:5.— "Her feet go down to 
death; her steps take hold on hell" [i.e., lead 
to the grave]. 

(13) Prov. 7:27.— "Her house is the way to 
hell [the grave], going down to the chambers 
of death." 

(14) Prov. 9: 18. -"He knoweth not that 
the dead are there, and that her guests are in 
the depths of hell." [Here the harlot's guests 
are represented as dead, diseased or dying, 



*To the credit of the translators of the Common Version 
(the King James Version) it should be stated that 
the English word "hell" has gradually come to have a 
very different meaning from what it once had, and that 
when used by them in the sixteenth century the word 
still retained much of its original meaning, which made 
it a fair equivalent of the Greek and Hebrew words they 
translated by it. There is no such excuse, however, for 
modern translators and teachers, for the original meaning 
has entirely passed from the word, except as found occasionally 
in old books, giving place to the "hell fire" idea. 

The word "hell" is Anglo-Saxon, and in old English 
usage meant a place of concealment— the hidden, or secret, 
or covered place. Its transitive verb was hele or hill 
meaning to hide, to conceal, to cover, to roof. In old 
English books you will find numerous instances of the 
use of this word, in connection with roofing houses, 
planting, hilling, hiding, etc. To hele a house did not 
mean to burn it, or torture it, but to cover or thatch it; to 
hele potatoes did not mean to burn them, but to conceal 
them in a pit; and so, likewise, when men were heled 
there was no thought of fire, torture and pain, but of covering, 
concealing, etc. Both good and bad were thus 
heled or buried. 



"Conceal" is the corresponding word from the Latin. 
See Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, under hell, hele, 
hill and conceal. From this it will be seen that the use 
of the word "hell" by the translators of the King James' 
Version was at a time when its meaning had not become 
so changed as at present. Yet modern translators and 
ministers, who well know that the word "hell," as now 
used, does not cover the thought of hades of the Greek, 
or sheol of the Hebrew, refuse to enlighten their credulous 
flocks. 

R1498 : page 41 

and many of the victims of sensuality in premature 
graves from diseases which hurry off 
their posterity also to the tomb.] 

(15) Prov. 15:11.— "Hell and destruction 

are before the Lord." [Here the grave is associated 
with destruction and not with a life of 
torment.] 

(16) Prov. 15:24.-"The path of life (leadeth) 
upward for the wise, that he may depart 
from hell beneath." [The hope of resurrection 
from the tomb.] 

(17) Prov. 23:14. -"Thou shalt beat him 
with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from 
hell" [i.e., wise corrections will save a child 
from vicious ways which lead to premature 
death, and may possibly prepare him to escape 
the "second death" also]. 

(18) Prov. 27:20. -"Hell [the grave] and 
destruction are never full: so the eyes of man 
are never satisfied." 

(19) Isa. 5:14.— "Therefore hell hath enlarged 
herself and opened her mouth without 
measure." [Here a symbol of destruction.] 

(20) Isa. 14:9.— "Hell [margin, grave] from 
beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy 
coming."— Verse 15. "Thou shalt be brought 
down to hell" [the grave— so rendered in 
verse 11.] 

(21) Isa. 57:9. -"And didst debase thyself 
even unto hell." [Here figurative of deep 
degradation.] 

(22) Ezek. 3 1:15-17. -"In the day when 
he went down to the grave,. ..I made the 
nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when 
I cast him down to hell with them that descend 
into the pit.. ..They also went down into 

hell with him, unto them that be slain with the 
sword." [Figurative and prophetic description 
of the fall of Babylon into destruction, 
silence, the grave.] 

(23) Ezek. 32:21.— "The strong among the 
mighty shall speak to him out of the midst of 
hell with them that help him." [A continuation 



of the same figure, representing Egypt's 
overthrow as a nation to join Babylon in 
destruction.] 

(24) Ezek. 32:27. --"And they shall not lie 

with the mighty that are fallen of the uncircumcised, 
which are gone down to hell with 
their weapons of war: and they have laid their 
swords under their heads; but their iniquities 
shall be upon their bones, though they were the 
terror of the mighty in the land of the living." 
[The grave is the only "hell" where fallen ones 
are buried and lie with their weapons of war 
under their heads.] 

(25) Hab. 2:5.— "Who enlargeth his desire 
as hell [the grave] and as death, and cannot 
be satisfied." 

(26) Jonah 2:1,2.— "Then Jonah prayed 
unto the Lord his God, out of the fish's belly, 
and said, I cried by reason of mine affliction 
unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the 
belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my 
voice." [The belly of the fish was for a time 
his grave.] 

(27) Isa. 28:15-18.— "Because ye have said, 
We have made a covenant with death, and with 
hell [the grave] are we at agreement; when the 
overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall 
not come unto us, for we have made lies our 
refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves: 
Therefore, saith the Lord,... Your 

covenant with death shall be disannulled, and 
your agreement with hell [grave] shall not 
stand." [God thus declares that the present 
prevalent idea, by which death and the grave 
are represented as friends rather than enemies, 
shall cease; and men shall learn that death is 
the wages of sin and that it now is in Satan's 
power (Rom. 6:23; Heb. 2:14), and not an 
angel sent by God.] 

ALL OTHER PLACES WHERE SHEOL OCCURS- 
RENDERED GRAVE AND PIT. 

Gen. 37:35.— "I will go down into the grave 
unto my son." 

Gen. 42:38.— "Then shall ye bring down 
my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave." [See 
also the same expression in 44:29,31.] 

1 Sam. 2:6.— "The Lord killeth, and maketh 
alive: he bringeth down to the grave, and 
bringeth up." 

1 Kings 2:6,9.— "Let not his hoar head go 
down to the grave in peace." "His hoar head 
bring down to the grave with blood." 

Job 7:9.— "He that goeth down to the 
grave." 



R1498 : page 42 

Job 14:13.— "Oh, that thou wouldst hide me 
in the grave, that thou wouldst keep me secret, 
until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldst appoint 
me a set time, and remember me" [resurrect 
me]! 

Job 17:13.— "If I wait, the grave is mine 
house: I have made my bed in the darkness." 
[Job waits for resurrection— "in the morning."] 

Job 21:13.— "They spend their days in 
mirth, in a moment go down to the grave." 

Job 24:19,20.— "Drought and heat consume 
the snow waters: so doth the grave those 
which have sinned." [All have sinned, hence 
"Death has passed upon all," and all go down 
to the grave. But all have been redeemed, 
by "the precious blood of Christ," hence all 
shall be awakened and come forth again in God's 
due time— "in the morning."] 

Psa. 6:5.— "In death there is no remembrance 
of thee: in the grave who shall give 
thee thanks?" 

Psa. 30:3.— "O Lord, thou hast brought up 
my soul from the grave: thou hast kept me 
alive, that I should not go down to the pit" 
[—recovery from danger of death]. 

Psa. 31:17.— "Let the wicked be ashamed; 
let them be silent in the grave." 

Psa. 49:14,15, margin.— "Like sheep they 
are laid in the grave; death shall feed on them; 
and the upright [the saints— Dan. 7:27] shall 
have dominion over them in the morning [the 
Millennial morning]; and their beauty shall 
consume, the grave being an habitation to every 
one of them. But God will redeem my soul 
from the power of the grave." 

Psa. 88:3.— "My life draweth nigh unto the 
grave." 

Psa. 89:48.— "Shall he deliver his soul from 
the hand of the grave?" 

Psa. 141:7.— "Our bones are scattered at the 
grave's mouth." 

Prov. 1:12.— "Let us swallow them up alive 
as the grave; and whole, as those that go down 
into the pit" [i.e., as of an earthquake, as in 
Num. 16:30-33]. 

Prov. 30:15,16.— "Four things say not, It is 
enough: the grave," etc. 

Eccl. 9:10.— "Whatsoever thy hand findeth 
to do, do it with thy might; for there is no 
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, 
in the grave, whither thou goest." 

Job 17:16.— "They shall go down to the 
bars of the pit, when our rest together is in the 



dust." 

Song of Solomon 8:6.— "Jealousy is cruel 
as the grave." 

Isa. 14:11.— "Thy pomp is brought down 
to the grave." 

Isa. 38:10.— "I shall go to the gates of the 
grave: I am deprived of the residue of my 
years." 

Isa. 38:18.— "The grave cannot praise thee, 
death cannot celebrate thee: they that go down 
into the pit cannot hope for thy truth." 

Num. 16:31-33.— "The ground clave asunder 
that was under them, and the earth opened 
her mouth and swallowed them up, and their 
houses, and all the men that appertained unto 
Korah, and all their goods. They and all that 
appertained to them went down alive into the 
pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they 
perished from among the congregation." 

Ezek. 31:15.— "In the day when he went 
down to the grave." 

Hosea 13:14.— "I will ransom them from 
the power of the grave; I will redeem them 
from death: O death, I will be thy plagues; 
O grave, I will be thy destruction. Repentance 
shall be hid from mine eyes." [The 
Lord did not ransom any from a place of fire 
and torment, for there is no such place; but 
he did ransom all mankind from the grave, 
from death, the penalty brought upon all by 
Adam's sin, as this verse declares. And shortly 
now, we trust, he will destroy death and the 
grave, and every vestige of Adam's penalty, 
as is also declared in this verse. This sheol, 
hell or grave shall be destroyed, that all may 
come to a full knowledge of the truth, and if 
they then will (by obedience), they may live 
forever.] 

The above list includes every instance of the 
use of the English word "hell" and the 
Hebrew word sheol. From the examination it 
must be evident to all readers that the Old 
Testament, covering God's revelation for four 
thousand years, contains not a single hint of 
"hell," as the word is now understood. 

R1498 : page 43 

HELL IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



In the New Testament, the Greek word hades 
corresponds exactly to the Hebrew word sheol. 
As proof see the quotations of the Apostles 
from the Old Testament, in which they render 



it hades. For instance, Acts 2:27, "Thou wilt 

not leave my soul in hades," is a quotation 

from Psa. 16:10, "Thou wilt not leave my soul 

in sheol." And 1 Cor. 15:54,55, "Death is 

swallowed up in victory. O death, where is 

thy sting? O hades [grave], where is thy victory?" 

is an allusion to Isa. 25:8, "He will 

swallow up death in victory," and to Hos. 13:14, 

"O death, I will be thy plagues: O sheol, I 

will be thy destruction." 

IN THE FOLLOWING CASES "HELL" IS FROM THE 
GREEK WORD "HADES." 

Matt. 11:23.— "And thou, Capernaum, 
which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be 
brought down to hell." Luke 10:15: "Shalt 
be thrust down to hell." [In privileges, etc., 
the city was highly favored, or, figuratively, 
exalted to heaven; but because of misuse of 
God's favors, it would be debased, or, figuratively, 
cast down to hades, overthrown, destroyed. 
It is now so thoroughly buried in 
oblivion, that even the site where it stood is a 
matter of dispute. Capernaum is certainly 
destroyed, thrust down to hades.] 

Luke 16:23.— "In hell he lifted up his eyes, 
being in torments." [A parabolic figure. See 
article, "The Rich Man and Lazarus."] 

Rev. 6:8.— "And behold a pale horse: and 
his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell 
followed with him." [Symbol of destruction or 
the grave.] 

Matt. 16: 18. -"Upon this rock I will build 
my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail 
against it." [Here the tomb is represented 
as a great prison with strong doors. 
The Lord's assurance is that though his Church 
may seem to be forever locked up in the tomb, 
yet its strong gates will not hold her when the 
due time comes and her Lord breaks the bars 
and by his resurrection power sets at liberty the 
captives, the result of the ransom which he gave 
once for all. Compare Luke 4:18; Isa. 61:1.] 

CHRIST IN "HELL" (HADES) AND RESURRECTED 
FROM "HELL. "-ACTS 2:1,14,22-31. 

"And when the day of Pentecost was fully 
come, ...Peter. ..lifted up his voice 
and said.. ..Ye men of Israel, hear these 
words:— Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of 
God among you, ...being delivered by the 
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God 
["He was delivered for our offences"], ye 
have taken and by wicked hands have crucified 



and slain: whom God hath raised up, having 
loosed the pains [or bands] of death, because 
it was not possible that he should be holden 
of it [for the Word of Jehovah had previously 
declared his resurrection]; for David speaketh 
concerning him [personating or speaking for 
him], 'I [Christ] foresaw the Lord [Jehovah] 
always before my face; for he is on my right 
hand, that I should not be moved. Therefore 
did my heart rejoice and my tongue was glad; 
moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope, because 
thou wilt not leave my soul in hell [hades] 
neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see 
corruption. Thou [Jehovah] hast made known 
to me [Christ] the ways of life'" [thy plan]. 
Here our Lord, as personified by the prophet 
David, expresses his faith in Jehovah's promise 
of a resurrection and in the full and glorious 
accomplishment of Jehovah's plan through 
him, and rejoices in the prospect. 

Peter then proceeds, saying— "Men and 
brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the 
patriarch David, that he is both dead and 
buried, and his sepulcher is with us unto this 
day [so that this prophecy could not have referred 
to himself personally; for his soul was 
left in "hell" [hades], and his flesh did see corruption]: 
Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing 
that God had sworn with an oath to him, that 
of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, 
he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; 
he, seeing this before [prophetically], spake of 
the resurrection of Christ [out of "hell"— 
hades— to which he must go for our offences], 
that his soul was not left in hell [hades— 
the death state], neither his flesh did see corruption." 
Thus Peter presents a strong, logical 
argument, based on the words of the prophet 
David— showing firstly, that Christ, who 

R1498 : page 44 

was delivered by God for our offences, went to 

"hell," the grave, the condition of death, destruction 

(Psa. 16:10); and secondly, that according 

to promise he had been delivered from 

"hell," the grave, death, destruction, by a RESURRECTION 

—a raising up to life, being created 

again, the same identical being, yet more 

glorious, and exalted even to the express image 

of the Father's person. (Heb. 1:3.) And now 

"this same Jesus" (Acts 2:36), in his subsequent 

revelation to the Church, declares— 

Rev. 1:18.— "I am he that liveth, and was 
dead, and, behold, I am alive forevermore, 
Amen; and have the keys of hell [hades, the 



grave] and of death." Amen! Amen! our 
hearts respond; for in his resurrection we see 
the glorious outcome of the whole plan of 
Jehovah, to be accomplished through the power 
of the resurrected one who now holds the keys 
of hell and of death, and in due time will release 
all the prisoners— who are therefore called 
the "prisoners of hope."— Zech. 9:12. No 
craft or cunning can by any possible device 
wrest these scriptures entire and pervert them 
to the support of that monstrous and blasphemous 
papal tradition of eternal torment. Had 
that been our penalty, Christ, to be our vicarious 
sacrifice, must still and to all eternity endure 
it— which is not the case, as these scriptures 
affirm. But death was our penalty, and 
"he died for our sins," and "also for the sins 
of the whole world."— 1 Cor. 15:3; 1 John 2:2. 

Rev. 20:13,14.— "And the sea gave up the 
dead which were in it; and death and hell 
delivered up the dead which were in them: 
and they were judged, every man, according 
to their works. And death and hell were cast 
into the lake of fire: this is the second death." 
[The lake of fire is the symbol of final and everlasting 
destruction.] 

OTHER OCCURRENCES OF THE WORD "HELL.' 



Having examined the word sheol, the original 
and only word in the Old Testament for "hell," 
and the word hades, most frequently rendered 
"hell" in the New Testament, we now notice 
every remaining instance in Scripture where the 
English word "hell" occurs. In the New Testament 
there are but two other words than hades 
rendered "hell," namely, gehenna and tartaroo, 
which we will consider in the order named. 

GEHENNA. 

This word occurs twelve times. It is the 
Grecian mode of spelling the Hebrew words 
which are translated "the Valley of Hinnom." 
This valley lay just outside the city of Jerusalem, 
and served the purpose of sewer and 
garbage burner to that city. The offal, garbage, 
etc., were emptied there, and fires were 
kept continually burning to consume utterly all 
things deposited therein, brimstone being added 
to assist combustion and insure complete destruction. 
But a living thing was never cast 
into gehenna. The Jews were not permitted 
to torture any creature. 



When we consider that in the people of Israel 
God was giving us object lessons illustrating 
his dealings and plans, present and future, 
we should expect that this Valley of Hinnom, 
or gehenna, would also play its part in illustrating 
things future. We know that Israel's 
priesthood and temple illustrated the Royal 
Priesthood— the Christian Church as it will be, 
the true temple of God— and we know that 
their city was a figure of the New Jerusalem, 
the seat of kingdom power and centre of authority 
—the city (government) of the Great 
King, Immanuel. We remember, too, that 
Christ's government is represented in the book 
of Revelation (Rev. 21:10-27) under the figure 
of a city— the New Jerusalem. There, after 
describing the class permitted to enter the 
privileges and blessings of that kingdom— the 
honorable and glorious, and all who have right 
to the trees of life— we find it also declared 
that there shall not enter into it anything that 
defileth, or that worketh abomination, or lies; 
but only such as the Lamb shall write as 
worthy of life. This city, representing the 
redeemed world in the end of the Millennium, 
was typified or represented in the earthly 
city, Jerusalem; and the defiling, the abominable, 
etc., the class unworthy of life, who do 
not enter in, were represented by the refuse and 
the filthy, lifeless carcasses cast into gehenna 
outside the city, for utter destruction. Accordingly, 
we find it stated that those not found 

R1498 : page 45 

worthy of life are to be cast into the fire (Rev. 20:15) 
—fire here, as everywhere, being used as 
a symbol of destruction. 

Thus we see that while gehenna served a useful 
purpose to the city of Jerusalem as a place for 
garbage burning, it, like the city, illustrated the 
future dealing of God, when the refuse and impure 
elements will be forever destroyed and prevented 
from contaminating the holy and pure, 
after that age of judgment, or trial, has proved 
all— which are sheep and which are goats. 

Gehenna, then, was a type or illustration of 
the second death— final and complete destruction. 
Strictly speaking, none could be in any 
danger of the second death while as yet under 
the first or Adamic death, and while as yet no 
ransom from it had been given. Consequently 
no one could have been liable to the second 
death before the coming of our Lord, who 
brought to light the plan of God (to be accomplished 
through Christ) for the resurrection of 



all from the first death, and a second trial of 
all men individually for the eternal continuance 
of that life, by obedience to the law of 
Christ. The penalty of failure to comply with 
those just and righteous conditions is to be the 
second death— condemnation a second time to 
death, for failure the second time, and this 
time individually. Nor is the world in general 
now liable to this penalty: none but consecrated 
believers could possibly incur it yet; because 
no others have escaped (even reckonedly) 
the condemnation that is on the world— the 
first death, for Adam's sin. The consecrated 
have escaped it reckonedly, the sin of Adam 
being no longer imputed to them.— Rom. 8:1; 
4:6-8. 

But remember that Israel, though they were 
not, and could not be, actually ahead of other 
men in this matter, were, for the purpose 
of being used as types of God's future dealing 
with the race, typically treated as though 
the ransom had been given before they 
left Egypt, though only a typical lamb had 
been slain. When Jerusalem was built, and the 
Temple— representative of the true temple, the 
Church, and the true kingdom as it will be 
established by Christ in the Millennium— that 
people typified the world in the next age. 
Their priests represented the glorified Royal 
Priesthood, and their Law and its demands of 
perfect obedience represented the Law and 
conditions under the New Covenant, to be 
brought into operation for the blessing of all 
the obedient, and for the condemnation of all 
who, when granted fullest opportunity, will not 
submit to the righteous ruling and laws of the 
Great King. 

Seeing then that Israel's polity, condition, etc., 
prefigured those of the world in the coming age, 
how appropriate that we should find the valley 
or abyss, gehenna, a figure of the second death, 
the utter destruction in the coming age of all 
that is unworthy of preservation; and how aptly, 
too, is the symbol, "lake of fire burning 
with brimstone" (Rev. 19:20), drawn from this 
same gehenna, or Valley of Hinnom, burning 
continually with brimstone. The expression, 
"burning with brimstone," adds force to the 
symbol, "fire," to express the utter and irrevocable 
destructiveness of the second death; 
for the latest deductions of scientists are that 
burning brimstone is the most deadly agent 
known. How reasonable, too, to expect that 
Israel would have courts and judges resembling 
or prefiguring such courts and judges in the 
next age; and that the sentence of those (figurative) 



courts of that (figurative) people under 
those (figurative) laws, to that (figurative) abyss, 
outside that (figurative) city, would largely 
correspond to the real sentences of the real 
court and judges in the next age. If these 
points are kept in mind, they will greatly assist 
us in understanding the words of our Lord in 
reference to gehenna; for though the literal 
valley just at hand was named and referred to, 
yet his words carry with them lessons concerning 
the future age, and the antitypical gehenna 
—the second death. 

MATT. 5:21,22. 

"Ye have heard that it was said by them of 
old time, 'Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever 
shall kill shall be amenable to the judges:' but 
I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with 
his brother [without a cause] shall [future— 
under the regulations of the real kingdom] be 
amenable to the judges; and whosoever shall 

R1498 : page 46 

say to his brother, 'Raca' [villain], shall be in 
danger of the High Council; but whosoever 
shall say 'Thou fool,' shall be in danger of 
hell [gehenna] fire." 

To understand these references to council 
and judges and gehenna, all should know 
something of Jewish regulations. The "Court 
of Judges" consisted of seven men (or twenty-three, 
—the number is in dispute), and had 
power to judge some classes of crimes. The 
High Council, or Sanhedrin, consisted of 
seventy -one men of recognized learning and 
ability. This constituted the highest court of 
the Jews, and its supervision was over the 
gravest offences. The most serious punishment 
was death, but certain very obnoxious 
criminals were subjected to an indignity after 
death, being refused burial and cast with the 
carcasses of dogs, the city refuse, etc., into 
gehenna, to be there consumed. The object 
of this burning in gehenna was to make 
the crime and the criminal detestable in the 
eyes of the people, and signified that the 
culprit was a hopeless case. It must be remembered 
that Israel hoped for a resurrection from 
the tomb, and hence they were particular in 
caring for the corpses of their dead. Not 
realizing the fulness of God's power, they 
thought he needed their assistance to that extent. 
(Exod. 13:19; Heb. 11:22; Acts 7:15,16.) 
Hence the destruction of the body in 



gehenna after death implied to them the loss 
of hope of future life by a resurrection. Thus 
it represented the second death in the same 
figurative way that they as a people represented 
or illustrated a future order of things under 
the New Covenant. 

Now notice that our Lord, in the above 
words, pointed out to them that their construction 
of the Law, severe though it was, was far 
below the real import of that Law, as it shall 
be interpreted under the real kingdom and 
judges which theirs only typified. He shows 
that the command of their Law, "Thou shalt 
not kill," reached much farther than they supposed; 
that malicious anger and vituperation 
"shall be" considered a violation of God's Law, 
under the New Covenant; and that such as, 
under the favorable conditions of that new age, 
will not reform so thoroughly as to fully observe 
God's Law would be counted worthy of 
that which the gehenna near them typified— 
the second death. However, the force and 
severity of that Law will be enforced only in 
proportion as the discipline, advantages and 
assistance of that age shall enable each to comply 
with it, and yet be disregarded. 

The same thought is continued in 

MATT. 5:27-30. 

Here again the operation of God's Law under 
the New Covenant is contrasted with its operation 
under the Old or Jewish Covenant, and the 
lesson of self-control is urged by the statement 
that it is far more profitable that men should 
refuse to gratify depraved desires (though they 
were dear to us as a right eye, and as convenient 
and almost indispensable as a right hand) 
than that they should gratify these, and lose, 
in the second death, the future life provided, 
through the atonement, for all who will return 
to perfection, holiness and God. 

These expressions of our Lord not only serve 
to show us the perfection (Rom. 7:12) of God's 
Law, and how fully it will be defined and enforced 
in the Millennium, but they served as a 
lesson to the Jews also, who previously saw, 
through Moses' commands, only the crude exterior 
of the Law of God. Since they found 
it difficult in their fallen state to keep inviolate 
even the surface significance of the Law, they 
must now see the impossibility of their keeping 
the finer meaning of the Law, revealed by 
Christ. Had they understood and received 
his teaching fully, they would have cried out, 
Alas! if God judges us thus, by the very 



thoughts and intents of the heart, we are all 

unclean, all undone, and can hope for naught 

but condemnation to gehenna (to utter destruction, 

as brute beasts). They would have 

cried, Show us a greater priesthood than that 

of Aaron, a priest and teacher able fully to appreciate 

the Law, and able fully to appreciate 

and sympathize with our fallen state and inherited 

weaknesses, and let him offer for us "better 

sacrifices," and apply to us the needed 

greater forgiveness of sin, and let him as a 

great physician heal us and restore us, so that 

R1498 : page 47 

we can obey the perfect Law of God from our 
hearts. Then they would have found all their 
needs in Christ. 

But this lesson they did not learn, for the 
ears of their understanding were "dull of 
hearing;" hence they knew not that God had 
already prepared the very priest and sacrifice 
and teacher and physician they needed— who 
in due time redeemed those under the typical 
Law, as well as all not under it, and who also 
"in due time," shortly, will begin his restoring 
work— restoring sight to the blind eyes of 
their understanding, and hearing to their deaf 
ears. Then the "vail shall be taken away"— 
that vail of ignorance, pride and human wisdom 
which Satan now uses to blind the world 
to God's true law and true plan of salvation 
in Christ. 

And not only did our Lord's teaching here 
show the Law of the New Covenant, and teach 
the Jew a lesson, but it is of benefit to the 
Gospel Church also. In proportion as we learn 
the exactness of God's Law, and what would 
constitute perfection under its requirements, 
we see that our Redeemer was perfect, and that 
we, totally unable to commend ourselves to 
God as keepers of that Law, can find acceptance 
with the Father only under the merit of 
our Redeemer, while none can be of that 
"body," covered by the robe of his righteousness, 
except the consecrated who endeavor to 
do only those things well pleasing to God, 
which includes the avoiding of sin to the extent 
of ability. Yet their acceptability with God 
rests not in their perfection, but upon the perfection 
of Christ, so long as they abide in him. 
These, nevertheless, are benefited by a clear 
insight into the perfect Law of God, even 
though they are not dependent on the perfect 
keeping of it. They delight to do God's will 
to the extent of their ability, and the better 



they know his perfect Law, the better they are 
able to rule themselves and conform to it. So, 
then, to us also the Lord's words have a lesson 
of value. 

The point, however, to be noticed clearly is 
the mistake commonly made, of supposing the 
gehenna which the Jews knew, and of which 
our Lord spoke to them, to be a lake of fire to 
be kept burning to all eternity, into which all 
would be cast who get "angry with a brother" 
and call him a "fool," or who "look upon a 
woman to lust." Nay, the point is that gehenna 
symbolizes the second death— utter, 
complete and everlasting destruction. This is 
clearly shown by its being contrasted with 
life as its opposite. "It is better for thee to 
enter into life halt, or maimed, than otherwise 
be cast into gehenna." It is better that 
you should deny yourself sinful gratifications 
than that you should completely lose all future 
life, and perish in the second death. 

MATT. 10:28; LUKE 12:5. 

"Fear not them which kill the body, but 
are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear 
him which is able to destroy both soul and body 
in hell" [gehenna]. [See also another account 
of the same discourse by Luke— 12:4,5.] 

Here our Lord pointed out to his followers 
the great cause they had for bravery and courage 
under the most trying circumstances. 
They were to expect persecution, and to have 
all manner of evil spoken against them falsely, 
for his sake, and the sake of the "good tidings" 
of which he made them the ministers 
and heralds; yea, the time would come, that 
whosoever would kill them would think that he 
did God a service. Their consolation or reward 
for this was to come, not in the present 
life, but in a life to come. They were assured, 
and they believed, that he had come to give 
his life a ransom for many, and that all in their 
graves must in consequence, in due time, hear 
the Deliverer's voice and come forth, either to 
reward (if their trial was passed in this life successfully), 
or to trial, as it must be to the great 
majority who had not, in the present life, come 
to the necessary knowledge and opportunity 
constituting the new trial. 

Our Lord here speaks of the present life and 
the life to come (which he was about to secure 
for all by the ransom-sacrifice he was giving). 
He calls that future condition the real "soul" 
or being ("soul" signifies being), while the present 
life (which is really a dying rather than a 



living state) he designates or indicates by the 
word "body." His bidding then is, Fear not 

R1498 : page 48 

them which can terminate the present (dying) 
life in these poor dying bodies, which, full of 
frailties and weaknesses and aches, you received 
from dying Adam. Care little for it, 
its food, its clothing, its pleasures, in comparison 
with that future existence or being which 
God has provided for you, and which, if secured, 
may be your portion forever. Fear not the 
threats, or looks, or acts of men, whose power 
can extend no farther than the present being, 
who can harm and kill these bodies, but can 
do no more. Rather have respect and deference 
to God, with whom are the issues of life 
everlasting— fear him who is able to destroy 
both the present dying existence and the future 
existence, in gehenna— the second death. 

Here it is conclusively shown that gehenna, 
as a figure, represented the second death— the 
utter destruction which must ensue in the case 
of all who, after having fully received the opportunities 
of a future being or existence through 
our Lord's sacrifice, prove themselves unworthy 
of God's gift, and refuse to accept it, by refusing 
obedience to God's just requirements. 
For it does not say that God will preserve soul 
or body in gehenna, but that he can and will 
destroy both in it. Thus we are taught that 
any who are condemned to the second death 
are hopelessly and forever blotted out of 
existence. 

MATT. 18:9; MARK 9:43-47. 

[Since these two refer to the same discourse, 
we quote from Mark— remarking that verses 
44 and 46, and part of 45, are not found in 
the oldest Greek MSS., though verse 48, which 
reads the same, is in all manuscripts. We quote 
only what is in the ancient MSS.] "If thy 
hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee 
to enter into life maimed, than having two 
hands to go into gehenna, into the fire that 
never shall be quenched. And if thy foot offend 
thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to 
enter halt into life, than having two feet to be 
cast into gehenna. And if thine eye offend 
thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter 
into the kingdom of God with one eye, than 
having two eyes to be cast into gehenna, 
where the worm dies not and the fire is not 
quenched." 



After reading the above, all must agree with 
the prophet that our Lord opened his mouth in 
figures and obscure sayings. (Psa. 78:2; Matt. 13:35.) 
No one for a moment supposes that our 
Lord advised the people to mutilate their bodies 
by cutting off their limbs, or gouging out their 
eyes. Nor does he mean us to understand that 
the injuries and disfigurements of the present 
life will continue beyond the grave, when we 
shall "enter into life." The Jews whom he 
addressed must have understood him better 
than many do to-day; because at that time the 
Jews had no conception of a place of everlasting 
torment, and knew the word gehenna to refer 
to the valley outside their city, which was not 
a place of torment (nor a place where any living 
thing was cast), but a place for the utter destruction 
of whatever might be cast into it; so that 
when they saw the Lord's expression regarding 
limbs and eyes to be figurative, they knew 
that the gehenna mentioned was not the valley 
of destruction, but a destruction which it prefigured 
or illustrated. 

The Lord meant simply this: The future life, 
which God has provided for sin-cursed, defiled 
and condemned man, is of inestimable value. 
It will richly pay you to make any sacrifice to 
receive and enjoy that life. Should it even 
cost an eye, a hand or a foot, so that to all 
eternity you would be obliged to endure the loss 
of these, yet life would be cheap at even such 
great cost. That would be better far than to 
retain your members and lose all in gehenna. 
Doubtless, too, the hearers drew the lesson as 
applicable to all the affairs of life, and understood 
the Master to mean that it would richly 
repay them to deny themselves many comforts 
and pleasures and tastes, dear as a right hand, 
precious as an eye and serviceable as a foot, 
rather than by gratification to forfeit the life to 
come and be utterly destroyed in gehenna— the 
second death. 

But what about the worms and the unquenchable 
fire? 

We answer, In the literal gehenna, which is 
the basis of our Lord's illustration, the bodies 
of animals, etc., frequently fell upon ledges of 
rocks and not into the fire kept burning below. 
Thus exposed, these would breed worms and be 

R1498 : page 49 

destroyed, as completely and as surely as those 
which burned. No one was allowed to disturb 
the contents of this valley; hence the worm 
and the fire together completed the work 



of destruction— the fire was not quenched and 
the worms died not. This would not imply a 
never-ending fire, nor immortal worms— the 
thought is that the worms did not die off and 
leave the carcasses there, but continued and 
completed the work of destruction. So with the 
fire also: if not quenched, it burned on until 
all was consumed, just as we might say, if a 
house were on fire and it could not be controlled 
or quenched, but burned until the building 
was destroyed— it would be an "unquenchable 
fire." 

Our Lord wished to impress the thought of 
the completeness and finality of the second 
death. All who go into the second death will 
be thoroughly and completely and forever destroyed; 
no ransom will ever again be given 
for any (Rom. 6:9); and there will be no occasion, 
for none worthy of life will be cast therein 
—but only those who love unrighteousness 
after coming to the knowledge of the truth. 

Not only in the above instances is the second 
death pointedly illustrated by gehenna, but it 
is evident that the same Teacher used the same 
figure to represent the same thing in the symbols 
of Revelation, though there it is not called 
gehenna, but a "lake of fire." 

The same valley was once before used as the 
basis of a discourse by the Prophet Isaiah. (Isa. 66:24.) 
Though he gives it no name, he describes 
it; and all should notice that he speaks, 
not as some with false ideas might expect, of 
billions in flames and torture, but of the carcasses 
of those who transgressed against the 
Lord, who are thus represented as utterly destroyed 
in the second death. 

The two verses preceding show the time, and 
it is in perfect harmony with the symbols of 
Revelation: it is in the new dispensation or 
the Millennium, in the "new heavens and 
new earth" condition of things. Then all the 
righteous will see the justice as well as the wisdom 
of the utter destruction of the incorrigible, 
wilful enemies of right— as it is written: "They 
shall be an abhorring unto all flesh." 

GEHENNA OCCURS BUT ONCE MORE.- 

JAMES 3:6. 

"So [important] is the tongue among our 
members, that it defileth the whole body, and 
setteth on fire the course of nature when it is 
set on fire of gehenna." 

Here, in strong symbolic language, the 
Apostle points out the great and bad influence 



of an evil tongue— a tongue set on fire (figuratively) 

by gehenna (figurative). For a tongue 

to be set on fire of gehenna signifies that a 

tongue may be set going in evil by a perverse 

disposition, self-willed, selfish, hateful, malicious, 

the sort of dispositions which, in spite 

of knowledge and opportunity, unless controlled 

and reformed, will be counted worthy 

to be destroyed— the class for whom the 

"second death," the real "lake of fire," the 

real gehenna, is intended. One in that attitude 

may by his tongue kindle a great fire, a destructive 

disturbance, which, wherever it has 

contact, will work evil in the entire course of 

nature. 

TARTAROO RENDERED HELL. 

The Greek word tartaroo occurs but once in 
the New Testament, and is translated hell. It 
is found in 2 Pet. 2:4, which reads thus:— 

"God spared not the angels who sinned, but 
cast [them] down to hell [tartaroo] and delivered 
them into chains of darkness to be reserved 
unto judgment." 

Having examined all other words in the Bible 
rendered "hell," and all the texts in which 
they occur, we conclude the subject with this, 
which is the only instance in which the word 
tartaroo occurs in the Scriptures. In the above 
text, all the words shown in Italic type are 
translated from the one Greek word tartaroo. 
Evidently the translators were at a loss how to 
translate the word, but concluded they knew 
all about where the evil angels must be, 
according to "orthodoxy," and so they made 
bold to put them into hell, though it took six 
words to twist the idea into the shape they had 
predetermined it must take. 

The word tartaroo, used by Peter, very closely 
resembles tartarus, a word used in Grecian mythology 
as the name for a dark abyss or prison. 

R1498 : page 50 

But the word tartaroo seems to refer more to 
an act than to a place. The fall of the angels 
who sinned was from honor and dignity, into 
condemnation and dishonor. Hence we prefer 
to translate the sentence thus: "God spared 
not the angels who sinned, but degraded them 
and delivered them into chains of darkness." 
This certainly agrees with the facts known 
to us through the Scriptures; for these fallen 
spirits frequented the earth in the days of our 
Lord and the apostles. Hence they were not 



down in some place, but "down" in the sense 
of being degraded from former honor and 
liberty, and restrained under darkness, as by a 
chain. Whenever these fallen spirits, in spiritualistic 
seances, manifest their powers through 
mediums, pretending to be dead human beings 
whom they simulate, they must always do 
their work in the dark, because darkness is the 
chain by which they are bound until the great 
Millennial day of judgment. Whether this 
implies that in the immediate future they will 
be able to materialize, etc., in daylight, is difficult 
to determine. If so, it would greatly increase 
Satan's power to blind and deceive for 
a short season— until the Sun of Righteousness 
has fully risen. 

Thus we close our investigation of the Bible's 
use of the word "hell." Thank God, we 
find no such place of everlasting torture as 
the creeds and hymn-books, and many pulpits, 
erroneously teach. Yet we have found a 
"hell," sheol, hades, to which all were condemned 
through Adam's sin, and from which 
all are redeemed by our Lord's death; and 
that "hell" is the tomb— the death condition. 
And we find another "hell" (gehenna— the 
second death— utter destruction) brought to 
our attention as the final penalty upon all who, 
after being redeemed and brought to the full 
knowledge of the truth, and to full ability to 
obey it, shall yet choose death by choosing a 
course of opposition to God and righteousness. 
And our hearts say, Amen. True and righteous 
are thy ways, thou King of nations. Who 
shall not venerate thee, O Lord, and glorify thy 
name? For thou art entirely holy. And all 
nations shall come and worship before thee, because 
thy righteous dealings are made manifest. 

THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS. 



LUKE 16:19-31. 

The great difficulty with many is that though 
they call this a parable, they reason on it, and 
draw conclusions from it, as though it were a 
literal statement. To regard it as a literal 
statement involves several absurdities: for instance, 
that the rich man went to "hell" because 
he had enjoyed many earthly blessings 
and gave nothing but crumbs to Lazarus. Not 
a word is said about his wickedness. Again, 
Lazarus was blessed, not because he was a sincere 
child of God, full of faith and trust— not 



because he was good— but simply because he was 
poor and sick. If this be interpreted literally, 
the only logical lesson to be drawn from it is, 
that unless we are poor beggars full of sores, 
we will never enter into future bliss; and that 
if now we wear any fine linen and purple, and 
have plenty to eat every day, we are sure of 
future torment. Again, the coveted place of 
favor is "Abraham's bosom;" and if the whole 
statement be literal, the bosom must also be 
literal, and it surely would not hold very many 
of earth's millions of sick and poor. 

But why consider absurdities? As a parable, 
it is easy of interpretation. In a parable the 
thing said is never the thing meant. We know 
this from our Lord's own explanations of his 
parables. When he said "wheat," he meant 
"children of the kingdom;" when he said 
"tares," he meant "the children of the 
devil;" when he said "reapers," his servants 
were to be understood, etc. (Matt. 13.) These 
same classes were represented by different symbols 
in different parables. Thus the "wheat" 
of one parable are the "faithful servants" 
and the "wise virgins" of others. So, in this 
parable, the "rich man" represents a class, and 
Lazarus represents another class. 

In attempting to expound a parable such as 
this, an explanation of which the Lord does 
not furnish us, modesty in expressing our opinion 
regarding it is certainly appropriate. We 
therefore offer the following explanation without 
any attempt to force our views upon the 
reader, except so far as his own truth-enlightened 
judgment may commend them as in accord 

R1498 : page 51 

with God's Word and plan. To our understanding 
the "rich man" represented the 
Jewish nation. At the time of the utterance 
of the parable, and for a long time previous, 
they had "fared sumptuously every day"— 
being the especial recipients of God's favors. 
As Paul says: "What advantage then hath 
the Jew? Much every way: chiefly, because 
to them were committed the oracles of God" 
[Law and Prophecy]. The promises to Abraham 
and David invested the people with royalty, 
as represented by the rich man's "purple." 
The typical sacrifices of the Law constituted 
them, in a typical sense, a holy (righteous) nation, 
represented by the rich man's "fine linen," 
—symbolic of righteousness.— Rev. 19:8. 

Lazarus represented the outcasts from divine 
favor under the Law, who, though sin-sick, 



hungered and thirsted after righteousness. Although 
these included "publicans and sinners" 
of Israel, in the main they were Gentiles 
—all nations of the world aside from the 
Israelites. These, at the time of the utterance 
of this parable, were entirely destitute of those 
special divine blessings which Israel enjoyed. 
They lay at the gate of the rich man. No rich 
promises of royalty were theirs; not even typically 
were they cleaned; but, in moral sickness, 
pollution and sin, they were companions of 
"dogs." Dogs were regarded as detestable 
creatures in those days, and the typically clean 
Jew called the outsiders "heathen" and 
"dogs," and would never eat with them, nor 
marry them, nor have any other dealings with 
them. (John 4:9.) As to how these ate of 
the "crumbs" of divine favor which fell from 
Israel's table of bounties, the Lord's words to 
the Syro-Phoenician woman give us a key. He 
said to this Gentile woman— "It is not meet 
[proper] to take the children's [Israelites] 
bread and give it to the dogs" [Gentiles]; 
and she answered, "Truth, Lord, but the dogs 
eat of the crumbs that fall from their master's 
table." (Matt. 15:26,27.) Jesus healed her 
daughter, thus giving the desired crumb of 
favor. But there came a time when the typical 
righteousness ceased— when the promise of 
royalty ceased to be theirs, and the kingdom 
was taken from them to be given to a nation 
bringing forth the fruits thereof.— Matt. 21:43. 
The "rich man" died to all these special advantages, 
and soon he (the Jewish nation) found 
himself in a cast-off condition,— in trouble, 
tribulation and affliction. In such condition 
that nation has suffered from that day to this. 

Lazarus also died: the condition of the humble 
Gentiles and the "outcasts" of Israel underwent 
a change, and from them many were carried 
by the angels (messengers— apostles, etc.) to 
Abraham's bosom. Abraham is represented as 
the father of the faithful, and receives all the 
children of faith, who are thus recognized as 
the heirs of all the promises made to Abraham. 
For the children of the flesh are not the children 
of God, "but the children of the promise 
are counted for the seed" (children of Abraham); 
"which seed is Christ;"— and "if ye be 
Christ's, then are ye [believers] Abraham's 
seed [children] and heirs according to the 
[Abrahamic] promise."— Gal. 3:29. Yes, the 
condition of things then existing terminated 
by death— the dissolution for the time of the 
favors which Israel had long enjoyed. There 
the Jew was cast off and has since been shown 



"no favor," and the poor Gentiles, who before 
had been "aliens from the commonwealth 
[the promises] of Israel and without God and 
having no hope in the world," were then "made 
nigh by the blood of Christ" and "reconciled 
to God."— Eph. 2:13. While the people of 
Judea at the time of our Lord's utterance of 
this parable are repeatedly called "Israel," 
"the lost sheep of the house of Israel," "cities 
of Israel," etc., because all of the tribes were 
represented there, yet actually the majority of 
the people were of the two tribes— Judah and 
Benjamin— while the masses of the ten tribes 
did not return from Babylon under Cyrus' 
general permission. And if the nation of the 
Jews (chiefly two tribes) were represented in 
the one "rich man," it would be a harmony 
of numbers to understand the five brethren to 
represent the ten tribes scattered abroad. 
The request relative to them was doubtless 
introduced to show that all special favor of 
God ceased to the ten tribes, as well as to the 
two more directly addressed. It seems to us 
evident that Israel only was meant, for no other 

R1498 : page 52 

nation than Israel had "Moses and the prophets" 
as instructors. 

In explanation of the statements, "In hell 
he lifted up his eyes, being in torments," and 
"There is a great gulf fixed:" The "gulf" 
is the wide difference between the Gospel 
Church and the Jew— the former enjoying 
free grace, joy, comfort and peace, as true 
sons of God, and the latter holding to the 
Law, which condemns and torments him. Prejudice, 
pride and error, from the Jewish side, 
form the bulwarks of this gulf which hinders 
the Jew from coming into the condition 
of true sons of God by accepting Christ and 
the gospel of his grace. The bulwark of this 
gulf which hinders true sons of God from going 
into bondage with the Jew— under the Law 
—is their knowledge that by the deeds of the 
Law none can be justified before God, and 
that if any man keep the Law (put himself under 
it to try to commend himself to God by 
reason of obedience to it) Christ shall profit 
him nothing. (Gal. 5:2-4.) So, then, we 
who are of the Lazarus class will not attempt 
to mix the Law and the Gospel, knowing that 
they cannot be mixed, and that we can do no 
good to those who still cling to the Law and 
reject the sacrifice for sins given by our Lord. 
And they, not seeing the change of dispensation 



which took place, argue that to deny the 
Law as the power to save would be to deny 
all the past history of their race, and to deny 
all of God's special dealings with the "fathers" 
(promises and dealings which through pride 
and selfishness they failed rightly to apprehend 
and use); hence they cannot come over to the 
bosom of Abraham, into the true rest and peace 
—the portion of all the true children of faith.— 
John 8:39; Rom. 4:16; Gal. 3:29. 

True, a few Jews probably came into the 
Christian faith all the way down the Gospel 
age, but so few as to be ignored in a parable 
which represented the Jewish people as a whole. 
As Dives represented the orthodox Jews and 
not the "outcasts of Israel" at the first, so 
down to the close of the parable he continues 
to represent a similar class, and hence does not 
represent such Jews as have renounced the Law 
Covenant and embraced the New Covenant. 

With the end of the Gospel age comes the 
end of this parable. It is now ending, and soon, 
therefore, the Jew will get out of the torment in 
which he has been for eighteen hundred years. 
The torment has not only been as above described 
—the torment of a Law which none of 
them ever did or ever could keep perfectly (except 
the one perfect man— Christ), but also a 
torment of another kind, viz., persecution. 
The Jew has for centuries been bitterly persecuted 
by Pagans, Mohammedans and professed 
Christians, but is now gradually rising to political 
freedom and influence; and as a people 
they will be very prominent among the nations 
in the beginning of the Millennium. The vail 
of prejudice still exists, but will be gradually 
taken away as the light of the Millennial morning 
dawns; nor should we be surprised to hear 
of great awakenings among the Jews, and many 
coming to acknowledge Christ. They are thus 
leaving their hadean state (national death) and 
torment and coming, the first of the nations, 
to be blessed by the true seed of Abraham, 
which is Christ. Their bulwark of race-prejudice 
and pride is falling in some places, and 
the humble, the poor in spirit, are beginning 
already to look unto him whom they pierced, 
and to inquire, Is not this the Christ? And as 
they look the Lord pours upon them the spirit 
of favor and supplication. (Zech. 12:10.) Therefore, 
"Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and 
cry unto her that her appointed time is accomplished. 
— Isa. 40:1,2, margin. 

In a word, this parable seems to teach precisely 
what Paul explained in Rom. 11:19-31. 
Because of unbelief the natural branches were 



broken off, and the wild branches grafted into 
the Abrahamic promises. The parable leaves 
the Jews in their trouble, and does not refer 
to their final restoration to favor— doubtless 
because it was not pertinent to the feature of 
the subject treated; but Paul assures us that 
when the fulness of the Gentiles— the Bride- 
be come in, "they [the Israelites] shall obtain 
mercy through your [the Church's] mercy." 
He assures us that this is God's covenant with 
fleshly Israel (who lost the higher— spiritual- 
promises, but are still the possessors of certain 
earthly promises), to become the chief nation 

R1498 : page 53 

of earth, etc. In proof of this statement, he 
quotes from the prophets, saying: "The deliverer 
shall come out of Zion [the glorified 
Church], and shall turn away ungodliness from 
Jacob" [the fleshly seed]. "As concerning 
the Gospel [high calling], they are enemies 
[cast off] for your sakes; but as touching the 
election, they are beloved for the fathers' 
sakes." "For God hath concluded them all 
in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon 
all. O the depths of the riches both of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God!"— 
Rom. 11:26-33. 

PARABLE OF THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS. 



MATT. 25:31-46. 



It has been truly said that "Order is Heaven's 
first law;" yet few, we think, have realized 
how emphatically this is true. In glancing 
back over the plan of the ages, there is nothing 
which gives such conclusive evidence of a 
Divine Director as the order observed in all 
its parts. 

As we have seen, God has had definite and 
stated times and seasons for every part of his 
work; and in the end of each of these seasons 
there was a finishing up of that work and a 
clearing off of the rubbish, preparatory to the 
beginning of the new work of the dispensation 
to follow. Thus in the end of the first dispensation 
(from creation to the flood), which, as 
we have seen, was placed under the control of 
the angels, there was a finishing work— an exhortation 
through Noah to forsake sin and turn 



to righteousness, and a warning of certain retribution. 

And when the full end of the time 

allotted for that dispensation had come, there 

was a selection and saving of all that was worth 

saving, and a clean sweeping destruction of all 

the refuse; and with that which remained a 

new dispensation began. 

In the end of the Jewish dispensation the 
same order is observed— a harvesting and complete 
separation of the wheat class from the 
chaff, and an entire rejection of the latter class 
from God's favor. With the few judged worthy 
in the end of that age, a new age, i.e., the Gospel 
dispensation, began; and now we find ourselves 
amidst the closing scenes (the harvest) 
of this dispensation. The wheat and the tares 
which have grown together during this age are 
being separated. And with the former class, 
of which our Lord Jesus is the Head, a new 
dispensation is about to be inaugurated, and 
these are to reign as kings and priests in that 
new dispensation, while the tare element is 
judged as utterly unworthy of that favor. 

As a skilled mechanic or artisan puts on the 
finishing touches and brushes away the refuse 
materials from one part of his work preparatory 
to the beginning of another part, so God 
has made a full end of each dispensation, preserving 
the finished work and casting off the 
refuse. 

While observing this order with reference 
to the dispensations past and the one just closing, 
our Lord informs us through the parable 
under consideration that the same order will be 
observed with reference to the dispensation to 
follow this. 

The harvest of the Jewish age was likened to 
the separation of wheat from chaff; the harvest 
of this age to the separation of wheat from 
tares; and the harvest of the Millennial age 
to the separation of sheep from goats. 

That the parable of the sheep and the goats 
refers to the Millennial age is clearly indicated 
in verses 31 and 32— "When the Son of man 
shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels 
with him, THEN shall he sit upon the throne of 
his glory, and before him shall be gathered all 
nations; and he shall separate them one from 
another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from 
the goats." As in the present age every act 
of those on trial (the Church) goes to make a 
part of that character which, in due time, will 
determine the final decision of the Judge in our 
case, so will it be with the world (the "nations") 
in the age to come. As in the present 
age the trial of the majority of the individual 



members of the Church ends, and the decision 
of their case is reached, long before the end of 
the age (2 Tim. 4:7,8), so under the Millennial 
reign the decision of some individual 
cases will be reached long before the end of 
the age (Isa. 65:20); but in both ages there is 
a harvest or general separation time in the end 
of the age. 

In the dawn of the Millennial age, after the 
"time of trouble," there will be a gathering of 
the living nations before Christ, and, in their 
appointed time and order, the dead of all nations 
shall be called to appear before the judgment 
seat of Christ— not to receive an immediate 
sentence, but to receive a fair and impartial 
trial, under the most favorable circumstances, 
the result of which trial will be a final 
sentence, as worthy or unworthy of everlasting 
life. 

The scene of this parable, then, is laid after 
the time of trouble and after the exaltation of 
the "little flock" to the throne, when the nations 
have been subdued, Satan bound (Rev. 20:2) 
and the authority of Christ's kingdom 
established. Ere this, the Bride of Christ will 
have been seated with him in his throne, and 

R1498 : page 54 

will have taken part in executing the judgments 
of the great day of wrath. Now the Son of Man 
appears (is made manifest) to the world "in his 
glory," and together Jesus and his Bride "shine 
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father." 
-Matt. 13:43. 

Here is the New Jerusalem as John saw it 
(Rev. 21), "that holy city [symbol of government] 
...coming down from God out of 
heaven." During all the time of trouble it 
was coming down, and now it has touched the 
earth. This is the stone cut out without hands 
(but by the power of God), and now it has become 
a great mountain (kingdom), and has 
filled the whole earth (Dan. 2:35), its coming 
having broken to pieces (Dan. 2:34,35) the 
evil kingdoms of the Prince of darkness. 

Here is that glorious city (government), prepared 
as a bride adorned for her husband (Rev. 21:2), 
and the nations are beginning to walk in 
the light of it. (Verse 24.) These may bring 
their glory and honor into it, but "there shall 
in no wise enter into it [or become a part of it] 
anything that defileth," etc. (Verse 27.) Here, 
from the midst of the throne, proceeds a pure 
river of water of life (truth unmixed with error), 
and the Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and 



take it freely. (Rev. 22:17.) Here begins 

the world's probation, the world's great judgment 

day— a thousand years. 

But even in this favored time of blessing and 
healing of the nations, when Satan is bound, 
evil restrained, mankind released from the 
grasp of death, and when the knowledge of 
the Lord fills the earth, two classes will be developed, 
which our Lord, in this parable, likens 
to sheep and goats. These, he tells us, he will 
separate. The sheep class— those who are meek, 
teachable and willing to be led, shall, during 
the age, be gathered at the Judge's right hand 
—symbol of his approval; but the goat class, 
self-willed and stubborn, always climbing on 
the rocks— seeking prominence and approval 
among men— and feeding on miserable refuse, 
while the sheep graze in the rich pastures of the 
truth furnished by the Good Shepherd, these 
are gathered to the Judge's left hand opposite 
the position of favor— as subjects of his disfavor 
and condemnation. 

In the end of the Millennial age, in the final 
adjustment of human affairs, Christ thus addresses 
his sheep: "Come, ye blessed,. ..inherit 
the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world." What kingdom? 
Was not the kingdom under the whole heavens 
given to the saints?— Dan. 7:22. 

Yes: as we have heretofore seen, a "little 
flock," "the saints," the overcoming "sheep" of 
the Gospel age, having followed the Lamb 
(Jesus) whithersoever he went, through evil and 
through good report, even to the sacrificing of 
the human life, with him have been exalted to 
the divine nature, and to the throne of the spiritual, 
unseen kingdom, and "He [the Christ, 
Head and body] must reign till he has put all 
enemies under his feet." (1 Cor. 15:25.) The 
saints shall reign with Christ a thousand years. 
-Rev. 20:6. 

Jesus calls believers of the Gospel age, who 
know and obey his voice, his sheep. But he 
says, "Other sheep I have which are not of 
this fold [referring to those who should become 
his followers in the Millennial age]: Them 
also I must lead [into truth and righteousness 
during that age];. ..and there shall be one 
fold and one shepherd." (John 10:16.) The 
Lord Jesus and the "little flock," the Bride, 
united as one, will be the Good Shepherd, who 
will lead mankind into the one fold of safety- 
harmony with God. 

This gradual work of separating sheep and 
goats will require all of the Millennial age 
for its accomplishment. During that age, each 



individual, as he comes gradually to a knowledge 
of God and his will, takes his place, by 
conforming or not conforming thereto, at the 
right hand of favor or the left hand of disfavor, 
according as he improves or misimproves the 
opportunities of that golden age. By the end 
of that age, all the world of mankind (not the 
present Church) will have arranged themselves, 
as shown in the parable, into two classes. As 
in nature sheep are far more numerous than 
goats, so we doubt not that with the perfect 
knowledge then possessed, the sheep company 
will far outnumber the goats. 

The end of that age is the end of the world's 
trial or judgment, and final disposition is made 
of the two classes. The goats, who have not 
developed the element of love— the law of God's 
being and kingdom— are counted not worthy 
of life, and must be destroyed; while the sheep, 
who will have developed God-likeness (love), 
and exhibited it in their characters, are to be 
installed as the joint-rulers of earth for future 
ages. 

The work of restitution will not be quite 
complete until the great mass of mankind, having 
been restored to the perfect condition, is 
re-invested with the dominion of earth as possessed 
by Adam before sin entered, as God had 
said— "After our likeness let them have dominion 
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl 
of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the 
earth, ...and over every living thing that 
moveth upon the earth"— a ruler over earth, 
like as God is ruler over all things. And the 
Psalmist expresses the same idea, saying, "Thou 

R1498 : page 55 

hast made man a little lower than the angels, 
and hast crowned him with glory and honor; 
thou madest him to have dominion over the 
works of thy hands." (Psa. 8:5-8.) The dominion 
is not to be over one another, for when 
the law of love controls human hearts, there 
will be no necessity for dominion over one 
another, though by mutual consent, prompted 
by love, regulations may be made among 
themselves for the common good and blessing 
of all. 

This, then, is the kingdom that has been in 
preparation for mankind from the foundation 
of the world. It was expedient that man should 
suffer six thousand years under the dominion 
of evil, to learn its inevitable results, misery 
and death, and in order by contrast to prove 
the justice, wisdom and goodness of God's law 



—love. Then it requires the seventh thousand 
years under the reign of Christ, to restore him 
from ruin and death, to the perfect condition, 
thereby fitting him to inherit the kingdom 
prepared for him from the foundation of the 
world. 

That kingdom in which all will be kings will 
really be a grand, universal republic, whose stability 
and blessed influence will be assured, by 
the perfection of its every citizen; a result now 
much desired but an impossibility. The kingdom 
of the saints during the Millennium will 
be, on the contrary, a Theocracy, which will 
rule the world (during the period of its imperfection 
and restoration) without regard to its 
consent or approval. 

But the righteous inquire why they are 
crowned with such glory, honor and dominion. 
And the Lord replies: I was hungry, and you 
fed me; thirsty, and you gave me drink; I 
was a stranger, and you took me in; naked, 
and you clothed me; I was sick, and you 
visited me; in prison, and you came unto me. 

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, 
Lord, when saw we thee hungry, and fed thee? 
or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw 
we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, 
and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, 
or in prison, and came unto thee? "And the 
King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I 
say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto 
one of the least of these my brethren, ye have 
done it unto me." 

Let us notice who these are that the Lord 
calls his brethren, and in what sense the evils 
here named may be true of them. We observe, 
first, that he is addressing all the sheep 
or the righteous class in the end of the Millennial 
age. Then all of that class will have had 
opportunity to minister to the necessities of the 
Lord's brethren. He calls the Church of the 
Gospel age his brethren (Matt. 12:49,50); but 
all of the sheep class then addressed will not 
have had opportunity to minister to these brethren. 
Millions of the sheep class will be of 
those who lived before the Gospel Church had 
an existence; others of them will have come 
to maturity during the Millennial age, after 
the Gospel Church has been exalted and no 
longer needs their ministry. 

The brethren of the Gospel Church, then, 
are not the only brethren of Christ. All who 
at that time will have been restored to perfection, 
will be recognized as sons of God— sons 
in the same sense that Adam was a son of God 
(Luke 3:38)— human sons. And all of God's 



sons, whether on the human, the angelic or 
the divine plane, are brethren. Our Lord's 
love for these, his brethren, is here expressed. 
As the world will now have opportunity to 
minister to those who are shortly to be the divine 
sons of God, and brethren of Christ, so 
they will have abundant opportunity during the 
age to come to minister to (each other) the 
human brethren. 

The dead nations when again brought into 
existence will need food and raiment and shelter. 
However great may have been their possessions 
in this life, death will have brought all 
to a common level: the infant and the man of 
maturer years, the millionaire and the pauper, 
the learned and the unlearned, the cultured 
and the ignorant and degraded; and all will 
have an abundant opportunity for the exercise 
of benevolence, and thus they will be privileged 
to be co-workers with God. We are here reminded 
of the illustration given in the case of 
Lazarus: Jesus only awakened him from death, 
and then permitted the rejoicing friends to 
loose him from his grave clothes and to clothe 
and feed him. 

Further, these are said to be "sick and in 
prison" (more properly, under ward or watch). 
The grave is the great prison where the millions 
of humanity have been held in unconscious 
captivity; but when released from the 
grave, the restoration to perfection is not to be 
an instantaneous work. Being not yet perfect, 
they may properly be termed sick and under 
ward. They are not dead, neither are they yet 
perfect; and any condition between those two 
is properly called sickness. And they will continue 
to be under watch or ward until made 
well— physically, mentally and morally perfect. 
During that time there will be abundant opportunity 
for mutual helpfulness, sympathy, instruction 
and encouragement. 

Since all mankind will not be raised at once, 
but gradually, during the thousand years, each 
new group will find an army of helpers in those 

R1498 : page 56 

who will have preceded it. The love and benevolence 

which men will then show to each 

other (the brethren of Christ) the King will count 

as shown to him. No great deeds are assigned 

as the ground for the honors and favors conferred 

upon the righteous: they have simply 

come into harmony with God's law— love— 

and proved it by their works. "Love is the 

fulfilling of the law" (Rom. 13:10), and "God 



is love." So, when man is restored again to 
the image of God— "very good"— man also will 
be a living expression of love. 

To the sheep it is said, "Inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of 
the world." But though God gave it to man 
at first, and designs restoring it to him when 
he has prepared him for the great trust, we are 
not to suppose that God intends man to rule 
it except as under or in harmony with his supreme 
law. "Thy will be done in earth as 
in heaven," must forever be the principle of 
government. 

Man thenceforth will rule his dominion in 
harmony with the law of heaven— delighting 
continually to do his will "in whose favor is 
life, and at whose right hand [condition of 
favor] there are pleasures forevermore." (Psa. 16:11.) 
Oh! who would not say, "Haste thee 
along, ages of glory," and give glory and honor 
to him whose loving plans are blossoming into 
such fulness of blessing. 

Then follows the message to those on the left 
—"Depart from me, ye cursed" (condemned)— 
condemned as unfit vessels for the glory and 
honor of life, who would not yield to the 
moulding and shaping influence of divine love. 
When these my brethren were hungry and 
thirsty, or naked, sick, and in prison, ye ministered 
not to their necessities, thus continually 
proving yourselves out of harmony with the 
heavenly city (kingdom); for "there shall in 
no case enter into it anything that defileth." 
The decision and sentence regarding this class 
is— "Depart from me into everlasting fire 
[symbol of destruction] prepared for the devil 
and his angels." Elsewhere (Heb. 2:14) we 
read in plain language that Christ "will destroy 
...him that had the power of death, 
that is, the devil." 

"And these [the goats] shall go away into 
everlasting [Greek, aionios— lasting] punishment, 
but the righteous into life eternal" [Greek, 
aionios— lasting.] The punishment is as lasting 
as the reward. Both are everlasting. 

EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. 



The everlastingness of the punishment being 
thus established, only one point is left open for 
discussion, namely, of what sort or kind will 
the punishment be? Take your Concordance 
and search out what saith the great Judge regarding 
the punishment of wilful sinners who 



despise and reject all his blessed provisions 
for them through Christ. What do you find? 
Does God there say— All sinners shall live in 
torture forever? We do not find a single text 
where life in any condition is promised to that 
class. 

God's declarations assure us that ultimately 
he will have a clean universe, free from the 
blight of sin and sinners, when the plan of redemption 
has separated the sheep from the goats. 

But while we do not find one verse of the 
Bible to say that this class can have life, in 
torment or in any other condition, we do find 
hosts of passages teaching the reverse. Of these 
we give a few merely as samples— "The wages 
of sin is death." (Rom. 6:23.) "The soul that 
sinneth, it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4,20.) "All 
the wicked will God destroy." (Psa. 145:20.) 
The wicked shall "perish." (Psa. 37:20.) 
Thus God has told us plainly of what sort the 
everlasting punishment of the wicked shall be 
—that it will be death, destruction. 

The false ideas of God's plan of dealing with 
the incorrigible, taught us from our cradles 
ever since the great "falling away" which 
culminated in Papacy, are alone responsible 
for the view generally held (that the punishment 
provided for wilful sinners is a life of torture) 
in the face of the many clear statements 
of God's Word that their punishment is to be 
death. Hear Paul state very explicitly what 
the punishment is to be. Speaking of the same 
Millennial Day, and of the same class, who, despite 
all the favorable opportunities and the 
fulness of knowledge then, will not come into 
harmony with Christ, and hence will "know 
not God," and obey not, he says— "Who shall 
be punished." Ah, yes! but how punished? 
He tells us how: They "shall be punished 
with everlasting destruction from the presence 
of the Lord and from the glory of his power." 
-2 Thes. 1:9. 

Thus the meaning and reasonableness of this 
statement concerning everlasting punishment 
are readily seen when looked at from the correct 
standpoint. The fire of the parable, by 
which the punishment (destruction) is to be accomplished, 
will not be literal fire, for the 
"fire" is as much a symbol as the "sheep" 
and the "goats" are symbols. Fire here, as elsewhere, 
symbolizes destruction, and not in any 
sense preservation. 

We might well leave this subject here, and 
consider that we have fully shown that the 
everlasting punishment of the goat class will 



R1498 : page 57 

be destruction; but we would direct attention 

to one other point which clinches the truth 

upon this subject. We refer to the Greek 

word kolasin, translated "punishment" in verse 46. 

Its signification is to cut off, or prune, or 

lop off, as in the pruning of trees; and a secondary 

meaning is to restrain. Illustrations 

of the use of kolasin can easily be had from 

Greek classical writings. The Greek word for 

"torment" is basinos, a word totally unrelated 

to the word kolasin. 

Kolasin, the word used in Matt. 25:46, occurs 
in but one other place in the Bible, viz., 1 John 4:18, 
where it is improperly rendered "torment" 
in the common version, whereas it 
should read, "Fear hath restraint." Those 
who possess a copy of Young's Analytical Concordance 
will see from it that he (a ripe scholar 
and a Presbyterian) gives as the definition of 
the word kolasis (page 995) "pruning, restraining, 
restraint." And the author of the Emphatic 
Diaglott, that valuable translation of 
the New Testament, after translating kolasin 
in Matt. 25:46 by the words "cutting off," says 
in a foot note: 

"The common version and many modern 
ones render kolasin aionion 'everlasting punishment,' 
conveying the idea, as generally interpreted, 
of basinos, torment. Kolasin in its 
various forms occurs in only three other places 
in the New Testament: --Acts 4:21; 2 Pet. 2:9; 
1 John 4:18. It is derived from kolazoo, which 
signifies, 1. To cut off; as lopping off branches 
of trees, to prune. 2. To restrain, to repress. 
The Greeks write— 'The charioteer restrains 
[kalazei] his fiery steeds.' 3. To chastise, to 
punish. To cut off an individual from life, or 
from society, or even to restrain, is esteemed 
as a punishment; hence has arisen this third or 
metaphorical use of the word. The primary 
signification has been adopted [in the Diaglott], 
because it agrees better with the second member 
of the sentence, thus preserving the force 
and beauty of the antithesis. The righteous 
go to life, the wicked to the cutting off from 
life, death.-2 Thes. 1:9." 

Now consider carefully the text, and note 
the antithesis or contrast shown between the 
reward of the sheep and that of the goats, 
which the correct idea of kolasin gives— the 
one class goes into everlasting life, while the 
other is everlastingly cut off from life— forever 
restrained in death. And this exactly agrees 
with what the Scriptures everywhere else declare 



concerning the wages or penalty of wilful 
sin. 

Consider for a moment the words of verse 41: 
"Depart from me, ye cursed [once redeemed 
by Christ from the Adamic curse or 
condemnation to death, but now condemned 
or cursed, as worthy of second death, by the 
one who redeemed them from the first curse], 
into everlasting fire [symbol of everlasting destruction], 
prepared for the devil and his messengers" 
[servants]. 

Remember that this is the final sentence at 
the close of the final trial— at the close of the 
Millennium. And none will then be servants 
of Satan ignorantly or unwillingly, as so many 
now are; for the great Deliverer, Christ, grants 
a Jubilee, and sets all free from the weaknesses 
and besetments within and without, which now 
prevail as a result of Adam's fall— from which 
he has redeemed all by his own precious blood. 
These "goats" who love evil and serve Satan 
are the messengers ("angels") of Satan. For 
these and Satan, and for no others, God has 
prepared the everlasting destruction— the second 
death. Fire will come from God out of 
heaven and consume them. Consuming fire and 
devouring fire all can appreciate, unless their 
eyes are holden by false doctrine and prejudice. 
No one ever knew of a preserving fire; and as 
fire never preserves but always consumes, God 
uses it as a symbol of utter destruction.— 
Rev. 20:9. 

THE LAKE OF FIRE AND BRIMSTONE, WHICH 
IS THE SECOND DEATH. 

-REV. 21:8.- 

Several prophetic pen pictures of the Millennial 
age and its work, in chapters 20 and 2 1 of Revelation, 
clearly show the object and result 
of that age of trial, in harmony with the 
remainder of the Scriptures as noted in the preceding 
articles. 

Chapter 20, verses 2,4,11, with verses 1,2,10,11 of chapter 21, 
show the beginning of 
the age of judgment, and the restraining of 
blinding errors and misleading systems. The 
beast and the false prophet are the chief symbols, 
and represent organizations or systems of 
error which we will not here pause to explain. 
(The Lord willing, we will do so in some future 
volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN.) This judgment 
against the "thrones" of the present time, and 
against "the beast and the false prophet" 
systems, follows speedily upon the introduction 



of this Millennial judgment reign. The thrones 
of present dominion of earth will be "cast 
down," and the dominion transferred to the 
great Prophet and Judge, "whose right it is." 
(Compare Dan. 7:9,14,22; Ezek. 21:27.) And 
the systems of error will be speedily judged 
worthy of destruction, the lake of fire, the second 
death.-Rev. 19:20. 

Thus the second destruction (or death) begins 
quite early in the new judgment— with the 

R1498 : page 58 

systems of error. But it does not reach men as 
individuals until they have first had full trial, 
with full opportunity to choose life and live forever. 
Chapters 20:12,13 and 21:3-7 indicate 
the blessed, favorable trial in which all, both 
dead and living (except the Church, who, with 
Jesus Christ, are kings, priests, joint-heirs and 
judges), will be brought to a full knowledge of 
the truth, relieved from sorrow and pain and 
freed from every blinding error and prejudice, 
and tried "according to their works." 

The grand outcome of that trial will be a 
clean Universe. As the Revelator expresses 
it, "Every creature which is in heaven and on 
the earth. ..heard I saying, Blessing and 
honor and glory and power be unto him that 
sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb 
forever." But this result will be accomplished 
in harmony with all God's dealings past and 
present, which have always recognized man's 
freedom of will to choose good or evil, life or 
death. 

We cannot doubt that when, in the close of 
the Millennial age, God will again for a "little 
season" permit Evil to triumph, in order thereby 
to test his creatures (who will by that time 
have become thoroughly acquainted with both 
good and evil and the consequences of each, 
and have had his justice fully demonstrated to 
them), that those who finally prefer and choose 
evil will be cut off— destroyed. Thus God will 
for all eternity remove all who do not love 
righteousness and hate iniquity. 

We read, regarding that testing, that Satan 
will endeavor to lead astray all mankind, whose 
numbers will then be as the sand of the sea for 
multitude; but that many of them will choose 
evil and disobedience, with past experience before 
them, and unhampered by present weaknesses 
and blinding influences, we do not suppose. 
However, when God does not tell us 
either the number or the proportion of those 
found worthy of life, and those judged worthy of 



death (the second death), we may not dogmatize. 
Of one thing we may be confident, God 
willeth not the death of the wicked, but would 
that all should turn to him and live; and no 
one will be destroyed in that "lake of fire and 
brimstone" (figurative of utter destruction, as 
gehenna) who is worthy of life, whose living 
longer would be a blessing to himself or to 
others in harmony with righteousness. 

That utter and hopeless destruction is intended 
only for wilful evil doers, who, like 
Satan, in pride of heart and rebellion against 
God, will love and do evil notwithstanding the 
manifestations of God's disapproval, and notwithstanding 
their experience with its penalties. 
Seemingly the goodness and love of God in 
the provision of a ransom, a restitution, and 
another opportunity of life for man, instead of 
leading these to an abhorrence of sin, will lead 
them to suppose that God is too loving to cut 
them off in the second death, or that if he did so 
he would give them other and yet other future 
opportunities. Building thus upon a supposed 
weakness in the divine character, these may be 
led to try to take advantage of the grace (favor) 
of God, and to use it as a license for wilful sin. 
But they shall go no further, for their folly 
shall be manifest. Their utter destruction will 
prove to the righteous the harmony and perfect 
balance of Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power 
in the Divine Ruler. Such are called the angels 
(messengers, followers, servants) of Satan. And 
for such, as well as for Satan, the utter destruction 
(the second death) is prepared by the 
wise, loving and just Creator. And so, in the 
parable of the sheep and the goats, the latter 
are called messengers or servants of Satan. 

The true character of the goat class is portrayed 
in Rev. 21:8. "The fearful and unbelieving 
[who will not trust God], the abominable, 
murderers [brother haters], whoremongers, 
sorcerers, idolaters [such as misappropriate 
and misuse divine favors, who give to self 
or any other creature or thing that service 
and honor which belong to God], and all 
liars"— "whosoever loveth and maketh a lie" 
[in a word, all who do not love the truth and 
seek it, and at any cost defend and hold it] 
—"shall have their part in the lake which 
burneth with fire and brimstone [gehenna, symbol 
of utter destruction], which is the Second 
Death." Such company would be repulsive to 
any honest, upright being. It is hard to tolerate 
them now, when we can sympathize 
with them, knowing that such dispositions are 
now in great measure the result of inherited 



weakness of the flesh. We are moved to a 

measure of sympathy by the remembrance that 

in our own cases, often, when we would do 

good, evil is present with us. But in the close 

of the second Judgment, when the Lord, the 

righteous Judge, shall have given every advantage 

and opportunity of knowledge and 

ability, this class will be an abhorrence and detestation 

to all in harmony with the King of 

Glory. And we shall rejoice when, the trial 

being ended, the gift of life, of which these 

shall have proved themselves unworthy, shall 

be taken from them, and the corrupters of the 

earth, and all their work and influence, shall 

be destroyed. 

Rev. 20:9 tells of the destruction of those 
who join with Satan in the last rebellion; and 
verse 15 tells of that same destruction in other 
words, using the symbol "lake of fire." They 

R1498 : page 59 

are devoured or consumed in fire. This being 
the case, verse 10 cannot refer to these human 
beings. Hence the question narrows down to 
this, Will Satan and a false prophet and a beast 
be tortured forever? and does this verse so teach? 

We answer in God's own words, "All the 
wicked will he destroy." Concerning Satan, 
the arch enemy of God and men, God expressly 
advises us that he will be destroyed, 
and not preserved in any sense or condition. 
SeeHeb. 2:14. 

The beast and false prophet systems, which 
during the Gospel age have deceived and led 
astray, will be cast into a great, consuming 
trouble in the close of this Gospel age. The 
torment of those systems will be aionion, i.e., 
LASTING. It will continue as long as they last, 
until they are utterly consumed. So at the 
end of the Millennial age the system of error 
which will then manifest and lead to destruction 
the "goats" will also be consumed. That deceiving 
system (not specified as to kind, but 
merely called Satan, after its instigator) will 
be cast into the same sort of trouble and destruction, 
in the end of the Millennial age, as 
the beast and false prophet systems are now 
being cast into, in the end of the Gospel age. 

Rev. 19:3, speaking of one of these systems, 
says, "Her smoke rose up forever and ever." 
That is to say, the remembrance of the destruction 
of these systems of deception and error 
will be lasting, the lesson will never be forgotten 
—as smoke, which continues to ascend 
after a destructive fire, is a testimony that the 



fire has done its work. 

Of Rev. 14:9-11 we remark, incidentally, 
that all will at once concede that if a literal 
worshiping of a beast and his image were meant 
in verse 9, then few if any in civilized lands 
are liable to the penalty of verse 11; and if 
the beast and his image and worship and wine 
and cup are symbols, so also are the torments 
and smoke and fire and brimstone. 

Rev. 20:14 says: "And death and hell 
[hades— the tomb] were cast into the lake of 
fire [destruction]. This is the second death, 
the lake of fire."-Sinaitic MS. 

"Death and hell" [hades] is used several 
times in this book as expressive of the first 
death. Hades is the state or condition of death, 
and is sometimes translated the grave. It is 
called a great prison house, because those who 
enter it, though actually extinct, are reckoned 
as not extinct, but merely confined for a time, 
and to be brought forth to life, liberty and a 
new trial by him who ransomed them from the 
penalty of the first trial. It is in view of God's 
purpose and promise of a restitution of all, and 
a second trial, that the tomb is spoken of as a 
great "prison house," in which the captives 
of death (the Adamic or first death) await deliverance. 
Though dissolved in death, the 
identity of each being is preserved in the mind 
and power of God, and will be reproduced in 
due time by resurrection power. Hades, the 
prison, the tomb, is referred to by the prophets, 
the Master himself, and the apostles. (Hos. 13:14; 
Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:18; John 5:28; 1 Cor. 15:55.) 
The grave is really a memorial of 
hope; for we would not speak of it as a prison 
house were it not for our hopes of resurrection. 
If we believed that death ended existence forever, 
all hope of the release of the dead would 
vanish, and we would not think of them as in 
prison, nor indicate our hope by a mound. 

Apply this thought to the verse under consideration, 
and it implies this:— The first death 
and the hopes of resurrection, which, by God's 
favor, were attached to it, will pass away or be 
utterly destroyed in the second death. From 
that time forth there will be no such thing as 
death under the first sentence, because of 
Adam's sin, and a hope of resurrection from it. 
That will all have been accomplished: every 
prisoner will have been set free from all the 
guilt, condemnation and penalty of the first 
trial; and the sentence of the second trial, 
whether to second life or second death, will 
have fully swallowed up and destroyed the penalty 
of the first sentence, as well as the hopes 



which attached to it. Hades is never associated 

with the second death, because those 

who go into the second death are in no sense 

"prisoners of hope;" they are utterly destroyed, 

extinct, without hope of any deliverance by resurrection. 

Hence the propriety of hades being 

destroyed. 

The destruction of the first death and hades 
commences with the beginning of the Millennial 
reign and continues to its close. It is a 
gradual process of casting into destruction. 
This is in harmony with Paul's explanation (1 Cor. 15:54,55) 
of Isaiah's prophecy, "Then 
[when the little flock, "we," have been changed 
to the full divine nature and likeness and 
begun to reign and bless the world— then] shall 
be brought to pass the saying that is written 
[Isa. 25:6-8], 'He will destroy [cast into destruction, 
or in symbol "the lake of fire"] 
in this mountain [symbol of the "Kingdom 
of God" or the "New Jerusalem"] the face 
of the covering cast over all people [death] and 
the vail [ignorance] that is spread over all 
nations. He will swallow up [the first] death 
victoriously.'" 

So, then, the casting of death and the grave 
into destruction during the Millennial age is a 
part of the second destruction which will include 

R1498 : page 60 

every improper, injurious and useless 
thing. -Isa. 11:9; Psa. 101:5-8. But the second 
death, the sentence of that second trial, 
will be final: it will never be destroyed. And 
let all the lovers of righteousness say, Amen; 
for to destroy the second death, to remove the 
sentence of the second trial, would be to let 
loose again all the evil systems and Satan, and 
all who love and practice wrong and deception, 
and dishonor the Lord, to oppose, offend 
and endeavor to overthrow those who love and 
desire to serve him and enjoy his favor. We 
rejoice that there is no danger of this, but that 
divine justice unites with divine wisdom, love 
and power to bring in everlasting righteousness 
on a permanent basis. 

TURNED INTO HELL. 



"The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations 
that forget God. "-Psa. 9:17. 

This statement of the Lord recorded by the 



Psalmist we find without any qualification 
whatever, and we must accept it as a positive 
fact. If the claims of "Orthodoxy" were 
true this would be indeed a fearful thought. 

But let us substitute the true meaning of the 
word sheol, and our text will read: "The 
wicked shall be turned into the condition of 
death, and all the nations that forget God." 
This we believe; but next, Who are the wicked? 
In one sense all men are wicked, in that all are 
violators of God's law; but in the fullest sense 
the wicked are those who, with full knowledge 
of the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and the 
remedy provided for their recovery from its 
baneful effects, wilfully persist in sin and refuse 
the remedy. 

As yet few— only consecrated believers- 
have come to a knowledge of God. The world 
knows him not, and the nations cannot forget 
God, until they are first brought to a knowledge 
of him. The consecrated have been enlightened, 
led of the Spirit through faith to 
understand the deep and hidden things of 
God, which reveal the glory of God's character, 
but which, though expressed in his Word, 
appear only as foolishness to the world. 

As we have hitherto seen, this will not be so 
in the age to come, for then "The earth shall 
be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the 
waters cover the sea." (Isa. 11:9.) Much 
that we now receive by faith will then be demonstrated 
to the world by sight. When he who 
has ransomed man from the power of the grave 
(Hos. 13:14) begins to gather his purchased 
possessions back from the prison-house of death 
(Isa. 61:1), when the sleepers are awakened 
under the genial rays of the Sun of Righteousness, 
they will not be slow to realize the truth 
of the hitherto seemingly idle tale, that "Jesus 
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for 
every man." 

We have also seen that the gradual ascent 
of the King's Highway of Holiness in that age 
will be easy and possible to all, because all 
the stones— stumbling-blocks, errors, etc.— will 
have been gathered out, and straight paths 
made for their feet. It is in that age that this 
text applies. Those who ignore the favoring 
circumstances of that age, and will not be obedient 
to the righteous Judge or Ruler— Christ 
—will truly be the wicked. And every loyal 
subject of the Kingdom of God will approve 
the righteous judgment which turns such a one 
again into sheol— the condition of death. Such 
a one would be unworthy of life; and were he 
permitted to live, his life would be a curse to 



himself and to the rest of mankind, and a 
blemish on the work of God. 

This will be the second death, from which 
there will be no resurrection. Having been 
ransomed from the first or Adamic death (sheol) 
by the sacrifice of Christ, if they die again on 
account of their own sin, "there remaineth 
no more sacrifice for sin." (Heb. 10:26.) 
"Christ dieth no more; death hath no more 
dominion over him." (Rom. 6:9.) The second 
death should be dreaded and shunned by 
all, since it is to be the final end of existence 
to all those deemed unworthy of life. But in 
it there can be no suffering. Like the first 
death, it is the extinction of life. 

It is because mankind had, through sin, become 
subject to death (sheol, hades) that Christ 
Jesus came to deliver us and save us from death. 
For this purpose Christ was manifested, that 
he might destroy death. (1 John 3:8; Heb. 2:14.) 
Death is a cessation of existence, the 
absence of LIFE. There is no difference between 
the condition in the first and second 
deaths, but there is hope of a release from the 
first, while from the second there will be no 
release, no return to life. The first death sentence 
passed upon all on account of Adam's 
sin, while the second death can be incurred 
only by wilful, individual sin. 

That the application of our text belongs to 
the coming age is evident, for both saints and 
sinners go into sheol or hades now, and this 
scripture indicates that, in the time when it 
applies, only the wicked shall go there. And 
the nations that forget God must be nations 
that have known him, else they could not forget 
him; and never yet have the nations been 
brought to that knowledge, nor will they until 
the coming time, when the knowledge of the 
Lord shall fill the whole earth, and none shall 

R1498 : page 61 

need to say unto his neighbor, Know thou the 
Lord, for all shall know him, from the least to 
the greatest of them. (Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34.) 
In further proof of this, we find that the Hebrew 
word shub, which in our text is translated 
"turned," signifies turned back, as to a previous 
place or condition. Those referred to 
in this text have been either in sheol or liable 
to enter it, but, being redeemed by the precious 
blood of Christ, will be brought out of 
sheol. If then they are wicked, they, and all 
who forget God, shall be turned back to sheol. 



CHOOSE LIFE THAT YE MAY LIVE. 



"I have set before thee this day life and good, death 
and evil." "I have set before you life and death, blessing 
and cursing; therefore choose life, that both thou and 
thy seed may live."— Deut. 30:15,19. 

We come now to the consideration of other 
Scripture statements in harmony with the conclusions 
set forth in the preceding articles. 

The words here quoted are from Moses to 
Israel. To appreciate them we must remember 
that Israel as a people, and all their covenants, 
sacrifices, etc., had a typical significance. 

God knew that they could not obtain life by 
keeping the Law, no matter how much they 
would choose to do so, because they, like all 
others of the fallen race, were weak, depraved, 
through the effect of the sour grape of sin 
which Adam had eaten, and which his children 
had continued to eat. (Jer. 31:29.) Thus, 
as Paul declares, the Law given to Israel could 
not give them life because of the weaknesses or 
depravity of their fallen nature.— Rom. 8:3; 
Heb. 7:19; 10:1-10. 

Nevertheless, God foresaw a benefit to them 
from even an unsuccessful attempt to live perfectly, 
namely, that it would develop them, as 
well as show them the need of the better sacrifice, 
the ransom which our Lord Jesus gave, 
and a greater deliverer than Moses. And with 
all this their trial furnished a pattern or shadow 
of the great second trial insured to the whole 
world (which Israel typified) and secured by 
the better sacrifices for sin— which were there 
prefigured, to be accomplished by the great 
prophet of whom Moses was but a type. 

Thus seeing that the trial for life or death 
presented to Israel was but typical of the great 
second trial and its issues of life and death- 
second (or restored) life and second death- 
may help some to see that the great thousand-year-day 
of trial, of which our Lord Jesus has 
been appointed the Judge, contains the two issues, 
life and death. All will then be called 
upon to decide, under that most favorable opportunity, 
and a choice must be made; and 
the verdict in the end will be in harmony with 
the choice expressed by the conduct of each during 
that age of trial. 

The second trial, its sentence and its result 
are also shown in the words of Moses quoted 
by Peter (Acts 3:22,23): "A Prophet shall 
the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 



brethren, like unto me. Him shall ye hear in 
all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. 
And it shall come to pass that every soul [being] 
which will not hear [obey] that Prophet 
[and thus choose life] shall be destroyed from 
among the people." In few words this draws 
our attention to the world's second trial, yet 
future. It shows the great Prophet or Teacher 
raised up by God to give a new judgment or 
trial to the condemned race which he has redeemed 
from the first condemnation. It shows, 
too, the conditions of the second trial to be 
righteous obedience, and that with the close 
of that trial some will be adjudged worthy of 
the second or restored life, and some worthy 
of destruction— second death. 

Our Lord Jesus, having redeemed all by his 
perfect and precious sacrifice, is the Head of 
this great Prophet; and during the Gospel age 
God has been selecting the members of his 
body, the little flock, who with Christ Jesus 
shall be God's agents in judging the world. 
Together they will be that Great Prophet or 
Teacher promised. "Do ye not know that 
the saints shall judge the world?"— 1 Cor. 6:2. 

The Lord briefly presents the same matter 
in Matt. 25:31-46. There he shows the trial 
of the world (not the Church, which as members 
of his body are with him in glory during 
that Millennial reign— judging, ruling and blessing 
the world), and, concluding the illustration 
of the second trial, he also shows the same 
two classes noted above, and their opposite rewards 
—the one class, who obey and come into 
harmony with his arrangement, enter fully into 
the blessing of the second life, and are therefore 
called "blessed." The other class, who 
with every opportunity obey not, experience 
the second condemnation of death, the "second 
death," and are thus "cursed" or condemned 
again. 

The first trial was of mankind only, and hence 
its penalty or curse, the first death, was only 
upon man. But the second trial is to be much 
more comprehensive. It will not only be the 
trial of fallen and imperfect mankind, but it 
will include every other thing and principle and 
being out of harmony with Jehovah. "God 
will bring every work into judgment, with every 
secret thing." 

The "Judgment to come" will include the 
judgment to condemnation of all false systems 

R1498 : page 62 

—civil, social and religious. These will be 



judged, condemned and banished early in that 
Millennial day, the light of truth causing them 
to come into disrepute and finally to flee away. 
This judgment comes first in order, that the 
trial of man may proceed unhindered by error, 
prejudice, etc. It will include also the trial 
of "the angels which sinned"— those angels 
"which kept not their first estate" of purity 
and obedience to God. Thus it is written by 
the Apostle of the members of the body of the 
great Prophet and High Priest who is to be 
Judge of all— "Know ye not that the saints 
shall judge angels?"— 1 Cor. 6:3. 

This being the case, the condemnation of the 
second trial (destruction, second death) will 
cover a wider range of offenders than the penalty 
or curse for failure under the first trial. 
In a word, the second destruction at the close 
of the second trial is an utter destruction of 
every being and every thing which will not glorify 
God and be of use and blessing to his general 
creation. Thus the second death will be 
to the perfect future age what gehenna, the 
Valley of Hinnom, was to the typical city and 
kingdom of Israel. It will destroy and consume 
totally whatever is cast into it. 

Thus seen, the second death does not mean 
simply to die or be destroyed a second time; for 
some things will be destroyed in the "second 
death" which were never before destroyed; for 
instance, Satan never yet died, so it could not 
mean death a second time to him. So, too, some 
of the systems of error which will be destroyed 
in that gehenna, which is the second death, were 
never before destroyed. Hence this second 
death in which they will be destroyed cannot 
be considered as their destruction a second time. 
The second death, or destruction, is the name 
of the destruction which will come upon every 
evil thing as the result or verdict of the second 
judgment, the "judgment to come." 



page 62 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1498 : page 62 

REBUILDING THE WALL OF JERUSALEM. 



I. QUAR., LESSON VIII., FEB. 19th, NEH. 4:9-23. 

Golden Text— "We made our prayer unto God, and 
set a watch against them."— Neh. 4:9. 

In our last lesson we saw the earnestness 
of Nehemiah, and noted his appeal to the 
right quarter for guidance and help. His 
appeal to Artaxerxes was blessed of the 
Lord— his prayer was answered. He was 
granted permission to go to Jerusalem, and 
become its Governor, with authority to act 
in the name of the Persian monarch. Upon 
his arrival at Jerusalem his first work was to 
reconnoiter the walls of the city and lay out 
a plan for rebuilding them. He had awakened 
the zeal of all the people, and the work 
of rebuilding the wall was well advanced 
at the point where this lesson begins. The 
jealousy of the neighboring rulers was awakened 
by this activity, and they had come 
against Jerusalem to attack it and spoil and 
stop the work of repairs, fearing that, after 
all, it might succeed. This compelled Nehemiah 
and those who co-operated with him to 
divide their attention between building and 
defending. Their opponents were strengthened 
by "false brethren," Jews from the surrounding 
country whose interest and sympathies 
were with these other peoples, who 
sought all they could to discourage the workers 
and to stop the work. But watching and 
praying and working they succeeded. 

This lesson seems to enforce and exemplify 
the Apostle's description of a true 
Christian course— "Not slothful in business, 
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord." It 
would be valuable to many of God's people 
to-day, if it led them to resolve that they, 
like Nehemiah, would henceforth do with 
their might what their hands find to do. 

The building of the wall, the opposition 
of enemies and relatives and so-called friends, 
and the necessity for fighting as well as 
building, furnish a good illustration of the 
experience of all who turn from sin to righteousness. 
They find the gates and fortresses 
of their nature weak and broken down. 



And the moment they start to repair and 
build up good character they find enemies 
within and without to hinder. Persecution 
and ridicule will first be used (as in the above 
case) and if these fail to overthrow the good 
resolutions force will be employed. There 
is no way of avoiding a battle if you would 
proceed with your character-building. Each 
must at least do as did this band— i.e., put on 
the armor and watch and pray and build. 

R1498 : page 63 

READING THE LAW. 



I. QUAR., LESSON IX., FEB. 26th, NEH. 8:1-12. 

Golden Text— "Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold 
wondrous things out of thy Law."— Psa. 119:18. 

By the Law here mentioned, the writings 
of Moses are meant. The Law Covenant was 
made with Israelites at Sinai, and the basis 
of it was in the Ten Commandments engraved 
upon the two tables of stone, which were 
handed down to them. As heretofore shown, 
that was not the fullest possible statement 
of the divine will, but a provisional arrangement, 
adapted as much as possible to Israel's 
degraded condition. It was a statement to 
the house of servants in terms which they 
could best appreciate. But when the time 
came to express the divine law to the house 
of sons, "his own house," our Lord expressed 
the matter not only more concisely but more 
exactly, in the perfect law of love. 

As the Israelites returned from Babylon 
were blessed by the reading and understanding 
of "Moses' Law," much more those who 
are now returning to the Lord, out of bondage 
to "Babylon the Great, the mother of 
harlots" (Rev. 17:1-6), are being greatly 
blessed by a fuller appreciation of the divine 
law, Love, granted to the house of sons. 
They are learning that God's Law is of the 
essence of his own nature, and that his dealings 
with his creatures are on the lines of that 
law; for God is love, and love worketh no 
ill to his neighbor. And, searching the entire 
Word of God, which in a larger sense 
is God's Law, his faithful followers learn 
that God's plans as therein stated are all plans 
of love and justice— love to those who love 
righteousness, and a just recompense of everlasting 



destruction in the second death for all 

others,— and a full provision for all to come 

to this second trial for life, through Christ, 

our Lord, who redeemed all from the condemnation 

of Adam, the result of the first trial. 

-1 Cor. 15:21,22. 

R1498 : page 63 

KEEPING THE SABBATH. 



I. QUAR., LESSON X., MAR. 5th, NEH. 13:15-22. 

Golden Text— "Remember the Sabbath day, to keep 
itholy."-Exod. 20:8. 

While from this scrap of history we learn 
of the worthy zeal of Nehemiah for the observance 
of the Sabbath day by Israel, in accordance 
with the law of Moses— the provisional 
statement of the law of God— it is 
necessary to remember that we are living in 
a different dispensation. The Jewish or Law 
Covenant having passed away (Col. 2:14), 
we are now living under the provisions of 
the "New Covenant"— a covenant of life, 
not through the keeping of the Mosaic law, 
but through faith in Christ, whose righteousness 
is imputed to us by faith.— Rom. 3:20-26. 

This "New Covenant," unlike the Law 
Covenant, does not stipulate that in order 
to prove ourselves worthy of everlasting life 
we shall not kill, nor steal, nor bear false 
witness, nor that we must keep the seventh 
day as a Sabbath or day of rest from labor, 
etc., etc. But it does stipulate that, while 
we humbly trust in the provisions of the New 
Covenant for our justification through the 
precious blood of Christ, we must follow 
after "the law of the spirit of life"— the law 
of Love— supreme love to God, and love to 
the neighbor as to self. (John 15:12-14; 
1 John 3:23,24; Rom. 8:2; Jas. 2:8; Gal. 6:2; 
5:14; Heb. 8:10; 10:16; Jas. 1:25.) 
According to this New Covenant, all who, accepting 
of the redemption provided through 
Christ, have a disposition or spirit in harmony 
with God's perfect law of love are 
reckoned of God to be worthy of life, regardless 
of the inability of their fallen, imperfect 
human nature to fully express that 
spirit or disposition. This New Covenant, 
with these gracious and merciful provisions 
for the weaknesses of our flesh, and this benevolent 



discernment of the willingness of 

our spirits to conform fully to the perfect 

will or law of God, is secured and made possible 

by the fact that Christ died for us, to 

liberate us from the curse of the law, Jews 

being set free from the condemnation resulting 

from failure to obey the law given 

by Moses, others being released by the same 

sacrifice from the condemnation inherited 

through Adam, the penalty of the original 

sin against God's law or command in Eden. 

And our Lord's resurrection became our assurance 

of the acceptableness of his sacrifice, 

and that in due time he will be the Deliverer 

of all that obey him, from the bondage of sin 

as well as from death, its penalty. 

The law of love is not given to all the 
world now, but merely to those who enter 

R1499 : page 63 

the bonds and cover of the New Covenant: 
just as the Mosaic Law Covenant was not 
upon all the world, but merely upon those 
who came under that Covenant— Israel after 
the flesh. Strictly speaking, the world is under 
no law except that of their own consciences 
—even though the light of conscience 
be greater in some and less in others. Since 

R1499 : page 64 

the world failed (representatively— in Adam's 
failure to obey the supreme law of Love 
to God, which implied obedience) it has been 
"without God and without hope" (Eph. 2:12), 
and without any law except what remained 
of the originally perfect law of nature, 
—conscience. 

While the New Covenant, which went into 
force after being sealed with the precious 
blood of Christ, was declared to be for ALL, 
it really applies only to those who have come 
under it, by knowledge of, faith in, and obedience 
to it and its Mediator,— Christ Jesus, 
our Lord. Such alone are under the Law 
of the New Covenant— Love. And to all 
such it is as useless to impose the Sabbath of 
the Law of Moses as to warn them not to 
blaspheme God's name, nor to worship other 
gods, nor to kill, steal, bear false-witness, etc. 
If they are under the New Covenant nothing 
so gross will apply to them: the only law 
which will reach their case will be the finer 
requirements of the Law of Love; and no 
Sabbath of mere cessation from labor will 



be real rest to them, but rather the rest of 
faith in Christ's finished work of redemption 
and coming work of rescue. Such, under 
the terms of the New Covenant, may do 
any work of service for God or men on any 
day of the week; and such would be prohibited 
from any violation of its law of Love 
on any day. The only laws governing those 
under the New Covenant, on the question 
of abstinence from good works on any day, 
would be the civil laws of the world. And 
these laws are peculiarly favorable to any 
good works of necessity or mercy or worship. 
In any case we are to "be subject to 
the powers that be" in all matters which do 
not conflict with the law of the New Covenant 
—Love. 

The Law of Love is the real law of God. 
(Rom. 13:10.) It was this law or principle 
that was originally written in the perfect 
nature of the first perfect man, when he was 
created in God's likeness and image. The 
Mosaic Law Covenant, with all its forms and 
ceremonies— its typical sacrifices, its feasts 
and its new moons and sabbath days— has 
passed away: no one is longer under its dominion. 
Therefore, says the Apostle Paul, 
"Let no man judge you in meat, or in drink, 
or in respect of a holy day, or of the new 
moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a 
shadow of things to come."— Col. 2:16,17. 

Thus we are taught to consider the Jewish 
Sabbath as typical of some higher blessing, 
realized during the Gospel dispensation; 
and the next question is, What did it foreshadow? 
The term "Sabbath" signifies 
rest, and the fourth commandment in the 
Law given by Moses was that this day of 
rest shall be kept holy unto the Lord. And 
as such it beautifully prefigured the worshipful 
rest of faith, and freedom from the 
bondage of Satan and sin, into which 
all believers come, on entering the New 
Covenant. 

This antitype is not a rest of one day out 
of seven, but a continual rest, to be enjoyed 
every day; and the fact of the observance 
of this rest among the Jews on the seventh 
day, after the six days of labor, is further 
typical of the fact that the fulness of the 
antitype will not be realized until the six 
thousand-year-days of evil and toil under 
the curse of sin are ended and the seventh 
or Millennial day has begun. 

When the early Church began to realize 
its freedom from the Law Covenant, gradually 



the seventh-day Sabbath ceased to be 

observed, and the first day of the week began 

to be observed; not as a Sabbath or 

special rest day, but as a day of worship and 

praise, commemorative of our Lord's resurrection 

and of the new and blessed hopes 

inspired by it. It was not regarded by them 

as taking the place of the Jewish Sabbath, 

and was never observed with that scrupulous 

exactness which was required for the 

Seventh day under the Jewish dispensation. 

The restoration of the proper observance 
of the Jewish Sabbath and the various other 
reforms instituted by Nehemiah and Ezra 
indicated a commendable zeal for that Law 
Covenant then in force which the Lord surely 
appreciated. And while it is not our 
part to similarly seek to bind the obligations 
and penalties of the Jewish law upon those 
whom God hath made free from the law, we 
may have a similar zeal for God in those 
things which he does require of us now, 
under the New Covenant. With a similar 
zeal we should seek to cultivate and manifest 
in ourselves and others that which our Lord 
defined as the spirit of the divine law- 
Love. This law of love is of universal and 
eternal application, and its blessed outcome 
of harmony, peace, happiness and joy will 
fully repay the protracted effort of obedience. 

"Love is the fulfilling of the law:" "Let 
love be unfeigned:" "Love worketh no ill 
to its neighbor:" "There is no fear in love, 
but perfect love casteth out fear." 



page 66 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



THE DAILY FOOD 1893 CALENDARS, announced 
in our January 15th issue, met with a large 
demand. We have secured another lot at the 
same price,— 15 cents including postage. 



OUR FEBRUARY ISSUE. 



Our double number for February seems to 
have been generally well thought of by our 
readers; and the offer to supply extra copies 
of it at five cents a copy was taken advantage 
of quite freely,— some ordering as many as a 



hundred. 

As we printed quite a large edition, we still 
have plenty and will continue the half -rate offer. 
If more convenient for you, send us the addresses, 
plainly written, and we will attend to 
the mailing of them. 

We have already heard from a number of 
ministers of various denominations and others 
relative to this TOWER, and believe that good 
results must follow. 



THE CHANGE APPROVED. 



While a few have written of their disappointment 
in connection with the cancellation of the 
Allegheny Spring Meeting arrangements, we 
have heard from a far larger number who approve 
the program and favor a Chicago meeting. 
And we trust that eventually we may all see 
that the Lord has guided in the matter for the 
general good. 

Several have written from the far West, expressing 
great satisfaction; and saying that 
they hope to get to Chicago at the reduced 
rates; but never expected to get to Allegheny. 



Do not forget the Missionary Envelopes. We 
have a new lot and supply them now at the reduced 
price of 25 cents per hundred, and $2.00 
per thousand. This includes free delivery to you 
at your Postoffice. 



A WORD TO CORRESPONDENTS. 



Letters containing money or orders should 
be addressed to the Tower Publishing Co. 
Private letters to the Editor may be enclosed, 
sealed, in the same envelope. Make no allowance 
for our remembering previous orders and 
explanations. Make each letter complete in 
itself. When changing your address give the 
old as well as the new one. Remit by Draft, 
Money Order or Registered letter. Give your 
full address at the beginning of each letter. 



TRACTS IN SWEDISH AND NORWEGIAN. 



Tract No. 1, "Do the Scriptures Teach that 
Eternal Torment is the Wages of Sin?" has 
been translated into Swedish, which is Tract 
No. 9; and into Norwegian, which is Tract 
No. 13. We do not send these out except when 
specially ordered. Any who can use these 
judiciously are welcome to order them— freely. 
These, as well as Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,10 and 
14, are supplied in quantities without charge- 
out of the Tract Fund. 



BINDERS FOR 1893-1894. 



Patent Binders of a size suitable for the 
TOWER for two years' issues, and with the name 
of our journal and the dates 1893-1894 stamped 
in gilt on the side, are now ready. Those 
therefore who hereafter order Binders should 
specify whether they want these for coming 
years or those for 1891-1892 which have no 
dates stamped on them. These are extremely 
desirable for preserving your TOWERS in a convenient 
form for future reference. Price fifty 
cents each. 



R1499 : page 67 

VOL. XIV. MARCH 1, 1893. NO. 5. 

FROM GLORY TO GLORY. 



"But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the 
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from 
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord."— 
2 Cor. 3:18. 

To be fully transformed into a likeness of 
character to our heavenly Father should be the 
constant effort of every true child of God. It 
is not enough that we gain a knowledge of his 
plan and a pleasurable realization of his mercy 
and grace toward our unworthy race, and that 
we joyfully tell the good news to others; and 



is not enough even that we exert ourselves with 
uncommon zeal to bless others with those good 
tidings of great joy for all people; for we may 
do all of these things and more, and yet, if we 
do not let our Heavenly Father's goodness and 
grace have its due effect upon our own hearts, 
our knowledge, and even our good works, will 
profit us but little. 

Our main object, therefore, in studying God's 
Word and his character as therein revealed, 
should always be to bring our own hearts and 
minds into closer sympathy and likeness and 
co-operation with his. As the Apostle says 
(1 Thes. 4:3), "This is the will of God, even 
your sanctification"— our full setting apart or 
consecration of mind and heart entirely to the 
Lord, that he may complete the good work of 
transforming us into his own glorious likeness 
by the operations of his Spirit through his 
Word, and thus fit us for the enjoyment of his 
abounding grace in the ages to come. 

In the above words of the Apostle we notice 
particularly that the statement is made of all 
the Church— We all are being changed from 
glory to glory. And the inference is consequently 
a strong one, that those who are not 
being so changed are not of the class addressed. 
This is a solemn thought, and one that claims 
the most careful consideration of all the consecrated. 
The question with us is not, Have 
we made a full consecration of ourselves to the 
Lord? but, having made such consecration, 
are we, in accordance with that consecration, 
fully submitting ourselves to the transforming 
influences of the Spirit of God to be changed 
daily more and more fully to the glorious likeness 
of our God? 

Like the Apostle, then, addressing all the 
consecrated and faithful, we also of to-day may 
say, We all are being changed from glory to 
glory under the moulding, fashioning influences 
of the Spirit of God. We can see it in each 
other, thank God, and we glory in it. Yesterday 
the mallet of divine providence struck a 
blow upon that member of the body of Christ, 
and an unsightly excrescence of pride fell off, 
and he looks so much more beautiful to-day, 
because he did not resist the blow, but gracefully 
submitted to it. The day before, we saw 
another under the wearing, painful polishing 
process to which he patiently submitted, and 
O how he shines to-day. And from day to 
day we see each other studiously contemplating 
the divine pattern and striving to copy it; 
and how we can note the softening, refining 
and beautifying effect upon all such. So the 



Spirit of God is at work upon all who fully submit 
themselves. 

R1499 : page 68 

But while the mallet and chisel and the polishing 
sand of divine providence do a very 
necessary part of the transforming work by way 
of relieving us of many of the old and stubborn 
infirmities of the flesh which cannot be so 
promptly and so fully eradicated by the gentler 
influences of the Spirit, the Apostle points 
us to the specially appointed means for our 
transformation in the careful and constant contemplation 
of the glory of God as revealed in 
his Word, and also in his blessed ambassador, 
Jesus Christ, saying, "We all, with open face, 
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, 
are changed into the same image from glory 
to glory." 

"With open face" would signify without 
any intervening vail of prejudice or fear or 
superstition, but with simplicity of heart and 
mind. So we behold the glory (the glorious 
character) of the Lord— not with actual vision, 
but as in a glass, as reflected in the mirror of 
his Word and as exemplified also in his living 
word, Jesus Christ. And to aid us in this study 
we are promised the blessed influences of the 
Spirit of the Lord, who will guide us into all 
truth and show us things to come. 

As we look into the mirror what a glorious 
vision we have of the divine justice, which we 
promptly recognize as the very foundation of 
God's throne (Psa. 97:2), as well as the foundation 
of all our present and future security. 
If we could not recognize the justice of God 
we could have no assurance that his gracious 
promises would ever be fulfilled; for we would 
say, Perhaps he will change his mind. But on 
the contrary we can say, He changeth not, and 
whatsoever he saith shall surely come to pass. 
See with what inflexible justice the sentence 
upon our sinful race has been executed. Generation 
after generation for over sixty centuries 
has witnessed it; and no power in heaven or 
earth could revoke that sentence until the 
claims of justice had been fully met by the sacrifice 
of Jesus Christ. Justice, says the Word 
of God, must be maintained inviolate at any 
cost. And herein we read not only our rightful 
condemnation as a race of sinners, but also 
final, complete and glorious deliverance, because 
"God is just to forgive us our sins" 
(1 John 1:9), since the precious blood of Christ 
redeemed us from the curse of death. 



And while we thus read justice in the character 
of God, and mark with what scrupulous 
care he regards and respects this principle in all 
his dealings with his creatures, we see how he 
could have us respect the same principle in all 
our dealings. Thus we are led to consider what 
is the exact line of justice in this and that and 
the other transaction; and to remember also 
that this must be the underlying principle in 
all our conduct: or, in other words, that we 
must be just before we can be generous. This 
principle should therefore be very marked in 
the character of every Christian. 

Next we mark the love and mercy of God. 
The death sentence upon our fallen race was a 
most merciful sentence. It was equivalent to 
saying, See, I have of my own free favor granted 
you life and all its blessings to be enjoyed forever 
on condition of its proper use; but now, 
since you have abused my favor, I take it away 
and you shall return to the dust from whence 
you came. 

True, in the process of dying and of bringing 
forth a dying race to share the penalty, the 
mercy of God is not so manifest to the unthinking, 
but those who see the plan of God 
discover in all this, not the decree of a merciless 
tyrant, but the star of hope which was to 
be the seed of the woman to bruise the serpent's 
head, and in due time the deliverer of the entire 
race once generated in sin but afterward 
regenerated to life and all its blessed privileges. 
And in this mercy, in all its multiplied forms, 
we see the verification of the statement that 
"God is love." Thus we learn to be loving 
and merciful and kind both to the thankful and 
also to the unthankful. 

We mark also our heavenly Father's bountiful 
providence and his tender care for all his 
creatures; for even the sparrows are clothed 
and fed, and the unconscious lilies are arrayed 
in glory. Here we learn precious lessons of 
benevolence and grace. Thus, through all the 
catalogue of the moral and intellectual graces 
which go to make up a glorious character, we 
see in the mirror of the divine Word the model 
for our imitation; and in contemplation of all 

R1499 : page 69 

that is lovely, as embodied in him, and of all 
that is pure and holy and beautiful, we are 
changed little by little in the course of years to 
the same blessed likeness— from glory to glory. 
So be it: let the good work go on until every 
grace adorns the spotless robe of our imputed 



righteousness, received by faith in the blessed 

Son of God, whose earthly life was a perfect illustration 

of the Father's character, so that he 

could say— "He that hath seen me hath seen 

the Father." Let us, therefore, mark well the 

love of Christ, the gentleness, the patience, the 

faithfulness, the zeal, the personal integrity and 

the self-sacrificing spirit. Mark well, then imitate 

his example and shine in his likeness. 

The Apostle adds (2 Cor. 4:7) that the fact 
that we thus hold this treasure of a transformed 
mind in these defective earthen vessels proves 
the excellency of the power of God, and not 
of us. And so, by constant yielding to the influences 
of the Spirit of God, we may show forth 
the praises of him who hath called us out of 
darkness into his marvelous light. (1 Pet. 2:9.) 
Oh! let our efforts and prayers continually 
be that these poor earthen vessels may more 
and more show forth the praises of our God. 
Let them be clean in body and mind; let no 
evil communications proceed out of the mouth; 
and let no actions unworthy of the sons of God 
dishonor these living temples of the holy Spirit. 
True, on account of our deformities we may 
very imperfectly perform good works; but, by 
the grace of God, let us at least refrain from 
known evil. 



R1499 : page 69 

JESUS IN THE SYNAGOGUE. 



Such was the title of a discourse delivered 
a few months ago before a Jewish congregation, 
in a Jewish synagogue, by a Jewish 
rabbi— Joseph Krauskopf— from a purely Jewish 
standpoint. It may be regarded as one of the 
straws in the wind which shows that the blindness 
of Israel is beginning to be turned away. 
It is noticeable also that it indicates no disposition 
to accept the traditions of "Christendom" 
concerning Jesus— "the pagan myths 
and heathen doctrines which his later disciples 
fastened on his name"— but the Lord's 
own beautiful teachings and character as presented 
in the New Testament are set forth as 
worthy of Jewish admiration and study. 

The following is an extract from the discourse, 
from the Jewish Exponent: 

Even in the synagogues, and especially in 
the more liberal ones, the long and dearly 



cherished idea of the Alone Chosen People, of 
the Only Favorites of God, is fast losing its 
hold. Closer attention is being paid to such 
teachings as prophets like Micah stamped 
upon the pages of the Bible— that not the accident 
of birth among a certain tribe or race, 
but the practice of justice and mercy and 
humility, constitutes the Chosen of God; or to 
such Talmudic teachings as that which declares 
that the righteous of all nations and creeds 
will share in the happiness of future life. 
There, too, poet and dramatist, skeptic and 
scientist, prophets and reformers, liturgies and 
Bibles, of other nations and religions, meet 
with a hearty welcome in pulpit and pew, and 
their teachings, when noble, are reverentially 
listened to and taken to heart. 

There is, however, with the vast bulk of 
them, one conspicuous exception. There is 
one illustrious reformer who meets with a 
scant welcome in the synagogue, if he is at all 
admitted. His very name grates on the Jewish 
ear. Many of even the most liberal among 
them, who listen enraptured to beautiful 
teachings of Hindoo or Parsee or Arabic or 
Greek or Roman prophet or reformer or moralist, 
instinctively recoil from every mention 
of that reformer and moralist who stands 
nearest to us of them all, whose teachings are 
almost identical with ours, who is of our flesh 
and blood, our kinsman, our brother, a Jew 
like ourselves, our teacher, like our Moses, our 
Isaiah, our Hillel. There are some even in 
this liberal congregation who would rather 
have such subjects as this not touched upon. 
Others are probably already squirming in their 
seats, and to endure this discourse to its end 
will put their patience and good behavior to a 
severe test. Others, not connected with us at 
all, have been in a state of excitement, if not 
indignation, ever since they read the announcement 
that to-day's lecture theme would be 
"Jesus in the Synagogue," and are sitting in 
impatient suspense, expecting any moment to 
hear of our wholesale baptism, of our obliterating 

R1499 : page 70 

the word ISRAEL from the honored name 

of our congregation, of our turning bodily 

from monotheistic Judaism over to our arch-enemy, 

to Trinitarian, Man-worshiping 

Christianity. 

There is certainly in all that we have so far 
heard or seen concerning the historic Jesus 
nothing so un-Jewish, or anti-Jewish, or unmonotheistic, 



that his name should grate on the 
ears of his own brethren. He certainly bears 
no responsibility for whatever pagan myth and 
heathen doctrine later disciples fastened on 
his name, that now the Jewish synagogue, in 
which he himself once worshiped, should be 
closed against him. There is certainly nothing 
in what he has taught or said so repugnant 
to the Jewish sense of right, to Biblical or 
Talmudic ethics, that while one may with 
impunity quote Ingersoll or Huxley or Haeckel 
or Buddha or Seneca or Lucretius in the Jewish 
pulpit, he cannot, for the most part, quote 
even such excellent lessons as are contained in 

R1500 : page 70 

the Nazarene rabbi's Sermon on the Mount 
without incurring displeasure, or opposition, 
or interdiction. 

This morning I shall select, from a large 
number at hand, just a few parallels between 
the sayings of Jesus and those of our other 
ancient Jewish savants, that you may convince 
yourselves how, by barring out from our synagogues 
the ethical sayings of Jesus, we close 
our doors to the noblest maxims in our own 
Biblical and Rabbinical literature. 
[These we omit, for brevity.— EDITOR.] 
Here are a dozen precepts from the first 
chapter of the Sermon on the Mount, and a 
dozen corresponding ethical maxims from 
Jewish Sacred Writings. With these passages 
before us (and what is true of these twelve 
passages is true of almost all the other ethical 
sayings of Jesus), which are identical in 
thought, frequently also in words, with those 
of Biblical and Talmudic writers, none of 
which are new, all of them fluent on the 
tongue of every cultured Jew at that time, 
wholly free from heathen mythology and from 
Gnostic theology and mysticism, how can we 
justly bar our doors to his ethical teachings, 
and extend a hearty welcome to identical teachings 
not only of other Jewish, but also of 
pagan, even agnostic, savants? With this 
knowledge of the parity of their ethical teachings 
before us, with the assurance that he himself 
taught nothing un-Jewish, said nothing 
unmonotheistic, is in no way responsible for 
the wrong done to Israel by his worshipers, 
what else does his banishment from his people, 
the exclusion of his teachings from Jewish 
homes, schools and synagogues, the Jewish 
aversion to his name, what else does it mean, 
if not visiting the guilt of deluded man-worshipers 



upon the innocent head of one like 

ourselves, and in purity of life and in excellence 

of teachings better than most of us? 

It surely cannot be because of his opposition 
to, and scathing denunciation of, that 
barren ceremonialism and formalism which with 
many of his time had taken the place of pure 
religion, for, in truth, much fiercer were the denunciations 
of prophets like Isaiah, who inveighed 
against similar hypocrisies and ceremonialisms 
in their times. Much louder was their 
cry that it is not the fast, not sacrifice, not constant 
prayer, that God wants— nothing but clean 
hands, a pure heart, blessed deeds. More eager, 
and more successful even, were Rabbi Hillel 
and his school, who flourished shortly before 
the advent of Jesus, in their opposition to the 
rigorous legalism, profitless verbalisms and quibbles 
of the corrupted Pharisaism of their time. 

With what justice, again I ask, do we banish 
him from our midst, whose very love for downtrodden 
Israel deluded him and his disciples 
into the belief that he was the expected Messiah, 
the "King of Israel," for which delusion 
he suffered as did many an unfortunate enthusiast 
before him, from the Roman tyrant a traitor's 
death? With what justice do we banish 
him, whose pure life, and beautiful teachings, 
and kindly deeds, whose gentleness and sympathy 
with the lowly and weak, whose unsparing 
severity on the haughty and hypocritical, 
are beautiful illustrations of what noble character, 
what exemplary specimens of humanity, 
Jewish home life, Jewish schooling, Jewish 
religion, can unfold and ripen? Why banish 
him, who has won a vast portion of humanity 
for civilization, for peace and good will, not 
by means of foreign dogmas or intricate theological 
abstractions and mysticism, but almost 
exclusively through such sublimely beautiful 
precepts and parables and incidents, as the 
Sermon on the Mount, the parable of the good 
Samaritan, his tenderness toward the little ones, 
the freedom of his intercourse with the lowly, 
that are all Jewish, that sprang from, and were 
nurtured on, Jewish soil? Why banish such an 
illustrious scion of our race, one of our best 
proofs to a prejudiced world of what the Jew 
really was, still is, and ever shall be? 

To all such questions answer we have none, 
save that of deep rooted antipathy, engendered 
and nurtured by eighteen centuries of Christian 
cruelty and injustice toward the Jew. That 
antipathy, though pardonable, is much to be 
regretted. By banishing him, for no wrong of 
his own, we ourselves strengthened in those 



R1500 : page 71 

that worshiped him the belief that we were 
in reality the wicked people for which they 
held us, that we were his executioners, who 
gloried in the deed, that we delighted in 
nothing more than in reviling and in cursing 
him. By banishing from us the godly man we 
strengthened our persecutors and his followers 
in the belief that he was the Man-God, that 
their cruel treatment of us was the visitation of 
God for our spurning his only-begotten Son. 
By closing, even in these days of kindlier 
Christian treatment of the Jew, our synagogues 
to Jesus and to his teachings, while we open 
them wide to those of illustrious Mohammedan, 
heathen or skeptic, we confirm the Trinitarian's 
belief that we are stricken with spiritual 
blindness. 

It is not with spiritual blindness that we are 
stricken, but with a blindness to our own and 
our religion's best interest. There has been 
enough of antipathy, and too much of unjust 
visitation of others' guilt upon an innocent 
head. The recognition which proud, intensely 
patriotic France has recently shown to the genius 
of a hostile nation, surely we ought to show to a 
genius who is at the same time our own brother, 
of our own flesh and blood, and whose genius 
was all drawn from our soil. 



R1507 : page 71 

I AM MY BELOVED'S. 



Thy spirit, Lord, has filled my life 

With sweetness and with love intense. 

I love to live to do thy will, 

Until thou'rt pleased to call me hence. 

I love to sit at thy dear feet, 

And learn of thee thy will, thy mind. 
And thou dost teach me lessons sweet, 

And learning these, great peace I find. 

Thou'rt ever ready to bestow 

A blessing fresh, so rich and rare; 

And as we're filled with thy great love, 
To that extent all things seem fair. 

The sweetest portion of my days 



Is spent just here, low at thy feet. 
Words fail to tell how deep the joy. 
The hour is holy when we meet. 

How gladly will I hail the day 

When I shall see thee as thou art, 

And be made like thee, precious One, 
And of thy glory share a part. 

--S. J. McPHAIL. 



R1500 : page 71 

THE DESIRE OF ALL NATIONS SHALL COME. 



"For thus saith the Lord of hosts: Yet once [more] it 
is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the 
earth, and the sea, and the dry land. And I will shake 
all nations, and the Desire of all nations shall come: and 
I will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord of hosts." 
-Hag. 2:6,7. 

Here is one of the richest promises in the 
blessed Word of God. It is the gospel in a nutshell 
—the gospel of grace to the world and of 
glory to the Church; and it is signed at both 
ends with the signature of the Sovereign of the 
universe, Jehovah of hosts. It was thus uttered 
by the mouth of one of his holy prophets— 
Haggai. But though with the other writings 
of the prophets it was held sacred as the word 
of the Lord and reverently read by his anciently 
chosen people, fleshly Israel, their understanding 
of it fell far short of its true significance; 
and not until the holy Spirit was given 
as a comforter, a guide into all truth and a 
revealer of things to come (John 14:26; 16:13), 
was the precious import of this declaration of 
Jehovah made manifest to his saints (the gospel 
Church), as it has been through his holy apostles 
and prophets.— Eph. 3:5. 

Fleshly Israel thought they saw in this declaration 
an intimation of the exaltation and 
universal dominion of their nation, the fall 
of the Persian kingdom and the subserviency 
of all other nations to them, and that the 
house of Israel, thus exalted and enthroned 
above all the nations, would be filled with the 
glory of the Lord and recognized by all the 
world as God's specially chosen and honored 
people— a holy nation and a royal priesthood. 
With such a hope in view they diligently and 
cheerily worked to rebuild the ruined temple 



and to repair the fallen walls of Jerusalem 
after the decree of the Persian monarch Cyrus 
granted them liberty to return from captivity. 
But centuries rolled on: the Persian empire 
fell, but Israel's glory still tarried; for they 
only passed from under the dominion of 

R1500 : page 72 

Persia to that of Greece, and then of Rome; 
and then, as a nation scattered and peeled, 
they were driven out of the land of their 
fathers— the land of divine promise— and 
scattered among all nations and persecuted 
among all unto this day. 

What then? has God's promise failed? or 
has he forgotten it? No; for the Apostle Paul, 
under the leading of the holy Spirit, calls it to 
mind again (Heb. 12:26-28) and shows that 
the house which is to be thus filled with the 
glory of the Lord is not the fleshly house or 
kingdom of Israel, but the spiritual house or 
kingdom of God— the Gospel Church. 

The shaking of the earth mentioned in this 
text presupposes a former shaking, and this 
one is shown to be the last. The former 
shaking was that typified in the quaking of the 
earth at the giving of the law at Sinai; for 
under the law, says the Apostle, every transgression 
and disobedience received a just 
recompense of reward, and at various intervals 
the nation was thoroughly shaken and sifted 
by captivities and otherwise, that only the 
loyal and true might remain. (See Hebrews 12:25,26; 
2:2; 3:17; 10:28.) But this 
last shaking is to be a greater shaking than 
fleshly Israel ever experienced; it is to be a 
shaking of the heavens [symbol of the ruling 
powers], and the earth [all organized and law-abiding 
society], and the sea [the lawless and 
anarchistic elements], and the dry land [the 
established aristocracy of wealth and social 
independence]. And it is to be a shaking, 
not only of one nation, but of all nations— 
"And I will shake all nations." Surely this 
predicted shaking of all nations is but a repetition 
of the prophecy of Daniel (12:1) of a 
great time of trouble such as never was since 
there was a nation. 

But the Apostle Paul gives us the comforting 
assurance that "This word, yet once more, 
signifieth the removing of those things that are 
shaken, that the things that cannot be shaken 
may remain." And he further shows (Heb. 12:28) 
that that which will remain after the 
shaking, and which cannot be moved, will be 



the kingdom of God, which we shall inherit 
if we prove worthy— i.e., if we stand all the 
tests and shakings and cannot be shaken out. 

The Apostle, in stating that the kingdom of 
God— the true Church, the elect— cannot be 
shaken, thereby intimates that it shall not be 
exempted from those blasts that shall shake 
and utterly remove all other organizations, 
but rather that the true, elect Church shall not 
be moved by them. Her foundation is sure. 
"God is in the midst of her, and she shall not 
be moved." (Psa. 46:5.) As a matter of 
fact, we find ourselves to-day in the midst of 
these perilous and disintegrating influences. 
The storm is rising, and, as predicted, it is felt 
first by the Lord's little flock of consecrated 
believers. Their faith and patience and zeal 
and endurance are being tried by every means 
that the adversary can devise. Every device 
of error is being put forth in its most pleasing 
and subtle form; and advantage is being taken 
of every weakness of the flesh to overcome 
those who are endeavoring to fight the good 
fight of faith and to overcome the world, the 
flesh and the devil. 

And when we consider that "we wrestle not 
with flesh and blood, but against principalities, 
and powers, and against the rulers of the 
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness 
in high places" (Ephesians 6:12), we 
realize that the contest is a very unequal one 
unless we lay hold upon the strength which 
God supplies to us through Christ. 

The Apostle's language further intimates 
that since only that which cannot be shaken 
will remain and will inherit the kingdom, all 
others will fall. And in this light the words 
of the Psalmist— "A thousand shall fall at 
thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand" 
—are seen to be no exaggeration. Nor should 
the faithful few be at all dismayed when the 
various shakings sift out their number; for so 
it must be until only that which cannot be 
shaken shall remain. Thus the whole nominal 
church, both within and outside the various 
organizations, must be shaken until only the 
true and faithful remain; for God will gather 
out of his kingdom all things that offend.— 
Matt. 13:41. 

But this shaking is permitted, not only to 
sift out of the Church all shakable things, but 

R1500 : page 73 

it is to extend to all the nations; and so 
unprepared are they for the storm that is coming, 



and so unable to resist it, that the Apostle, 
with prophetic foresight, declares that their 
shaking signifies their removal (Heb. 12:27); 
and further, that their removal is not in order 
that anarchy may prevail, but in order that 
the kingdom of God, which cannot be shaken, 
may take their place. 

Thank God for the prospect of an unshakable 
kingdom, whose king shall reign in 
righteousness and whose princes shall decree 
justice (Isa. 32:2; Prov. 8:15), and under 
whose dominion the whole earth shall be at 
rest. (Isa. 14:7.) This is the kingdom 
which the Prophet declares will indeed be 
"the desire of all nations," when it is once 
established and its blessings begin to be 
realized by the world. Yes, truly "the desire 
of all nations shall come"— with blessings of 
life and health and peace and prosperity and 
good government. It is for this coming 
kingdom and its blessings that the whole 
creation groans and travails together in pain, 
waiting for the adoption, viz., "the redemption 
of our body"— the body of Christ, the 
heirs of the kingdom. (Rom. 8:22.) As 
soon as this body is all selected, fitted and 
tested, then the kingdom will be established 
and the desire of all nations will have come— 
the long desired peace and prosperity which 
every experiment of their own will have failed 
to secure. And doubtless every possible experiment 
will have been tried and proved 
futile before that time; the last, that of socialism, 
ending in universal anarchy. 

It is this body of Christ, this spiritual house 
of Israel, which, though lashed by many a 
storm, nevertheless "cannot be shaken," because 
it is firmly founded upon the Rock 
Christ Jesus: it is this house that Paul calls 
"the temple of God" (1 Cor. 3:16; 6:19) 
that is to inherit the kingdom of God, and that 
Jehovah says he is going to fill with his glory. 

He will fill it with the glory of the divine 
nature: he will make every member of it like 
unto Christ's glorious body: he will endow 
them with power from on high to execute 
faithfully all of the divine purpose for human 
restitution, and for the establishment of universal 
harmony and peace. Praise the Lord 
for such a prospect for both the Church and 
the world. May its inspiration be felt by 
every devoted heart, and its warning be 
heeded by every one who feels to any degree 
inclined to be unstable. Take unto you the 
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to 
stand unshaken in the midst of the storms of 



this evil day, and be counted worthy to be a 
living stone in that glorious temple of God, 
now shortly to be filled with his glory, and to 
be an heir of that kingdom which cannot be 
moved, and which shall indeed be the desire of 
all nations. 

THE WORLD LONGS FOR PURE RULERS. 

The following editorial, from the Pittsburg 
Telegraph, February 29th, shows how worldly 
people estimate present governments and how 
an improvement is already the desire of all nations. 
The great time of trouble, predicted in 
the Scriptures as nigh, even at the doors, which 
will result in world-wide anarchy, will be the 
result of efforts to improve upon just such dishonesty 
of government as is here brought to our 
attention. We who see and have confidence 
in the Lord's plan and kingdom alone realize 
how futile is every such hope— because rulers 
can not be found that are pure in heart and 
that rule from love of the interest of the people. 

God is selecting the only absolutely trust-worthy 
rulers— Christ and the little flock of his 
saints— whose rule will be to bless all the 
families of the earth and whose motive will be 
love. 

The article referred to is as follows:— 

ITALY'S FINANCIAL SCANDAL. 

"A perfect epidemic of financial scandals 
seems to have swept and is still sweeping over 
the world. Not to speak of comparatively 
small transactions, we have had something like 
scandal in Germany in connection with the 
small-arms factory there. Portugal had to send 
one of her leading statesmen into the penitentiary 
for frauds committed in the State railways. 
France is still in the throes of a financial 
revulsion connected with the Panama 
Canal swindle. It happily did not extend to 

R1500 : page 74 

the government finances, which are still able 
to show a clean bill of health. 

"Now comes a scandal of the first magnitude 
in Italy, compromising many of her principal 
statesmen to such an extent as to endanger 
the very throne itself. Many of the most powerful 
Ministers have made use of their positions 
to sanction fraudulent operations on the part 
of the principal banking institutions of the 
country in return for large bribes. Indeed, 



the situation there may be described as far more 
serious than that in France, since the revelations 
made there, however damaging to the reputation 
of the official and parliamentary classes, 
do not directly affect the national credit, as do 
those on the south side of the Alps. 

"It seems a secret investigation was made 
by the Government some three or four years 
ago, when the National Bank of Italy had advanced 
some $10,000,000 to another institution 
in great straits. The results of this investigation 
were pigeon-holed for reasons which the 
reader can readily supply. 

"A few weeks ago the Government submitted 
to the Legislature a proposal for a six years' 
extension of the Banking law which is now 
about to expire. Great was the consternation 
of the Ministers when they found that the measure 
was opposed by a Sicilian Radical Deputy 
named Napoleone Colaianni. 

"Almost at the very outset of the speech 
(says a letter in the New York Tribune) against 
the projected bill, he confronted the Ministers 
with the damaging report above referred to as 
having been kept secret by the Government. 
No one knows how it has come into his hands. 
His charges, founded on the paper in his hands, 
were directed principally against the great 
Banca Romana, and consisted, among other 
things, of an assertion that it kept a duplicate 
series of notes (each set bearing the same numbers) 
in circulation, thus fraudulently exceeding 
its legal issue by 100 per cent. It is calculated 
that by this means the bank has an illegal 
circulation of $6,000,000. This state of things, 
repeated in a smaller degree by the other banks 
of emission, had become known during the last 
two or three years, and has led to the institution 
in question being black -mailed by various 
statesmen, Government officials and politicians, 

R1501 : page 74 

under threats of exposure. 

"It is stated by the writer quoted that not 
less than 150 Senators and Deputies are compromised 
by these revelations, as having borrowed 
money without ever having gone through 
the formality of paying back. 

"A number of arrests have been made, but 
that the events alluded to will have more consequences 
than merely increasing the population 
of the jails would seem to be clear to 
all who consider the very precarious nature of 
the hold the National Government has on the 
masses of the people." 



R1501 : page 74 

"LIVE PEACEABLY WITH ALL MEN. 



[Before our February TOWER had been issued, 
a reporter representing a Pittsburg journal, 
and several others east and west, learned something 
concerning its contents, and applied to 
us for proof sheets in advance;— proposing to 
call it to public attention. His report, however, 
was glaringly incorrect; and this led us to give 
to the public, through various daily news-papers, 
a more correct statement of our faith, and of 
our attitude toward fellow Christians. 

Some of the friends hereabouts were quite 
interested in the article, and suggested that it appear 
in the WATCH TOWER. We have acceded 
to the request and reprint the article below.] 

A CORRECTION. 



NO "CHALLENGE."-NO "RUSSELLISM."-NO 
NEW SECT.-A FAIR, CANDID REVIEW OF 
THE DOCTRINE OF ETERNAL TORMENT. 
-ITS CLAIMED, AND ITS REAL EFFECTS 
SHOWN.-LOGICAL 
CONCLUSIONS. 

I owe it to myself and to my fellow citizens 
to state publicly that I wholly disclaim the 
"attack" and "challenge" upon the Christian 
ministers of this vicinity, attributed to me in 
the Dispatch of Tuesday. I would assure all 
that I have none but friendly feelings toward 
fellow Christians, however much I may differ 
from some of them regarding the teachings of 
the Holy Scriptures. A Dispatch reporter 
learned that we had on the press a pamphlet 
entitled, "What Saith the Scripture About 
Hell?" and, securing an advance copy, inquired 
whether we would not send a copy to 
the ministers of Pittsburgh and Allegheny. 
We concluded that the suggestion was good, 
and assented. This became the basis of a half 
column of miserable misrepresentation, and a 
blatant challenge, with which I have not the 
slightest sympathy. 

R1501 : page 75 



As for Russellites and Russellism, we know 
nothing of them and never shall. I have lived 
in this vicinity for nearly half a century, and 
have published and circulated millions of tracts 
and pamphlets without the name of Russell 
being mentioned in them in any manner whatever 
—a very different method from that pursued 
by those who seek their own name's fame. 
I seek not to add to the number of Christian 
sects, but on the contrary, I seek to present 
that one harmonious view of God's word upon 
which all true Christians might harmonize 
differences and unite in one Church as at the 
first— "The Church of the Living God"— 
whose "names are written in heaven." 

True, I hold views differing considerably 
from those of many. But the last fifteen years 
have decreased these differences considerably, 
and the next fifteen will probably bring still 
greater changes. Our Presbyterian and other 
Calvinistic friends have approached much 
nearer to us on the subjects of God's elections 
and decrees, and a hope for the heathen and 
the ignorant beyond the present life. And 
the thinking classes of the entire church, of 
all denominations, are much nearer to us in 
our denial that eternal torment is the future 
for all who are not members of the church— or 
more than nine-tenths of the human race. 
Indeed, I am confident that more than one-half 
of the ministers and intellectual membership 
of Christendom no longer believe this horrible, 
God-dishonoring, soul-degrading theory 
hatched in the dark ages. 

But most of those who see the fallacy of this 
eternal torment theory are afraid to let others 
see it, lest the influence should be pernicious. 
I, on the contrary, show from the Scriptures 
that God has no such plan; that the passages 
of Scripture supposed to teach it are symbolical 
and misunderstood, and that God's plan is one 
of justice and love in Christ, and will embrace, 
with an opportunity of everlasting life, every 
member of the human family, either in the 
present or in a future life. They hold that, if 
the fear of eternal torment be taken away, 
people would hasten to become criminals. I 
reply that faith in eternal torment is confessed 
by almost all the criminals executed; and that 
an examination of the inmates of jails and 
penitentiaries has often proved that almost all 
of the inmates confess to faith in some of the 
so-called orthodox creeds. And the most 
casual observer of the every-day street profanity 
must admit that fear of hell and torment 



seems to have no effect upon the lower classes, 
who jest about such matters. 

The fact is that while some feel a little timorous 
on the subject, no intelligent person 
really believes that the great Creator made a 
lake of fire and brimstone into which to cast 
nine out of ten, or any other proportion, of 
his creatures for preservation in torture to all 
eternity. And I hold that in hiding the truth 
on this subject, and making a false pretense 
of believing it, a serious error is unintentionally 
committed by some of God's people. 
Such a monstrous doctrine cannot possibly be 
upheld before the present nineteenth century 
light and intelligence. And if Christian people 
persist in upholding it publicly, and in 
claiming that it is the teaching of the Bible, 
while denying it privately, they will commit 
several serious errors. 

The bad effects will be: 

First— God's name and character will be 
made odious in proportion as people become 
intelligent. 

Second— The Word of God will lose reverence 
and respect in proportion as intelligence 
increases among all who believe that the Bible 
is the authority for this doctrine. 

Third- With the fall of the Bible from the 
reverence of the intelligent comes the fall of 
Christianity, real and nominal. 

Fourth-With the fall of the Bible and 
Christianity comes the reign of infidelity— a 
reign of anarchy— as exhibited in France a 
century ago. 

My teachings, both oral and by the printed 
page, are in harmony with this, my faith. In 
harmony with the general intelligence of our 
favored day, I believe that God is granting, to 
all who rightly seek it, special light upon His 
Word— "meat in due season" to the household 
of faith. I prefer to study, and think it right 
to interpret, the Bible in the light of its own 
spirit-illumined utterances (through the Apostles 

R1501 : page 76 

and Prophets), rather than in the light of 
creeds formulated in the dark ages, by fallible 
though probably well-intentioned men. 

All intelligent people who accept the Bible 
as God's inspired Word must admit that this 
is the correct principle in Bible study and 
teaching. And, if so, all true Christians 
should unite their hearts and heads and hands 
in finding out and making known that interpretation 
of the Scripture which harmonizes 



God's character and plan with the highest 
development of sanctified common sense. 

Since, in view of the misrepresentation set 
forth in the Dispatch, the sending of the pamphlet 
which examines the entire teaching of 
the Bible on hell and torment to the ministers 
of this vicinity might be considered a discourtesy, 
"an attack" and "a challenge," we conclude 
not to do so. But we here announce 
our willingness to send this 10 cent pamphlet 
ree to any minister of any denomination who 
will drop us a postal card requesting it. And 
to any one requesting it, we will send free our 
new 32-page pamphlet entitled, "Thy Word is 
Truth— A Reply to Robert Ingersoll's Charges 
against Christianity." 

But while I make no "attack" and offer no 
"challenge," my conviction that the Bible 
does not teach eternal torment of any sort as 
the penalty for sin is so strong that if any minister, 
recognized as orthodox by the Evangelical 
Alliance, desires to discuss this subject 
with me publicly, for the truth's sake, I will 
take pleasure in endeavoring to set him 
straight on what saith the Scripture on this subject, 
or in being set straight by him on the 
same authority. 

Respectfully, a minister (servant) of Christ 
and the Truth, C. T. RUSSELL. 

CONSEQUENCES OF FALSE TEACHING. 

The daily papers of this week mention four 
cases of violent insanity resulting from misrepresentation 
of the divine plan— based upon 
the fallacious doctrine of a hell-of-torment. 
One is a Mrs. W. Wilbur, of Rowan, Iowa. 
Of her it is said, "The preacher's description 
of the torments of the damned made such a 
vivid impression upon Mrs. Wilbur's mind 
that it is feared she is hopelessly insane." The 
other three are Mr. and Mrs. Gleason, and 
another person whose name we did not learn, 
at Burg Hill, Ohio. Two of these went ravingly 
insane the same night, and had to be bound 
hand and foot, and when, the night following, 
the third became insane, a "citizens committee" 

R1502:page76 

called upon the "Evangelist" (?) and compelled 
him to leave the town. 

To what extent this blasphemous doctrine is 
accountable for all the insanity of the world, 
God only knows; but surely it is responsible 
to a considerable extent. How many children 



have received pre-natal mental injury through 
the attendance of mothers at such "revivals ! " 
Many of those made insane are so affected 
from sympathy— for companions, children or 
parents who have died out of Christ. One 
sister in the church at Allegheny told recently 
how the truth had reached her when her mind 
had almost given way under the strain of weeks 
of agony for her husband, who had died a moral 
man, but without profession of religion. 

Surely the gospel of damnation and torment— 
whether the vulgar theory of literal fire and flame 
or the more aesthetic theory of mental anguish 
which some say is worse— is quite a different 
gospel from that preached by our Lord and the 
Apostles. The multitude bare our Lord witness 
and marveled at the gracious words which he 
spoke. (Luke 4:22.) None of the Apostolic epistles 
contain one word about eternal torment, 
but tell of the love and peace of God which 
pass all understanding, which shall keep the 
hearts of believers. (Phil. 4:7.) "Being justified 
by faith [in the real gospel of God's love 
and favor to us and toward all in Christ], we 
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus 
Christ."-Rom. 5:1. 

We whose eyes have been opened to clearer 
views of our gracious Heavenly Father's plan 
and words do well to show our love and zeal 
for him and for our blinded fellows by letting 
our light so shine as to glorify him and bless 
them. Whenever you hear of a discourse about 
to be preached on hell, etc., send for a lot of 
Tract No. 1, free, and distribute to the congregation 
after the discourse— keeping a reasonable 
distance away from the church building. 



page 77 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1502:page77 

ESTHER BEFORE THE KING. 



I. QUAR., LESSON XL, MARCH 12, ESTHER 4:10-17; 
5:1-3. 

Golden Text— "Judge righteously, and plead the cause 
of the poor and needy."— Prov. 31:9. 

In the story of the book of Esther we have 
a glimpse of the condition of the Jews under 
the dominion of Persia. From chapter 3:8,9 
we learn that they were scattered all 
over the Persian provinces and were living 
in a measure of temporal prosperity, and that 
their destruction and the confiscation of their 
property and goods would be a large acquisition 
to the king's treasury, since ten thousand 
talents of silver were willingly appropriated 
to accomplish this end. 

The incident of this lesson furnishes also 
an instance of the Lord's providential care 
over them and his preservation of them as 
a people when their destruction was threatened 
by a wicked and capricious king. And 
this marked providence is specially noteworthy 
in view of the fact that these were 
the descendents of those Jews who failed to 
go up to Jerusalem to restore and to build 
it, when Cyrus issued the decree that all 
who desired might do so. They had not 
been zealous for the Lord, but nevertheless 
his loving kindness did not forsake them, 
and when they cried unto him he heard and 
answered their prayer. 

The special feature of this lesson is God's 
providential care over those who trust in 
him. 

R1502 : page 77 

A TEMPERANCE LESSON. 



I. QUAR., LESSON XII., MAR. 19, PROV. 23:15-23. 

Golden Text— "And be not drunk with wine, wherein 
is excess; but be filled with the Spirit."— Eph. 5:18. 

VERSES 15,16 manifest the right desire 
and ambition of a true parent for a son— 
viz., wisdom and righteousness. The ambitious 
aim of some parents is to have their 
own sons men of wealth, or power, or fame, 
or social prominence: but none of these 



things are worthy of their ambition. It is 
the wise son (wise in heavenly wisdom) that 
maketh the glad father. 

VERSES 17,18. It is indeed folly to envy 
sinners and thereby to miss the joy and peace 
which naturally flow from a heart full of 
the love and reverence of the Lord; for there 
is an end of their brief pleasures, while those 
whose joy is in the Lord have a never failing 
source of consolation. 

VERSE 19. The guiding of the heart in 
the right ways of the Lord is more important 
than the guiding of our actions, because 
if the heart is right the actions will regulate 
themselves accordingly. "Keep thy heart, 
for out of it are the issues of life." (Prov. 4:23.) 
By communion with God in prayer 
and through the Word of truth our hearts 
are kept in the love and service of God; and 
it is therefore only by constant use of these 
means that our hearts can be guided in the 
right way. 

VERSES 20,21 need no comment: they 
need only to be remembered and heeded. 

VERSE 22. This is but another way of 
saying, Honor thy father and thy mother. 
And the obligation of honor to parents never 
ceases, though that of obedience does when 
the years of maturity and discretion are 
reached. 

VERSE 23. Truth, wisdom, instruction 
and understanding are not dear at any price, 
and when secured should never be sold or 
compromised for the short-lived advantages 
of error. Buy the truth, and sell it not: in 
meekness and with a ready and appreciative 
mind seek instruction in the ways of God's 
appointment, but never take counsel with 
the ungodly. In God's Word a refreshing 
understanding of the truth is gained and the 
wisdom that cometh down from above is secured, 
with all the peaceable fruits of 
righteousness. 

The Golden Text— Eph. 5:18— does not 
refer to literal wine, but to the spirit of the 
world, which is thus symbolized. Christians 
are here counseled not to become intoxicated 
with the spirit of the world (See also Isa. 28:7), 
but to be filled with the spirit of the 
Lord, the spirit of the truth, that so they 
may bring forth its precious fruits in 
abundance. 

page 78 

REVIEW. 



I. QUAR., LESSON XIIL, MARCH 26. 

Golden Text— "Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and 
a light unto my path."— Psa. 119:105. 

Alas! how many of the virgins espoused 
to Christ are "foolish;" how many have failed 
to secure the oil, the spirit of the truth, in 
God's appointed way, and are now beginning 
to find that they walk in darkness— that their 
lamps have gone out. Only those who have 
the spirit of the truth (oil) in themselves— 
honest hearts, zealous for the right— will be 
able to get light from God's Word, shortly. 
But to such humble, honest ones God provides 
a light, a lamp, which shines now and 
will continue to shine in the dark places 
until the day dawn.— 2 Pet. 1:19. 



R1502:page78 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



Washington. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Many thanks 
for your note of the 5th inst., just received. 
March and January 1st copies of WATCH 
TOWER also came to hand. The latter is 
particularly rich. "In Our Day" is convincing. 
I have now finished all three volumes 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN; and more and 
more clearly, as I read, do your positions 
appeal to my judgment. It is, of course, 
difficult to break away all at once from 
opinions that have been held for years, but 
with me the work is done in large measure. 
I cannot think other than that your clear-cut 
expositions of Scripture and interpretations 
of prophecy, harmonizing as they do 
with present day occurrences, are of God. 
I have read theology (mostly Arminian) to 
some extent, but always with more or less 
dissatisfaction, because of its failure to 
answer many questions that would not 
down; while Calvinism has been to me an 
unthinkable system. Yet I have continued 
preaching and working in the hope that 
light would come. It has come, but not in 
the way expected. 



I sincerely believe that in what I have 
thus far learned I have been led by the 
Divine Hand, and feeling this shall trust 
implicitly as to the future, although leaving 
the pastorate of the church which I have 
long loved, and in whose work and fellowship 
I have realized much joy, would be no 
small thing. 

Again thanking you for your kindness 
toward me, 

I am yours sincerely, C. COOK. 



Ohio. 
MR. C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR SIR: -After 

having been a member of the Methodist 
Episcopal Church for about twenty years, I 
have to-day sent to the pastor a letter of 
withdrawal. I have hesitated long to take 
the step, as it is a coming out from pleasant 
associations, and fellowship with many who 
are apparently perfectly honest in their belief; 
but it is also a coming out of Babylon 
or confusion. My prayer has been, "Lord, 
what wilt thou have me to do;" and now, 
with an honest desire to do God's will, and 
to walk in the footsteps of our Lord and 
Master, I have taken the step. 

The teachings of the several volumes of 
DAWN and the WATCH TOWER have been 
food to my soul. From a child I have read 
the Scriptures, and all other books that I 
thought or hoped would make plain to my 
understanding the truth, as I was hungry to 
know and anxious to teach it; and now, as 
the day dawns, and the Sun of Righteousness 
arises with healing in its beams, the 
clouds are being dispelled, the blind are 
receiving sight, and by confessing the new 
light, or, rather, the "Old Theology," men 
are again being put out of the synagogues; 
but the refreshment which comes to the 
believer makes us rejoice in hope, knowing 

R1503 : page 78 

that the day of our redemption draweth 
nigh. 

I preach the truth wherever opportunity 
affords; and if circumstances would permit, 
I would gladly go out into all the world and 
preach the gospel to all having hearing ears; 
but it is not my privilege so to do. Occasionally 
I have the opportunity to teach it 
to individuals. 



I ask that you will remember me at the 
throne of grace, that I may be led by the 
spirit of Christ into all truth, that I may be 
enabled, by his grace, to walk worthy of the 
gospel wherein we are called, that my will 
may be fully submitted to God's will and 
that I may soon be buried with him in baptism; 
and, being filled with the spirit of Christ, 
that I may be permitted to go forth bearing 
the precious seed (truths) of the Lord. 

Yours in hope and faith, 

W. E. RICHARDS. 

page 79 

Kansas. 
GENTLEMEN: --I have been a Christian, 
and a member of an evangelical church, for 
twenty-five years, but I could never bring 
myself to believe the doctrine of everlasting 
torment for even the worst of mankind; 
though I saw clearly that there could be no 
salvation out of Christ. The plan presented 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN so completely solves 
the difficulty, and the hitherto insoluble 
problem of God's permission of evil in the 
universe; and it is so grand and beautiful, 
so reasonable, and so worthy of God, that I 
am convinced it must be true. What light 
and glory it throws upon the Bible! I have 
always maintained that God would give 
every human being a fair opportunity for 
salvation, thought I could not tell how it was 
to be brought about; and now that I know, 
I rejoice in it every hour of the day. I now 
wish to qualify myself to answer objectors, 
for I intend to do what I can to spread these 
glad tidings of great joy which shall be unto 
all people. The Lord bless you and your 
work, F. E. HALE. 



R1503 : page 79 

Indiana. 

DEAR FRIENDS IN THE LORD:-Enclosed 
please find my estimated "Good Hopes" for 
1893. The package of tracts was duly received, 
and is being disposed of rapidly. 

The Presbyterian church session, here, refuses 
to release me, upon the ground that it 
cannot do so without a trial for heresy; and 
it will never consent to that. Had I asked 
for a letter to another denomination, it would 
have been given; and if I insist upon leaving 



that body, my name will be put upon 
the "retired" list. Nevertheless, I have fully 
determined to do what seems to be the Lord's 
will, and I will not be argued out of doing 
my duty. 

The most prominent elder has begun to 
study with a view of convincing me that I 
am in error. He is a physician, and is sure 
that I have overworked my brain upon these 
subjects until I have become skeptical. He 
says, truly, that if there be anything in my 
views, it is time that the church began to investigate 
the matter. Yours in the bonds 
of Christian fellowship, L. HAMILTON. 



Connecticut. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Although 
somewhat tardy in the renewal of my TOWER 
subscription, I heartily thank you for its continued 
visits up to date. There is nothing 
I look forward to with so much hungering 
as its regular portion of meat and drink for 
the truth-hungry. There is no other publication 
that has been so satisfying to my mind; 
and to do without it would be out of question 
so long as it continues to supply this 
demand. Surely one that has received the 
anointing of the spirit and the eye-salve of 
the truth perceives the work, the strange 
work, that the Lord is working, not only in 
the nations but in the lives of his consecrated 
children, as each is quarried and 
chiseled and polished by the various workings 
together of the circumstances of his 
life, and thus made ready for his respective 
place in the great Temple— his body, his 
Bride— according to the plan of the great 
Master Builder. Lord grant that none of us 
come short of this through conceit or neglect. 

The heavens are fast "rolling together 
like a scroll" in our midst: all the denominations 
represented here, ignoring differences 
among themselves, have united with the 
Catholic temperance society in a grand 
rally for temperance, and in a general boom 
for the society of the "mother church." So 
naturally and quietly do these things come 
to pass, that no one seems aware of the fast 
approach of the time of trouble. Blessed is 
he who has learned to lean on the arm of the 
strong Deliverer, and not on an arm of flesh. 

May the dear Lord continue the flowing 
of the stream of truth to you, and through 
you to all the household of faith, is the 



prayer of your sister in Christ, 

L. M. FAIRFIELD. 



Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed you 
will find a small order for Tower publications. 
I desire to be used in the Master's 
service, and do what I can in spreading the 
truth. I have been a reader of DAWNS and 
Tower since January last— proving all things 
by the word; and I must confess that it has 
given me a joy and comfort that the world 
knows not of. I have been seeking to 
know the truth for about five years. Two 
years ago I came to the conclusion that the 
Baptist church was nearer to my views than 
any other denomination, as it claimed to 
take the Bible as its creed. So I joined 
that church with the understanding that I 
would take nothing for my guide but the 
Bible. I let my name remain until a few 
weeks ago, when I told the pastor to drop 
my name from the church roll. He expressed 
great surprise, but I told him that it 
was not that I had any enmity against any 

R1503 : page 80 

one, but that I felt a plain conviction that 
I could serve the Master better out of it, 
and by holding a membership in only the 
true church which Christ founded. 

It is a painful thing for me now to hear 
the unsupported doctrines as taught by the 
various creeds, but what a joy it is to view 
the glorious glad tidings from the standpoint 
of the "Plan of the Ages." What 
wonderful harmony! Now I can see how 
"God so loved the world," and it has begotten 
in me a new hope and a desire to tell 
the good news to others. Oh, how I love 
to read the Tower. Do not fail to send it to 
me for 1893. It has food for me that I cannot 
find elsewhere. I must tell you, my 
dear brother, that you seem very near and 
dear to me, as do all the dear brethren in the 
Anointed One. I feel so glad to hear from 
any of them. I am almost alone here. 

I have several DAWNS in circulation, and 
quite a number are interested. Two or 
three are rejoicing in the light, but as yet 
have not renounced their creeds. My health 
being poor, I am not able to be out much, 
and consequently I feel that I am not doing 



the work that I would love to do. I feel so 
unworthy, and long to be able to do much 
good in the Master's name. I need your 
prayers in my behalf, that I may be filled 
with humility and love, to the Master's 
glory. I desire to have my name on the 
Colporteur Roll, even if my work should 
seem small. I will endeavor to do all to the 
honor and glory of God. May the Lord's 
blessings rest upon us all in such a way as 
to bring us in contact with those that are 
hungering after truth. In hope, I am truly 
yours, J. T. MILLER. 



South Dakota. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: -Three years 
ago Vols. I. and II. of the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN were placed in my hands. I read, 
re-read and studied the wonderful books, 
and to my own astonishment they began to 
break the seals of the Bible, and the hidden 
mystery was revealed to me. I then gave 
up the ministry and stepped out of Babylon. 
Since then I have been grieved, because I 
have not been able to enter the harvest work: 
for, being a Norwegian, I think it is of no 
use to try to sell English Dawns; but I intend 
to enter the work as soon as the Dawn 
is published in that language. Meanwhile 
I am trying to establish in the truth those 
who have already received it. 

I recently visited a few saints in R 



and was quite interested in learning how the 

truth reached them. About eight years ago 

a copy of the Watch Tower came into the 

hands of Brother M., and it made a deep 

impression on him. He brought the copy 

home and let some of his neighbors (Baptists) 

read it. After some time they sent 

for more numbers, which they read with increasing 

interest, and their faith in eternal 

torture was soon shaken. But as they had 

adopted some erroneous ideas of the atonement 

advocated by one of the leaders among 

the Swedish Baptists, the ransom was almost 

a stumbling-block to them. However, they 

have since been convinced, through the 

Tower, of their error, and now believe fully 

that Christ died in our stead. 

When the Swedish Tower was discontinued, 
some of the friends subscribed for 
the English Tower. But as they could not 
read English, their progress was slow. However, 
being truth hungry, they have tried to 



dig out some of the gold and precious stones 
from the English. One, in particular, looks at 
every word in his lexicon in order to get the 
meaning of a sentence. 

The cross is becoming more and more a 
rock of offence to the Swedes. Many in 
recent years have laid aside the paradoxes 
of the old German reformers, and are following 
in the footsteps of their own favorite 
leaders, who are "denying the sovereign 
Lord that bought them." But there are still 
many humble ones among Scandinavians, 
waiting for the truth, who will be glad to have 
the Swedish and the Danish Dawn. 

I myself cannot express how grateful I am 
to you who have been the instrument in 
God's hands to lead me out of darkness into 
light. I know what it is to be in darkness. 
I was brought up in a very dark corner of 
the earth, in the darkest of Lutherism, and 
in full faith in the horrible doctrine of eternal 
torment. When I reached maturity, I 
received some light and peace, which I 
thought I could increase by preparing for 
the ministry. But while studying theology I 
encountered skepticism and disappointment, 
and was soon as discontented as ever. But 
now my skepticism and the former things 
have disappeared, and light and peace are 
streaming in upon me from the channel of 
truth, and I can praise the infinite, wise and 
loving God, whose ways and plan are so 
full of blessing to all his creatures. 

Yours for the truth, K. P. HAMMER. 



R1504 : page 82 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



page 82 

TO TOWER READERS AND COLPORTEURS. 



DEAR FRIENDS OF OUR REDEEMER, SAVIOR 
AND PRESENT LORD:- 

I have passed days (even since tracts were 
made free) without giving out a single one of 
our strong list of tracts; but those days are 
about gone by, I hope and pray. I pray the 
Lord will not count me heartless, but careless 
I surely have been; and I am now trying to 
stir myself and others of my class to more energetic 
service. I might excuse myself to some 
extent, because of various labors— viz., meetings, 
visits, the canvass of DAWNS, correspondence, 
etc.,— but others might justly say, those 
meetings, etc., were but added opportunities 
or tract work. But excuses are idle, and like 
trying to find excuses for staying at home, or 
returning early to it from the canvass. As no 
colporteur sells DAWN to every one he meets, 
and could sell more by trying more places, we 
should each try to sell one more DAWN, if not 
several more each day, and thus, by each, preach 
sixteen more sermons each day: But tract distribution 
is not hard work, like DAWN selling, 
and what good excuse can any of us offer for 
neglecting to circulate our good tracts. 

A word to the wise is sufficient; but while 
the spirit is willing the flesh is weak, and so I 
add some incentives to engage or to engage 
more fully in these services for Christ. Before 
starting to canvass for DAWN, read a stirring 
chapter in the Bible or in MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
or a few of the Hymns of Dawn descriptive of 
our glorious hopes for both the Church and the 



world. If timid about giving tracts, read as 
above or read the tracts themselves over again, 
and if you are unselfish and loving as the gospel 
is, you will take pleasure in giving some to the 
truth-starving. 

Another incentive to present service is the 
short time for it— "the night cometh when no 
man can work." It is evident that a portion 
of the forty years of the Gospel "harvest" will 
be a "night" without opportunity for labor. 
And this harvest time is now nearly half consumed: 
since there probably will be ten years 
of "night," but little more than a decade remains 
for active service. But in another passage 
(John 11:10) our Lord Jesus, referring to 
the present opportunity, says: "Are there not 
twelve hours in a day?" [May not this imply 
that the forty-year day will be practically divided 
in the middle? and, hence, that from 
1895 onward the darkness may be expected to 
gather, more and more?— EDITOR.] Since there 
are the same number of hours to each individual, 
can a man excuse himself for misappropriating 
his consecrated time? 

Every man has his day of twelve hours for 
"walking" and no more; and if he attempt 
to make up at night, by an extra effort, for 
the loss of his precious twelve hours of day he 
finds people unready— either asleep or getting 
ready for it. For a Scriptural use of the term 
"walk" see John 7:1 and 6:66, also Psa. 14:2 
and 1 19:3. Jesus evidently designed to teach 
the need of unwavering, continuous, effective 
use of our present opportunities for service. 
He that walks by day has light and he that 
walks by night (either night of either text) has 
no light, and stumbleth. 

In love, fellowship and service, 
J. B. Adamson. 

[Tract No. 14 is specially good to leave at 
houses where you have failed to get an order 
for DAWN. Some leave them saying, Read 
this little tract and you may want one of my 

books next day, when you will see me 

delivering copies to your neighbors. And often 
they watch for them and purchase.— EDITOR.] 



R1504 : page 83 

VOL. XIV. MARCH 15, 1893. NO. 6. 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



How sacred the memories which gather around 
the anniversary of our Lord's death. It calls 
to mind the Father's love as exhibited in the 
entire plan of salvation, the center of which 
was the gift of his Son as our Redeemer. It 
calls specially to our thoughts him who gave 
himself a ransom— a corresponding price— for 
all. Then faith comes still nearer to him who 
"suffered, the just for the unjust," and with 
grateful, overflowing hearts and tear-dimmed 
eyes we whisper, My Savior! My Redeemer! 
My Lord and Master! "He loved me, and 
gave himself for me." Ah, yes!— 

"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 

Which before the cross I spend: 
Life and joy and peace possessing 

From my best and truest Friend." 

How blessed the thought that he cares to 
have us think of him and call him ours— he 
so great— "far above angels and every title 
that is named; next to the Father himself;— 
and we so insignificant, so imperfect, so unworthy 
of such a friendship. And yet to think 
that "he is not ashamed to call us Brethren," 
and that he is pleased to have us memorialize 
his death and that he gave us the bread to emblemize 
his broken flesh and the wine to emblemize 
his shed blood— the one to represent 
the human rights and privileges purchased for 
all and of which all may partake, the other to 
represent the life he gave which secured everlasting 
life for all who will accept it. 

How delightful, too, to count, as he and the 
Jews did, the days and the hours, even until 
finally "the hour being come," he sat down with 
his disciples to celebrate the death of the typical 
Paschal lamb, and to consider the deliverance 
of Israel's firstborn from the great destruction 
which came upon Egypt, and the 
subsequent deliverance accomplished through 
those first-born ones for all the typical Israel 
of God. 

How precious to look beyond the type which 
was commemorated, and to hear the Master, as 
he took new emblems, say, "This [celebrating 
of the Passover] do [henceforth] in remembrance 
of me." Ah yes! in the crucified one we 
can now see "The Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world." "Christ our passover 
[lamb] is sacrificed for us, therefore let us 
keep the feast;" for as oft as we do this, we do 
show forth our Lord's death until he come 



again— until, his kingdom having come, we shall 
be permitted to drink with him the new wine 
(the new life and joy) in the Kingdom.— Matt. 26:29; 
ICor. 5:7,8; 11:26. 

But we are not only privileged to enjoy the 
favors of our Lord's sacrifice (by partaking of its 
merit and its consequent advantages, viz., justification, 
and restitution rights and privileges 
as redeemed men), but more than this: we are 
invited to share with our Master in the sacrifice 
and in its glorious reward. He says to us, 
Whoever is in sympathy with my work and its 
results— whoever would share my Kingdom and 
join in its work of blessing the world, let him 
also be broken with me, and let him join me 
in drinking the cup of self-denial, unto death. 
To all such he says, "Drink ye all of it." 

Gladly, dear Lord, we eat (appropriate to our 

R1504 : page 84 

necessities) the merit of thy pure human nature 
sacrificed for us— for our justification. 
Gladly, too, we will partake of the cup of suffering 
with thee, realizing it to be a blessed privilege 
to suffer with thee, that in due time we 
may also reign with thee;— to be dead with 
thee, that in the everlasting future we may live 
with thee and be like thee and share thy love 
and thy glory as thy Bride. Oh! that we may 
be faithful, not only in the performance of the 
symbol, but also of the reality. Blessed Lord, 
we hear thy word saying, "Ye shall indeed 
drink of my cup and be baptized with my baptism. 
Lord, thy grace is sufficient for us, for 
we are wholly thine, now and forever. 

Oh! what a thought: that if faithful in the 
present privilege of drinking of his cup and being 
broken with our Lord as his body, we with 
him will soon be that "Church of the first-born 
ones whose names are written in heaven," and 
as such shall constitute the Royal Priesthood, 
which, under our great High Priest, will lead, 
out of the Egyptian bondage and slavery to 
sin, all those slaves of sin whose groanings and 
prayers for deliverance have entered the ears 
of the Lord of Sabaoth. 

These will be some of the thoughts which will 
constrain numbers of the Lord's people all over 
the world to meet in little groups, and sometimes 
quite alone with Jesus, on the evening of 
March 30th, next, after six o'clock, to celebrate 

R1505 : page 84 

on its anniversary the most notable event in 



the history of the Universe of God. 

Eat and drink, O beloved, says the King to 
his spouse. (Sol. Song 5:1.) Let us eat and drink 
reverently, devotedly, thoughtfully, prayerfully, 
tearfully perhaps, as we each think of our 
Redeemer's love and sacrifice, and pledge ourselves 
afresh to be dead with him. Meet with 
any who recognize him as their ransom, and 
who are pleased to do this in remembrance of 
him— or else do it alone. 

Let your heart be so full of the reality that 
forms and ceremonies will generally be forgotten, 
except such as are needed for decency 
and order. Prepare beforehand some sort of 
"fruit of the vine." Our preference is for 
stewed-raisin juice or unfermented grape juice, 
and for either Jewish unleavened bread or plain 
water-crackers, which are about the same in substance 
—flour, water and salt, without leaven. 
Leaven being a symbol of sin or corruption, 
yeast-raised bread is not an appropriate symbol 
of our Lord, the undefiled and separate 
from sinners. 

The Church at Allegheny will meet at "Bible 
House" chapel, Arch Street, at the hour above 
named. All, who trust in the substitutionary 
sacrifice finished at Calvary, and who are fully 
consecrated to the Redeemer's service, and 
who can make it convenient to meet with us, 
will be made very welcome. Some who profess 
that their wills are fully immersed into the 
will of Christ, desire to symbolize their baptism; 
and an opportunity will be afforded at 
3 o'clock on the afternoon preceding the Memorial 
Supper. On the subject of Baptism see 
your TOWER for May '88, of which issue we have 
no more. For further particulars concerning 
the Memorial Supper see March '91 TOWER. 



R1504 : page 84 

CHRISTIAN UNION VS. UNITY. 



We have pointed out repeatedly the tendency 
of Christian people toward Union; showing, too, 
that such a union is predicted in Scripture; 
but that its results, while designed to be good, 
will really be bad; and this because it will be 
a mechanical union instead of a heart unity. 
The following clip from the Pittsburg Times, 
February 22d, shows that worldly people discern 
that the various denominations, while crying 



aloud for union, are far from united in 
heart or head. 

STRUGGLING FOR THE UNATTAINABLE. 



"We have read with care most of the last 
number of The Church Union, and seldom anything 
more melancholy. The object of this 
paper is to induce believers and congregations 
everywhere "to manifest to the world their 
essential unity in faith and spirit," and almost 
every article in it is evidence that the object is 
unattainable. 

"A distinguished Bishop of the Episcopal 
Church writes that there are two theories of the 
ministry, personal and official, that his denomination 

R1504 : page 85 

holds to the latter, 'and enjoins it upon 
her members as the one exclusive ministry, 
which they must accept or fall under discipline 
as law-breakers.' To the many who deny this 
'one exclusive ministry' there is not much 
hope for unity in that quarter. 

"Another writer lays down as prerequisites 
to unity, belief in the Bible as the sole guide to 
spiritual life, faith in the divinity of Jesus, and 
baptism; but a third writer, mocking at creeds 
as they exist, says: Let us have more thinking, 
then, upon the higher criticism, evolution, 
the intermediate state, the duration of future 
punishment, and such like matters, but whenever 
anyone rises to impose his opinions in 
regard to such subjects upon the brotherhood, 
let us resist him to the uttermost.' The latter 
permits the discussion and the overthrow, if it 
comes to that, of what the former sets forth as 
final truths, without the acceptance of which 
there can be no union. 

"A fourth writer asks: "Why not come together 
in a loving fellowship of worship and 
work on the basis of the Christian religion as 
propounded by Jesus and his elect ones in the 
New Testament?" Upon this a fifth writer remarks 
that upon it all churches, Greek, Roman, 
Protestant orthodox and Protestant heterodox, 
ought to be able to unite, as they one and all 
"claim to hold a primitive belief and to 
practice the primitive ordinances." Whether 
he meant it or not he revealed the absurdity 
of attempting to find a basis of union in that 
which in its very nature is the cause of disunion, 
and which was never more incisive than 



R1508 : page 85 
PALESTINE. 



"A good land and a large, a land flowing with milk and 
honey."— Exod. 3:8. 

Blest land of Judea! Thrice hallowed of song, 
Where the holiest of memories pilgrim-like throng: 
In the shade of thy palms, by the shores of thy sea, 
On the hills of thy beauty, my heart is with thee. 

With the eye of a spirit, I look on thy shore, 
Where pilgrim and prophet have lingered before; 
With the glide of a spirit, I traverse the sod 
Made bright by the steps of the angels of God. 

Blue seas of the hills! in my spirit I hear 
Thy waters, Gennesaret, chime on my ear; 
Where the lowly and just with the people sat down, 
And the spray on the dust of his sandals was thrown. 

Beyond are Bethulia's mountains of green, 
And the desolate hills of the wild Gadarene; 
And I pause on the goat crags of Tabor to see 
The gleam of thy waters, O dark Galilee! 

Hark! a sound in the valley where, swollen and strong, 
Thy river, O Kishon, is sweeping along; 
Where the Canaanite strove with Jehovah in vain, 
And thy torrent grew dark with the blood of the slain. 

There, down from his mountain, stern Zebulon came, 
And Napthali's stay, with his eyeballs of flame, 
And the chariots of Jabin rolled harmlessly on, 
For the strength of the Lord was Abinoam's son! 

There sleep the still rocks, and the caverns which rang 
To the song which the beautiful prophetess sang, 
When the princes of Issachar stood by her side, 
And the shout of a host in its triumph replied. 

Lo, Bethlehem's hill-site before me is seen, 
With the mountains around and the valleys between, 
There rested the shepherds of Judah, and there 
The song of the angels rose sweet on the air. 

And Bethany's palm-trees in beauty still throw 
Their shadows at noon on the ruins below; 
But where are the sisters who hastened to greet 



The lowly Redeemer, and sit at his feet? 

I tread where the twelve in their wayfaring trod; 
I stand where they stood, with the chosen of God- 
Where his blessing was heard, and his lessons were taught, 
Where the blind were restored and the healing was 
wrought. 

Oh, here with his flock the sad Wanderer came— 
These hills He toiled over in grief are the same— 
The founts where He drank by the wayside still flow, 
And the same airs are blowing which breathed on His 
brow. 

And throned on her hills sits Jerusalem yet, 
But with dust on her forehead and chains on her feet; 
For the crown of her pride to the mocker hath gone, 
And the holy shechinah is dark where it shone. 

But wherefore this dream of the earthly abode 
Of humanity clothed in the brightness of God? 
There my spirit but turned from the outward and dim, 
It could gaze, even now, on the presence of Him. 

Not in clouds and in terrors, but gentle as when 
In love and in meekness He moved among men; 
And the voice which breathed peace to the waves of 

the sea, 
In the hush of my spirit would whisper to me! 

And what if my feet may not tread where He stood, 
Nor my ears hear the dashing of Galilee's flood, 
Nor my eyes see the cross which he bowed Him to bear, 
Nor my knees press Gethsemane's garden of prayer. 

R1508 : page 86 

Yet, loved of the Father, thy spirit is near 
To the meek and the lowly and penitent here; 
And the voice of thy love is the same even now, 
As at Bethany's tomb, or on Olivet's brow. 

Oh, the outward hath gone!— but in glory and power, 
The spirit surviveth the things of an hour; 
Unchanged, undecaying, its Pentecost flame 
On the heart's secret altar is burning the same. 
-J. G. Whittier. 



R1505 : page 86 

THE ONENESS OF THE DIVINE FAMILY. 



"I pray for them... which thou hast given me; for 
they are thine; and thou hast given them to me; and I 
am glorified in them."— John 17:9,10. 

There is a touching pathos in this prayer of 
our Lord for his disciples as he was about to 
leave them which draws us very near to his 
loving heart; especially when he adds, "Neither 
pray I for these alone [then present with him], 
but for them also which shall believe on me 
through their word; that they all may be one, 
as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that 
they also may be one in us, that the world may 
believe that thou hast sent me. And the glory 
which thou gavest me I have given them, that 
they may be one, even as we are one— I in them 
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect 
in one, and that the world may know that thou 
hast sent me and hast loved them as thou hast 
loved me."— Verses 20-23. 

As we come to consider this beautiful expression 
of the Lord's sentiments with reference to 
the Church, we catch a glimpse of the glory of 
the blessed oneness of the divine family. It is 
a oneness of purpose, a oneness of confidence, 
a oneness of sympathy, a oneness of love, a 
oneness of honor, and a oneness of mutual 
possession. This oneness our Lord described 
as already existing between himself and the 
Father, but so far as his disciples were concerned 
it was and still is only prospective; and 
its full accomplishment is the ideal goal towards 
which we are taught to aspire. 

But let us study this exemplified oneness more 
closely that we may be enabled the more fully 
to enter into it. In the first place we notice 
that the one purpose which is common to both 
the Father and the Son is the Father's purpose, 
which was gradually revealed to the Son in due 
time and order, whose it also became by adoption. 
Since Jesus himself said, "Of that day 
and hour knoweth no man, no not the angels 
which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the 
Father" only (Mark 13:32), it is manifest that 
the revelation of that plan to him was a gradual 
one; and that he was led into the knowledge of its 
various features as they became due to be worked 
out through his instrumentality. Thus he was 
allowed to grow in knowledge; and thus, too, 
he was spared the sad spectacle of subsequent 
trouble which also lay along the pathway of the 
divine plan. Thus, while he joyfully worked 
out the grand plan of creation (John 1:3; Prov. 8:22-31), 
he probably knew nothing of God's 
purpose for the subsequent permission of evil 
and the necessity for the great work of redemption. 



Before he came to that test of faith in God 

his confidence in his almighty power, wisdom 

and love had been firmly established by the experiences 

of the past. For centuries he had seen 

his mighty works, marked his wondrous wisdom 

and experienced his tender love. Could he 

doubt him then when another feature of his 

plan made manifest the great work of redemption 

and restitution, and gave to him the privilege 

of undertaking this work, also for the joy 

that the Father set before him? No: doubtless 

he did not at first realize the depths of humiliation 

and sorrow through which he must pass, 

but, step by step, along the painful way of humiliation 

and suffering, his faith in the Father, 

founded upon his previous experimental knowledge, 

sustained him, as it is written— "By his 

knowledge shall my righteous servant justify 

many."— Isa. 53:11. 

We next notice between the Father and the 
Son a beautiful oneness of confidence. The 
Son trusted the Father fully— at first, because 
it was easy and natural. Created in the likeness 
of God, trust in the Being who brought 
him into existence was spontaneous, and experience 
served but to develop and establish it. And 
the Father trusted the Son fully— first, because 
he recognized in him the inherent principles of 
righteousness and truth and filial loyalty which 

R1505 : page 87 

he himself had given him; and, as the course 
of time and experience developed and the more 
firmly established his Son in righteousness, his 
confidence in him became firmly established. 
And so strong was the Father's confidence in 
the subsequent fidelity of his beloved Son, that 
he did not hesitate to declare the results of his 
faithfulness thousands of years before he even 
began the work of redemption. He even declared 
all the special features of his work, by the 
mouth of his holy prophets at various intervals 
for four thousand years before he began the 
work. And still he declares that the work shall 
in due time be gloriously accomplished. How 
wonderful and how beautiful is this mutual 
confidence! 

We further notice a oneness of sympathy between 
the Father and the Son. The Son glories 
in the Father's plan, saying, "I delight to do 
thy will, O my God." He delighted in it because 
he discovered therein the worthy features 
of his Father's glorious character; and though 
his faith may have been temporarily tested 
by the permission of evil, his knowledge of 



God's character and resources and of the 
depth of his wisdom did not permit him to 
doubt, but held him still in loving trust in his 
infinite goodness and grace, and therefore in 
readiness to acquiesce fully in the measures 
proposed for the final triumph of righteousness 
and truth. 

And the Father was likewise in loving sympathy 
with the Son, not permitting him to be 
tried above what he was able to bear; and not 
leaving him to bear any trial alone, but always 
granting him the light of his countenance and 
a joyful sense of admiring approval (John 11:42; 
Matt. 3:17), except when, for our sakes, he permitted 
him for a moment to feel that he was 
forsaken; when, in the anguish of his soul, he 
cried out at this unusual experience, "My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" 

Now mark the oneness of love manifested. 
In every act we have already noted we have 
seen it expressed. It was mutual love that delighted 
to manifest and express mutual confidence, 
that gloried in the same loving and benevolent 
purposes, that sympathized fully with 
each other's thoughts and feelings, and that delighted 
in the close and blessed relationship of 
Father and Son. The Father did not treat the 
Son as a servant and hide his purposes from 
him, but delighted to take him into his confidence 
in so far as his wisdom and prudence 
dictated— i.e., as the truth became meat in 
due season to him. And, in turn, the Son did 
not serve the Father as a hireling, but as a son 
with a common interest. The Father declared, 
"This is my beloved Son;" and the Son said, 
"I delight to do thy will." 

How blessed the fellowship! It was a fellowship 
of joy and a fellowship of suffering— of 
joy in a common anticipation of the future 
glory; and of suffering in mutual participation 
of the preliminary trials to secure that end. 
The Son suffered in his humiliation and his dying 
agony; and the Father suffered in giving 
his only begotten Son— an intensity of suffering 
which the loving, yearning hearts of devoted 
parents can best imagine and appreciate. 

There was further a recognized oneness of 
possessions clearly expressed by our Lord, who 
declared, "All things that the Father hath are 
mine." (John 16:15.) And the Apostle says, 
God hath appointed the Son the "heir of all 
things," and hath "set him at his own right 
hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality 
and power and might and dominion, 
and every name that is named, not only in this 
world, but also in that which is to come."— 



Heb. 1:1,2; Eph. 1:20,21. 

And lastly we notice a oneness of honor. 
In honor each seems to prefer the other. The 
Father says, Let all men honor the Son, even 
as they honor the Father. (John 5:23.) God 
has made him the brightness of his glory and 
the express image of his person, and exalted 
him to his own right hand, to the chief seat of 
power in his kingdom, giving him all power in 
heaven and in earth. --Heb. 1:2,3; Matt. 28:18. 

In the work of creation he has set him forth 
in great prominence and glory, saying, "Without 
him was not anything made that was made." 
In the work of redemption and restitution God 
has set him forth so prominently that his name 
is the theme on every tongue, almost to the 
eclipse of the Father's own glory, who of necessity 
is himself greater than the Son (1 Cor. 15:27), 

R1505 : page 88 

and to whom the glory pre-eminently 
belongs, as the Son also declares, saying, "My 
Father is greater than I;" and again, "I can 
of mine own self do no thing.... The Father 
that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works."— 
John 5:30; 14:10. 

The Son's corresponding anxiety to glorify 
the Father is most marked in the instance when, 
realizing that he was approaching the dreadful 
hour of his dying agony, he exclaimed, "Now 
is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? 
Father save me from this hour? But for this 
cause came I unto this hour. Father glorify 
thy name"— even at this cost to me. (John 12:27,28.) 
Again we hear him say, "Father, 
the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy 
Son also may glorify thee." (John 17:1.) 
And when the great work of redemption and 
restitution is accomplished we see him delivering 
up the kingdom to God, the Father, and 
subjecting himself to his further direction that 
Jehovah himself may be universally recognized 
as all in all. (1 Cor. 15:24,28.) And we, 
like him, may surely trust that his purposes for 
the ages to follow will but the further express 
and emphasize the same lines of his glorious 
character— his justice, his wisdom, his love and 
his power. 

Glorious oneness! who could suggest an improvement 
to its wondrous beauty and completeness? 
But the wonder and joy increase 
when we learn that it is also our privilege to 
come into this same blessed oneness with God. 
What! we inquire— the very same oneness as 
above described? Yes; undoubtedly it is our 



privilege to enter into the very same relationship 
and privileges and blessings. To this end 
consider the exceeding great and precious promises 
and see that it is ours to have the same oneness 
with God— of purpose, of confidence, of 
sympathy, of love, of honor and of possession. 

The same plan of God is presented to and 
adopted by us, and we also are invited to become 
co-workers with God in carrying it out 
(2 Cor. 6:1); and in so doing we are counted 
in with Christ Jesus as filling up the measure of 
the sufferings of the anointed body necessary 
to the accomplishment of that plan. Our heavenly 
Father also similarly manifests his confidence 
in us— in the loyalty of our hearts toward him 
and in the sincerity of our consecration to him 
—even though he recognizes our inherent weaknesses 
and inability to carry out fully our own 
determinations. But, notwithstanding this, so 
great is his confidence in our sincerity and integrity 
of heart, that, on our profession of faith 
and consecration, he fully accepts us as his sons 
and heirs, supplementing our weaknesses and 
shortcomings with the all-sufficient merit of our 
Redeemer, in whom we humbly trust. And 
not only so, but as sons, honored and beloved, 
he makes known to us also, his secret counsels, 
which others cannot know (Matt. 13:11), and 
invites us to confide in him as children and to 
speak to him freely of all that concerns us, in 
full assurance of his loving interest even in our 
smallest affairs. (Psa. 103:13,14.) And then 
he commits a portion of his great work to us. 
He gives us certain talents, certain portions of 
his goods, and tells us to invest them for him 
according to our best judgment as to the profitableness 
of the results, not dictating all the 
minutiae of the management as to hireling servants, 
but merely submitting to us the general 
principles which should govern us. Thus, for 
instance, he gives us his plan as to the work in 
hand with such general directions as, not to 
cast our pearls before swine; to be wise as serpents 
and harmless as doves; to give meat in 
due season; to do good to all men as we have 
opportunity, but especially to the household of 
faith; and to observe the times and seasons, 
and the character of the work in each— seed-sowing 
in the spring and reaping in the harvest 
time; etc., etc. Thus with general directions 
he sends us forth— not like machines to do a 
monotonous treadmill service, but as intelligent 
beings, to use our brains as well as our hands 
and feet. So he counsels us to "study" to show 
ourselves workmen approved, and to consider 
and think, and not to be "as the horse, or as 



the mule, which have no understanding, whose 
mouth must be held in with bit and bridle." 
(Psa. 32:9.) Then, according to our zeal and 
faithfulness, not only in the use of our hands, 
but also of our brains, in the Lord's service his 
confidence in us increases and we are entrusted 
with more and more of his goods and given a 

R1505 : page 89 

corresponding sense of our heavenly Father's 
approval. And the mutual confidence and fellowship 
of purpose and work, draw our hearts 
closer and closer to the heart of the Eternal, 
and the joyful realization of sonship and mutual 
interest and confidence and sympathy fills 
our hearts. 

We are also assured of the same love from 
our heavenly Father which he exercises toward 
our Lord Jesus. The statement seems almost 
startling; but yet, hearken to our Lord's prayer 
—"I pray for them. ..that they may be one 
...that they may be made perfect in one... 
that the world may know that thou hast... 
loved them as thou hast loved me." (John 17:20-23.) 
In amazement we inquire, How 
can this be? Our Lord Jesus was always in perfect 
harmony with the Father, a son which 
gloriously reflected his likeness; but it has not 
been so with us: we were sinners and had 
nothing in us worthy of love. Yes, but we have 
been washed and cleansed, and, however imperfect 
our earthen vessels may still be, our 
hearts are perfect in his sight who is able to 
read the heart. And, as he sees us with a perfect 
heart— a perfect purpose and intention- 
striving to overcome the weaknesses and disabilities 
of our imperfect flesh, and with painful, 
yet determined, effort to do his will, and humbly 
trusting in the provision which he has made 
for our redemption from the fall, God recognizes 
in us that which is worthy of his love. 
And so our Lord Jesus gives us clearly to understand 
that the Father loves us, even as he 
loves the Son. 

And not only is this equality of the Father's 
love for us as for Christ Jesus thus declared, 
but it is also manifested; for we are called to 
be joint heirs with his Son and partakers of his 
glory; and even as all things are his, they are 
also said to be ours.— Rom. 8:17; 
1 Cor. 3:21-23. 

While such is the oneness between the heavenly 
Father and all his anointed sons, it is blessed 
also to mark the same oneness between Christ 
Jesus and his anointed brethren. The Lord 



Jesus does not selfishly grasp all the glory and 
seek to retain it for himself, but the rather with 
admiration he contemplates their acquired 
worthiness and says, They "are mine and I am 
glorified in them" (John 17:10); and he would 
have them all bound up together with himself 
in the Father's love. He would also have them 
with him, beholding and sharing the glory which 
the Father had given him from the foundation 
of the world— the glory of his mighty creative 
works, with all the other evidences of his Father's 
love.-John 17:22-24. 

Thus all the divine family are bound together 
in one bond of love and fellowship and confidence 
and sympathy and harmony and common 
interest; and the honor and glory of one are 
the honor and glory of all. The Lord's prayer 
abounds with petitions for this oneness. Mark 
the expression (verse 21)— "That they all may 
be one; as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee" 
[thy spirit or disposition and purposes and aim 
being common to us all]. Hence he would have 
us adopt the same Father's spirit, aim and purpose, 
and devote all our powers with zeal and 
faithfulness to the accomplishment of the Father's 
will. Amen, so let it be. 



page 89 

INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSON, APRIL 2, '93. 



R1505 : page 89 

THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST. 



II. QUAR., LESSON I., APR. 2, MATT. 28:1-10. 

Golden Text— "Now is Christ risen from the dead and 
become the firstfruit of them that slept."— 1 Cor. 15:20. 

The familiar account of the Lord's resurrection 
is before us, and the brief record calls 
up a train of reflections worthy of our deepest 
reverence and profoundest gratitude. In the 
resurrection of Christ we have the assurance 
that death shall not always have dominion 
over us. His death satisfied the claims of 
justice against us, and his resurrection is the 
proof to us of the Father's acceptance of his 
sacrifice— our corresponding price— for the 



cancellation of our debt. 

So important was this feature of the divine 
plan that the Apostle says that if Christ be 
not risen our faith is vain and there is no 
evidence that our sins are forgiven. (1 Cor. 15:14-18.) 
"But," he adds, "now is Christ 
risen from the dead and become the firstfruit 

R1505 : page 90 

of them that slept." (Verse 20.) And 
if the resurrection of Christ was but a first 
fruit, then the after fruits must in due time 
also appear. And so we read, "Marvel not 
at this; for the hour is coming when all that 
are in their graves shall hear his voice [the 
voice of the Son of God], and shall come 
forth; they that have done good, unto the 
resurrection of life; and they that have done 
evil unto the resurrection of judgment" 
[krisis, trial].— John 5:28,29. And again 
we read that "God hath appointed a day [the 
Millennial age] in the which he will judge 
the world in righteousness by that man 
whom he hath ordained"— Jesus Christ- 
Acts 17:31. 

Thus in the resurrection of Christ we have 
assurance of a resurrection of all men— both 
of the Church and the world. The former are 
to have part in "his resurrection"— "the first 
resurrection"— and are to be joint-heirs with 
him in his Millennial kingdom; they are to 
be kings and priests unto God, and of the 
"Seed" of promise through whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed (Rev. 20:6; 
Phil. 3:21; Rom. 8:17; Rev. 1:6; Gal. 3:29; 
Gen. 28:14), while the latter, through 
this risen and exalted body of which Christ 
Jesus is the head, are to be granted (offered) 
the blessings of full restitution to the former 
estate of human perfection lost in Eden,— 
a full resurrection or lifting up to human 
perfection.— Acts 3:19-21. 

It is only the long deferment of the "appointed 
day" of resurrection or restitution 
that makes this hope and promise seem like 
an idle tale, but now the time draws very 
near, as all may see who study the evidences 
presented in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vols. II. 
and III., "The Time is at Hand" and "Thy 
Kingdom Come." 

In this lesson we have also a beautiful example 
of the loving devotion of some of the 
Lord's followers— the Marys who improved 
the very earliest opportunity to honor him 
whom they so loved. And their devotion 



was richly rewarded in being the very first 
to see the Lord and receive from him the 
message to bear to the other disciples. 

For a particular account of our Lord's 
doings during the forty days after his resurrection, 
and the character of his change from 
natural to spiritual conditions, etc., see MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., pages 107-172. 



page 90 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1505 : page 90 
THE BOOK OF JOB. 



The Book of Job is credited with being the 
finest piece of literature in the Hebrew language. 
It is a poem: and all scholars admit 
that no translation yet given does it justice. 
Martin Luther, after reviewing his last effort to 
translate it into the German, said, "Job is suffering 
more from my version than from the taunts 
of his friends, and would prefer his dunghill 
to my translation of his lamentation." The 
Book of Job "is admitted, with hardly a dissenting 
voice, to be the most sublime religious 
poem in the literature of the world," said 
Samuel Cox. "I call that one of the grandest 
things ever written with pen. ...There is 
nothing written, in the Bible and out of it, of 
equal literary merit," said Thomas Carlisle. 

Whoever was used of God as the penman, his 
name is not given. The book is introduced 
with a prose narrative of Job's losses and sufferings, 
and of his patient endurance, then follow 
the poetic colloquies between Job and his 
three friends, then Elihu's argument, then the 
Almighty's address, then Job's confession. 
The conclusion, relating Job's return to favor 
and blessing, and his death, is in prose. 



Some have assumed that the Book of Job is 
merely a parable and Job himself, therefore, 
merely an imaginary character. But if this were 
the case, the teachings of the book would not 
be different. However, we see no cause to 
doubt that such a person did live and pass 
through the experiences related. In Ezek. 14:14 
and James 5:11, Job is classed with other 
holy men, which would not be the case were 

R1505 : page 91 

this narrative merely a parable. Besides, there 
are particular details given (respecting Job, his 
family and friends, and especially Elihu's genealogy), 
such as are not common to parables. 

The fact that Job lived one hundred and 
forty years after his adversities, or in all probably 
over two hundred years, together with the 
fact that neither he nor his friends make any 
allusion to Israel or Moses or the Law, nor to 
Abraham and God's covenant made with him, 
seems to indicate beyond doubt that he belonged 
to the Patriarchal age; possibly living about 
the same time as Abraham. His home was 
evidently in Arabia and probably not far from 
Palestine. 

Job is introduced as a man of great learning 
and influence; as a man of great piety who knew 
and reverenced God and appreciated justice; 
as a man of great generosity, who considered 
the widow and the orphaned; and as a merchant-prince 
of great wealth, who, by his numerous 
servants and three hundred camels, carried on 
an extended and very prosperous traffic. Suddenly 
disaster came upon him and he was bereft 
of his children, his wealth, his influence and 
his health. He sought in vain for an explanation 
as to why God should permit such evils to 
befall him, yet still trusted in God, saying, 
"Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him,"— 
while his wife urged that it had been without 
divine appreciation that he had sought to do 
justice and mercy all his life, and exclaimed, 
"Curse God and die!" 

His three friends came to visit him, and, taking 
much the same view, told him in lengthy 
argument that he must have been a great sinner 
and a hypocrite. But, conscious of his own 
heart-honesty toward God, Job defends himself 
and goes to too great an extreme in declaring 
his innocence, but silences his critics. He 
seems to realize his need of some one to represent 
his cause before the Lord, and cries out 
that he is as righteous as he knows how to be; 
that he cannot reason the matter with God, 



being so much beneath him in knowledge and 

power; that the wilfully wicked are not so 

troubled, while he who has pursued righteousness 

is so afflicted that life has no further 

pleasure and he wishes he had never been born. 

(Chapters 9, 10 and 16.) Feeling his own insufficiency 

R1506 : page 91 

to state his case before the great 

Jehovah he desires "a days-man [i.e., a mediator] 

betwixt" God and himself.— Chapters 9:33; 

16:21. 

Job's masterly reply to the false reasonings 
of his friends (which many improperly quote as 
inspired), and his expressions of confidence in 
God and of his ultimate deliverance, are clearly 
presented in Chapter 13:1-16. And then 
with prophetic wisdom, in Chapter 14, he presents 
a most wonderful statement of the course 
of God's dealing with mankind. 

The question which perplexed Job and confused 
his reasonings was the same that for 
centuries has confused others of God's people; 
namely, Why does God permit evil (calamities, 
afflictions, etc.) to come upon his faithful servants? 
and why are the wicked permitted to 
flourish? But not until the Gospel dispensation 
was it possible for any to know the mind 
of God on this subject; for it is one of the 
"deep things" which could only be revealed 
by the Spirit of God, and only to those begotten 
of that spirit as Paul explains. (1 Cor. 2:10-14.) 
And the Holy Spirit was not thus 
given, as a guide and teacher, until after Christ 
had redeemed us and ascended up on high, 
there to present his sacrifice as the price of 
our return to divine favor, peace and 
communion. 

Although many are still in the dark on this 
subject, it is now open and clear to all the 
earnest ones to whom "it is granted to know 
the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven," to 
understand "the deep things of God." (Matt. 13:11; 
1 Cor. 2:10.) These see that the reign 
of evil, the reign of sin and death, under 
Satan, the prince of this world, is permitted for 
two reasons: first, that all men may gain a full 
experience of the exceeding sinfulness of sin 
and the bitterness of its legitimate fruit; and 
secondly, that God's people may be fully tried 
and tested as to their loyalty to God in the 
shadow of affliction and trial, as well as in the 
sunshine of health and prosperity. Thus, while 
God did not directly cause the evil state of things 
which surrounds us in nature and among men, 



but let it come upon men as the legitimate result 

R1506 : page 92 

or fruit of disobedience, sin, yet he does 

make use of even the wrath of man and the sins 

of men and the animosity of Satan to work out 

grand designs which they do not comprehend, 

and of which his children know only by faith 

in his Word of revelation. For instance, how 

little did Satan and those malicious Jewish 

priests and Pharisees and those heartless Roman 

soldiers know that they were assisting in the 

working out of the divine plan when tempting, 

mocking, insulting and crucifying the Lamb 

of God! And so it is with the many afflictions 

of God's people— especially those of the "little 

flock," "the bride of Christ,"— they are designed 

to fit and polish them for the greater 

usefulness and honor in the future developments 

of God's great plan; and thus, regardless of 

the wilfulness or the ignorance of the persecutors, 

these trials of faith and patience are working 

out for such a far more exceeding and 

eternal weight of glory— preparing the called 

ones to be heirs of glory, by cultivating (in 

those who are properly exercised by such experiences), 

patience, experience, brotherly sympathy 

and love— which is God-like-ness. Such, 

and such only, can rejoice in tribulation and 

realize that all things (bad, as well as good, 

unfavorable, as well as favorable) will be overruled 

in God's providence for their ultimate 

benefit. 

But, returning to our consideration of Job, 
let us note in Chapter 14 some of his prophetic 
wisdom. The first four verses graphically 
picture what all of experience realize— that human 
life under present conditions is full of trial 
and sorrow, from the cradle to the tomb. And 
Job shows that he realizes that as a son of fallen 
parentage he could not be perfect, free from 
sin, "clean," in the full sense of that word. 

In verses 5,6, he tells the Lord that he recognizes 
the fact that the authority and power 
to limit man's days are in his hands, but urges 
(not seeing the ministry of trouble), Why not 
let me and all men live out our short time in 
peace— even as we would not afflict a hireling 
who already has a heavy, burdensome task! 

Verses 7-10 are close reasonings respecting 
the utter hopelessness of man in death, so far 
as any powers of his own are concerned. A 
tree may die and yet its root retain life, which, 
under favorable conditions may spring up into 
another tree. But when man dies there is no 



root left, no spark of life remains— he giveth 
up the spirit of life, and where is he? 

Having confessed that there is no ground for 
hope inherent in man, Job begins to express 
the only, the real hope of our race— a resurrection 
—see verses 12,13. Man lies down in 
death and loses all power to arouse himself— 
nor can he be resuscitated from the sleep of 
death by anyone, until God's due time— the 
resurrection morning, the Millennial day— 
when the present symbolic "heavens" shall 
have passed away, and the "new heavens" or 
new spiritual ruling power— Christ's Kingdom 
—shall have come into control of the world. 
In this Job fully agrees with the teachings of 
our Lord and the apostles. 

The more he thinks of that blessed time when 
evil shall no more have dominion, but when a 
King shall reign in righteousness and princes 
execute judgment, the more he wishes that he 
might die and be at rest, and exclaims (verse 13), 
"Oh, that thou would'st hide me in the 
grave [sheol]; that thou would'st keep me secret 
[hidden] until thy wrath be past; that thou 
would'st appoint me a set time and remember 
me." Job had faith in a resurrection, else he 
would never have uttered this prayer for death, 
—for hiding in the grave. But he preferred 
death, and desired to "sleep" (verse 12) until 
the "morning," for one reason only— that he 
might have no further experience with sin and 
with God's wrath— evil. 

While a short period in the end of the Gospel 
age is specially called "the day of wrath and 
revelation of the righteous judgment of God," 
because it will be "A time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation," yet the entire 
period from the time when Adam fell is 
called a time of divine wrath, and properly so, 
because in all this long period "the wrath of 
God is revealed against all unrighteousness," 
in a variety of ways. While love is a controlling 
principle in the divine government, it can 
operate only in harmony with justice and wisdom; 
and it was both just and wise to let man 
feel the real weight of condemnation to death 

R1506 : page 93 

incurred by wilful transgression, in order that 
when love should in due time provide a ransom 
and a resurrection, the culprit might the 
more gladly avail himself of the provided favors 
of restitution and everlasting life. Thus, death 
and all the evils now permitted to come upon 
the culprit race (in which also the "new creatures 



in Christ" are given a share, for their development 
in grace) are manifestations of God's 
wrath which will be yet further shown in the 
great time of trouble; to be followed by full 
and clear manifestations of divine love and 
favor in Christ and the glorified Church during 
the Millennial age.— Rom. 1:18. 

Job desired to be hidden in the grave until 
the reign of sin and death should be ended;— 
until in due time the light of the goodness of 
God, shining in the face of Jesus Christ, our 
Lord, shall bless all nations;— until, as the Sun 
of Righteousness, Christ shall shine upon humanity 
with healing beams. It was for this 
culmination that Job longed and prayed and 
waited. 

In verses 14 and 15, he puts the question 
pointedly, as though to determine and settle 
his faith; but he immediately answers affirmatively. 
"Thou shalt call, and I will answer thee 
[and awake out of the sleep of Adamic death. 
Compare John 5:28,29]: Thou wilt have a desire 
to the work of thine hands"— for his people 
are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus.— 
Eph. 2:10. 

When Job had refuted the arguments of his 
three friends, Elihu (whose name signifies, God 
himself) spoke from a different standpoint, reproving 
the three friends as well as Job himself. 
Elihu shows Job that he had been reasoning in 
part from a wrong premise— that he must not 
expect to fully comprehend all the ways of one 
so far above him, but must trust in God's justice 
and in his wisdom. And in Chapter 33:23,24 
he shows the one thing needful to man's 
recovery from the power of death and his restoration 
to divine favor, saying, "If there be with 
him a messenger as defender, one of a thousand 
[i.e., a rare one] to declare his own righteousness 
for man, then will God be gracious unto 
him [man] and say, Release him from going 
down to the grave: I have found a ransom." 

This is indeed the case with man. God's 
wisdom and justice cannot be impugned— the 
sentence of death is justly upon all men through 
father Adam (Rom. 5:12), but God has provided 
us "a days-man," an advocate, Christ 
Jesus our Lord; and he, in harmony with the 
Father's plan, became a man, and then gave 
himself a ransom-price for all by paying the 
death-penalty that was upon Adam. And as 
soon as "the bride," otherwise called "his 
body" and "the temple," is complete, this 
great Mediator will stand forward to declare 
his righteousness as for or applicable to every 
one who will accept it when brought to a full 



knowledge of God's provision. 

Then will follow restitution, as pictured in 
verses 25 and 26. Physically these for whom 
the Mediator stands shall be restored to a perennial 
youth, in which death and decay will 
find no place: they shall find acceptance and 
communion with God in joy and peace; and 
he will restore to them the original perfection 
lost through sin in Eden. But an acknowledgment 
of God's justice and that the restitution 
was unmerited will be required as is indicated 
by verses 27,28: "He will chant it before 
men, and say: I have sinned and perverted the 
right; and it was not requited me. He has 
redeemed my soul from going into the pit and 

R1507 : page 93 

my life that it may be brought to the light." 

In conclusion Jehovah addresses Job, reproving 
his temerity in attempting, with his little 
knowledge, to judge God. This Job acknowledges, 
and finds peace in trusting God. Job's 
three friends, however, are severely reproved by 
God; but when their sacrifice is offered for them 
by Job they are restored to divine favor, while 
at once Job's prosperity returns— his friends 
and influence, the same number of children as 
before, and his wealth exactly doubled,— for he 
had twice as many flocks and herds and camels. 

This ending of Job's career with a general 
restitution, is incomprehensible to those who 
have never seen that the plan of God in Christ 
provides for a time of restitution of all things 
lost in Adam, to all of his race who will accept 
them under the terms of the New Covenant. 
(Acts 3:19-21.) But those who do see this 
plan of God can readily see, too, that Job's experience 

R1507 : page 94 

was not only actual, but also typical. 
He seems to represent mankind. Man was at 
first in divine likeness and favor with all things 
made subject to him. (Psa. 8:4-8.) Because 
of Adam's sin Satan* obtained an influence in 
human affairs which has resulted in degradation, 
sickness and death; but God has never really 
forsaken his creatures, and is even now waiting 
to be gracious unto all in and through Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 



*The account of Satan's conversation with God concerning 
Job should be understood as allegorical— after the 



style of "Pilgrim's Progress." 

page 94 

AFFLICTIONS VIEWED DIFFERENTLY. 



II. QUAR., LESSON II., APRIL 9, JOB 5:17-27. 

Golden Text— "For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth. 
-Heb. 12:6. 

This lesson is from the words of Eliphaz, 
whom God reproved for speaking unadvisedly 
according to human philosophy. It 
was his own wisdom as expressed in verse 27. 
The same false impressions prevail in 
many minds, dark respecting God's dealings 
with his children. The Golden Text expresses 
the true view. 

page 94 

JOB'S CONFIDENCE. 



II. QUAR., LESSON III., APRIL 16, JOB 23:1-10. 

Golden Text— "What I do thou knowest not now, but 
thou shaltknow hereafter."— John 13:7. 

Job's error in assuming himself just before 
God has already been shown. However, his 
faith in God is commendable. 

page 94 

JOB'S CONFESSION AND RESTORATION. 



II. QUAR., LESSON IV., APRIL 23, JOB 42:1-10. 

Golden Text— "Ye have heard of the patience of Job 
and have seen the end of the Lord: that the Lord is very 
pitiful and of tender mercy."— James 5:11. 

See article foregoing. 



R1507 : page 94 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



page 94 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-How grateful 
I feel that the Lord has brought me 
the precious "meat in due season;" and, in 
common with many of the other dear ones 
of the household, I love to feast upon these 
inspiring truths. But I am beginning more 
and more to see the grave responsibility 
connected with the entrusting of the Lord's 
truth to us in this testing time; and what 
a testing time it indeed is! How some are 
falling away on the right hand and on the 
left! Well might the prophet, referring to 
this day— the day of his wrath now beginning 
—exclaim, "Who shall be able to stand?" 
But, praise the name of the Lord, if our feet 
are planted squarely on the Rock, Christ 
Jesus and his ransom, none of these things 
will be able to move us; and though a thousand 
may fall at our side, it shall not come 
near us, for the "everlasting arms shall be 
underneath us." 

The Lord has graciously brought us "out 
of darkness into his marvelous light;" but 
unless our dying in the Lord is complete, 
with self and selfish ambitions buried, the 
tendency will be, as it too often is, to think 
we know even more than God has revealed, 
and to go beyond the limit of his Word and 
his glorious plan. "Therefore we ought to 
give the more earnest heed to the things 
which we have heard, lest at any time we 
should let them slip."— Heb. 2:1. 

But it can be only a little while longer before 
our time is ended. Let us pray the 
Lord to help our feet onward in the narrow 
way, that we stumble not nor fall, and, being 
"diligent, may be found of him in peace, 
without spot, and blameless." Take courage, 
then! "Let us lift up our heads, for our redemption 
draweth nigh." Pray for your 
brother who sometimes is weak and tempted, 
as I make mention of you in my prayers— 
"that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of glory, may give unto you the 
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge 
ofhim."-Eph. 1:16,17. 

Yours in his name, J. A. MITCHELL. 



R1507 : page 94 

New York. 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., DEAR BRETHREN: 

—Having withdrawn my subscriptions 
from all so-called orthodox institutions, I 
feel that I can give to the "Good Hopes" 
Fund $25.00 a month, as my offering for the 
spread of the truth that has done so much 
for me. Not having many talents in other 
directions, I want to use this one to my full 
extent. The "Evil One" tries to make me 
think that I can not afford it; but as all I 

R1507 : page 95 

have belongs to him who died for me, it is 
but giving back to him that which is his. 

Occasionally I have an opportunity to 
speak for the truth, but in most cases find a 
very deep seated prejudice against it, though 
from what I, at times, hear about it, the stand 
we have taken has made many Christian 
people think. The other day a friend asked 
me to subscribe to a Methodist missionary 
box, but I refused to do so, and thus made 
an opportunity to speak to her about the 
truth. She seemed quite interested, and 
said that when she had heard of my course 
she was astonished, I being the last one she 
would have thought of as leaving the church; 
but when she heard the reasons, she was far 
more charitable, and said that I was much 
misunderstood. 

Was in New York to hear Brother Russell 
preach a few Sundays ago, and was 
much refreshed and greatly profited thereby. 

Believe me, your brother in the faith once 
delivered to the saints. M. T. LEWIS. 



page 95 

Michigan. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am one of 

the many readers of your valuable paper, and 
still want it as an aid to help me along the 
"narrow way;" for it ever comes freighted 
with sweet ministries of religion, and is indeed 
"meat in due season"— giving strength 
to all those who would walk therein with 
earnest consecration. 

I may say that for the last two years it 
has been a sorrowful way for me; for it has 
brought me many afflictions. When the 



bitter cup was pressed to my lips, I found it 

hard to bring the prayer of my fainting heart 

to God, and say submissively, "Thy will be 

done." And lest this situation bring temptations, 

I feel I must be active, if I would 

have God still feed my hungry soul with 

heavenly manna. I have always believed 

that Christians owe their fullest love and 

service to Him who gave himself as our ransom-price: 

but I cannot say this has been 

my experience, specially in regard to service, 

for I have been too easily satisfied to sit 

quietly down and let the spirit of God work 

in my heart, satisfying myself with ardent 

expressions and songs and prayers, and have 

put aside the stern realities of a life with 

Christ. I often read the experience of Paul 

as told by himself, and say, This is the school 

by which he reached that true experience 

which worketh hope, which maketh not 

ashamed; while I cannot say I "glory in 

tribulation," for I have not been "zealously 

affected always in good things," or "gloried 

in the cross of our Lord Jesus with humbleness 

of mind and meekness." And now that 

a chastening hand has shown me the measure 

of my weakness and my unproven Christian 

life, my soul is longing for something better. 

I do want the victory through our Lord 

Jesus Christ; I do want to retain that robe 

of righteousness which Christ gives to all 

his chosen ones; and I am resting my hope 

on his finished work and unchanging love. 

I wonder if I could be of advantage to the 
cause of truth as a colporteur. Situated as 
I now am, I can give all my time to this 
specially useful service. I do not want to 
make any mistake, but to make the work a 
success, and will abide by the judgment of the 
Tract Society as to whether I would best 
enter this field of service. I have never 
done such work, and do not know that I am 
adapted to it, but I realize the responsibility 
of this harvest time, and am willing to lay 
this in God's hand, believing he will guide 
and give spiritual discernment. 

And now I want to say that the truth as 
set forth in the MILLENNIAL DAWN series is 
wonderful and glorious to me; and I am glad 
to acknowledge the strength and grace I have 
derived from reading and studying the three 
volumes. 

May God bless you all for showing the 
religion of Jesus Christ in so cheering a light 
—the hopes and promises it sets before all, 
the patience and resignation it inspires under 



affliction. I believe it is Scriptural to request 
the prayers of God's people, and I need 
this help. Pray for me, and for all the afflicted 
ones. 
In Christian love, MRS. W. P. 



R1507 : page 95 

Texas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Owing to a 

combination of circumstances it has been 
some time since I last wrote you. As soon 
as I received the five sets of DAWNS, I 
began to distribute them where I thought 
they would do the most good. So far, there 
has not been a dissenting voice among all 
who have read them. One friend was so 
pleased with Vol. I that he asked for Vols. 
II. and III., and said that, if he were a minister, 
he would sever his connection with all 
ecclesiastical organizations, and preach the 
doctrine taught in those books. 

In a prayer meeting recently the question 
was asked, "What penalty did Adam and 
Eve suffer for their sin? or, were they eternally 
damned?" A physician present, who 

R1507 : page 96 

also has been reading, replied in the sentiment 
of DAWN, causing no little confusion, 
which did not end there, nor has it ended yet. 

The pastor was informed of the episode, 
and inquired of the physician where he got 
those books, and was told that I put them 
into his hand. This raised a war-cloud against 
me, but I have already committed myself, and, 
unless shown that I am wrong, I will never 
retract a single word. I do not know what it 
will cost me, but I am satisfied that, whatever 
the cost, the good Lord will foot the bill. 

Fraternally, N. G. MURPHY. 



page 96 

Missouri. 
DEAR BROTHER:-My report for the week 
ending to-day is fifty-two DAWNS, fourteen 
Booklets and five Bibles, No. 307-a little 
better showing than last week. My work 
here has not been very profitable financially, 
yet I trust that I will receive my reward in 



"that day," that every thing done (though 
little) will result in good to the Master's 
cause, and that the great Reaper will be 
pleased with his servant's work. 
Yours in the Lord, W. A. DAVIS. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Enclosed please find 
$1.00 for the TOWER. The "Old Theology" 
is ever new! In the middle of this day and 
the crotchety utterances of "advanced theological 
thought" (?), how blessed to have a 
gospel that is bolted, riveted and clinched— 
by divine truth— to the eternal throne! "Behold, 
I thought," said Naaman; and so it has 
been with many: They "think"— but to what 
purpose? They continually say, "Abana and 
Pharpar are better than the waters of Israel." 
Better or not better is not the question. Obedience 
is the subject in hand— not metaphysics, 
not philosophy, not speculation! Platonic 
religion is not Christianity. 

Please pardon this digression. I started 
to say that I like to read the TOWER. 

Yours hopefully, J. H. VENT. 



R1507 : page 96 

British Columbia. 

MY DEAR BRETHREN:-In December last I 
received through your colporteur the three published 
volumes of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series, 
for which I desire to express my deepest gratitude. 
Since then they have been my constant 
study. They came in due time to a mind prepared 
by the spirit for the reception of the great 
light therein contained. The outlines of the 
first two volumes were grasped as quickly as the 
facts could be verified from the written Word 
of God, and now they are proving, together 
with the precious third volume, truly a "helping 
hand in Bible Study." The requirements 
in the remark of Ralph Waldo Emerson, that 
"The value of a principle is the number of 
things it will explain; and there is no good 
theory of disease which does not at once suggest 
a cure," are most fully satisfied in these 
volumes. The truths now due illuminate every 
page of the Holy Scriptures, and the plan of 
God daily becomes clearer. 

For some years the Lord has shown me that 
the nominal church had become a great social 



organization, filled with the spirit of this world, 
in which the truth-hungry soul sought in vain 
for growth in the knowledge of Christ. My 
friends and relatives (with the exception of my 
dear wife) have been greatly distressed and very 
angry with me for expressing my belief that the 
nominal church was not the body of Christ, 
that her days were numbered, and that very 
shortly she would become a thing of the past. 
I did not see the prophecies relative to this 
matter, but the fact became firmly established 
in my mind. 

For some eighteen months past I have been 
patiently waiting, watching and praying for a 
message from on High; and during this time 
the conviction was deepening that more light 
would be sent, together with a message to go to 
work in the vineyard. I thank God that this 
light has now come and with it also the message 
looked for. My only desire now is to be 
permitted to help spread the glorious tidings 
that "the Lord reigneth," to be one of the 
"feet," to give my life to this most important 
of all work. I observe in Mr. Russell's preface 
to the third volume of the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
series that you make arrangements to send out 
colporteurs, and I wish to have the opportunity 
of being one of them. Every day I seem to 
hear the Lord saying to me, "Give yourself entirely 
to me and my work. What have you to 
do with the things of this world? You are not 
of it, you have now no interest in the aims and 
ambitions of worldly men that you should be 
found in their service." My wife is one of the 
covenanted ones and is also desirous of working 
for the Saviour. I observe that your conditions 
for this service are just what our Lord 
Jesus himself requires of his own, of those who 
would be his disciples indeed, namely, entire 
consecration to do his work, even unto death. 
It is unnecessary to say that I am willing to go 
wherever I may be sent, and to carry the message 
in the way that your experience suggests. 
The whole matter now rests in the Lord's direction; 
for "without me ye can do nothing." 

Your servant in Christ, G. C. 



page 98 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION. 

As per appointment in our last issue quite a 
goodly company gathered at Bible House 
chapel, Allegheny, on March 30th. About two 
hundred were present, chiefly the Allegheny 
congregation— about fifty coming from the surrounding 
towns of Pennsylvania; New York, 
Ohio, District of Columbia, Missouri, Iowa, 
Kansas and Nevada being also represented. 

Eighteen adults symbolized their full consecration 
even unto death and their hope of a 
resurrection, by immersion. The interest was 
good, the feeling deep; and while the signification 
of the unleavened bread and the unfermented 
fruit of the vine were explained, hearts 



full of gratitude for the great gift of God's 
love promised renewed zeal in being broken 
in the service of the Lord as members of the 
one loaf (1 Cor. 10:17), and in drinking of his 
cup of self-denial and suffering for righteousness' 
sake. 

R1514:page98 

PROTESTANT ENGLAND. 

The following we take from a recent number 
of the Pall Mall Gazette:— "For the first time 
for 334 years, or at any rate since the Reformation, 
the Mayor and corporation of Southampton 
[England], on Sunday morning, in 
their official robes, and attended by the mace 
bearers and borough police, attended divine 
service at St. Joseph's Roman Catholic Church. 
The occasion was made a great festival, and 
Mozart's Seventh Mass was sung to the accompaniment 
of a string band.... In the course 
of his sermon Canon Scannell said that day 
was the highest and most beautiful day for 
Southampton after the last three hundred years 
of estrangement and mismanagement. There 
had been no brighter day than that in his life, 
which had brought them together for the first 
time for three centuries. That day had been 
approaching for the last twenty years. Some 
of his best friends had been Protestants, and he 
felt happy that that day had come which had 
brought them together. At the close the civic 
body was escorted from the church by the 
canon, the officiating priests, acolytes, and choir 
in their vestments, carrying the candles, crosses, 
banners, etc., and the procession was watched 
by thousands of people. It is, perhaps, worthy 
of note that not one member of the corporation 
is a Roman Catholic, and the Southampton 
corporation are said to be the first public body 
in the country to officially attend a Roman 
Catholic Church in this way." 

And thus it is that Roman Catholic influence 
is increasing. Poor, weak-kneed, short-sighted 
Protestantism ! 

BINDERS FOR 1893-1894. 

Patent Binders of a size suitable for the 
TOWER for two years' issues, and with the name 
of our journal and the dates 1893-1894 stamped 
in gilt on the side, are now ready. Those 
therefore who hereafter order Binders should 
specify whether they want these for coming 
years or those for 1891-1892 which have no 



dates stamped on them. These are extremely 
desirable for preserving your TOWERS in a convenient 
form for future reference. Price fifty 
cents each. 



R1508 : page 99 

VOL. XIV. APRIL 1, 1893. NO. 7. 

THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD. 



"Touching the resurrection of the dead I am called in 
question."— Acts 24:21. 

—"When they heard of the resurrection of 
the dead, some mocked."— Acts 17:32. 

—The prophet David "spake of the resurrection 
of Christ: that his soul was not left in 
hades."— Acts 2:31. 

—Christ was proved or "declared to be the 
Son of God with power... by the resurrection 
from the dead."— Rom. 1:4. 

—"Now if Christ be preached, that he rose 
from the dead, how say some among you that 
there is no resurrection of the dead?"— 
ICor. 15:12. 

—"But if there be no resurrection of the dead 
then is Christ not risen."— 1 Cor. 15:13. 

—"And if Christ be not risen, then is our 
preaching vain;— and your faith is also vain;— 
and we are false witnesses;— and ye are yet in 
your sins; and they that are fallen asleep in 
Christ are perished."— 1 Cor. 15:14-18. 

—"But Christ is risen from the dead, and become 
a first-fruits of them that slept."— 
1 Cor. 15:20. 

—"For since by a man [Adam] came death, 
by a man also [Christ] came the resurrection 
of the dead."- 1 Cor. 15:21. 

—"The God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
...hath begotten us again unto a hope of life 
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the 
dead."-l Pet. 1:3. 

—The Apostles "taught the people and 
preached through Jesus the resurrection of the 
dead."-Acts 4:2. 

—At Athens, Paul "preached unto them Jesus 
and the resurrection."— Acts 17:18. 

—Paul said, "I count all things but loss... 
that I may know him [Christ] and the power 
of his resurrection;... if by any means I 
might attain unto the [chief] resurrection of 
the [chief] dead."-Phil. 3:8-11. 



—"Blessed and holy are all they that have part 
in the first [chief] resurrection."— Rev. 20:6. 

—"There shall be a resurrection of the dead, 
both of the just [justified believers] and the unjust" 
[now unjustified].— Acts 24:15. 

—Some "concerning the truth have erred, 
saying, that the resurrection is past already."— 
2 Tim. 2:18. 

No other doctrine is made so prominent in 
the New Testament as that of the Resurrection; 
except it be that of the second coming of our 
Lord and his kingdom glory, or his first advent 
and sacrifice for sins. And yet, so far has modern 
popular theology drifted away from that of 
our Lord and his Apostles that, the resurrection 
of the dead is scarcely ever preached upon today; 
and it would be a great convenience, indeed, 
to many ministers of all denominations, 
if the entire doctrine of the resurrection could 
be expunged from the Bible: It would save 
them from many perplexing questions which 
they can only ignore or seek to evade, instead 
of answering them. What a proof this furnishes 
that the Bible is not what infidels assert— the 
work of knavish priests. Had such made it 
they would have made it more to their pleasement 
—to support their theories. 

R1508 : page 100 

FALSE VIEWS. 



If the reader ever heard one sermon on the 
resurrection from any so-called "orthodox" 
pulpit he was remarkably favored. And yet 
that is scarcely true, either, for what he heard 
was probably such a medley, such a confusion, 
that his ideas were worse confounded after hearing 
than before. Such exceptional ones probably 
heard such a discourse as was reported in 
the public press about two years ago, delivered 
by a very learned and able Presbyterian Doctor 
of Divinity to a Brooklyn audience. 

This D.D. explained that the resurrection will 
consist in a regathering and revivifying of all 
the bones and sinews and flesh and skin, etc., 
that ever constituted human bodies, regardless 
of how they had been disposed of, by fire or 
mouldering or otherwise: No matter if parts 
had been destroyed by accident or eaten by 

R1509 : page 100 

fishes or beasts of prey; or if they had rotted 



and gone as fertilizer into various fruits, vegetables, 
grasses, etc., and thus been over and 
over again transformed. 

He explained "the last day" to mean a final 
twenty-four hours before the burning up of the 
world, and pictured that an after portion of 
that twenty-four hours would be devoted to a 
work of judging the world, while the forepart 
would be occupied by the resurrection work; 
and he pictured the air black with hands, arms, 
feet, fingers, bones, skins, sinews, etc., of the 
billions who have lived and died, seeking the 
other parts of their bodies; and that then the 
souls would come from heaven and hell and 
be imprisoned in those resurrected bodies. 

What an unscriptural and nonsensical view! 
And yet, how could the man think or preach 
differently on the subject seeing that he believed 
firmly in a "resurrection of the body," which 
very words nearly all "orthodox" creeds of 
"Christendom" recite? And how could a body 
be resurrected in any other way than by gathering 
together again the various parts and 
members which once composed it? In no other 
way, of course. And if the "resurrection of 
the body" is the resurrection specified in the 
Bible, we as well as others are shut up to the 
nonsensical and ludicrous view expressed by the 
Brooklyn D.D., as above stated. 

THE BIBLE DOCTRINE REASONABLE. 



But the Bible contains no such statement; 
and such an inference is as unwarranted as it is 
unreasonable. The reason which led to this 
statement that the resurrection would be merely 
that of the body is quite evident. The teaching 
had gradually crept into the Church that 
what seems to the five senses to be death is not 
such in reality: none are dead— saints nor sinners 
—but all more alive than ever, when to us 
they appear to be dead. With this idea before 
the mind, many lose sight of the Scriptural 
teaching of a "resurrection of the dead" [beings, 
persons, souls]; and hence they altered it 
to suit their changed ideas, although it is still 
"a very inconvenient doctrine to get around." 
Because after having preached in the funeral discourse 
that the deceased is "free now" and "no 
longer hampered and encumbered with a body," 
it is confusing to read from the Bible as a part 
of the funeral service about the "hope of a resurrection 
of the dead," when they hope that 
their friends are not dead, and would be glad 



to hope that they would never have anything 
more to do with what they term the "prison-house 
of clay"— the body. It is confusing, too, 
to read the Apostle's words (specially intended 
and suited for such an occasion) about the second 
coming of Christ, and the blessing at that 
time, by a resurrection of "them that sleep in 
Jesus" (1 Thes. 4:14-18); and the expression, 
"Wherefore comfort one another with these 
words," only adds to their confusion; for no 
other words would be so comfortless to them; 
because of the unscriptural views they entertain. 

But while, as we have seen, the theory of a 
"resurrection of the body"— the recovery and 
reorganization of the original atoms of matter- 
is nonsensical, as well as without Scriptural warrant, 
let none so regard the doctrine of the resurrection 
of the soul or being, which is taught 
in the Bible, and which is reasonable. 

ANASTASIS-RESURRECTION. 



In the Bible the word resurrection is found 
only in the New Testament; it is the translation 
of the Greek word, anastasis, the meaning 
of which, as given by Prof. Young's Concordance 

R1509 :page 101 

(a standard authority), is, "A standing or 
rising up." Liddell & Scott's Lexicon defines 
the word similarly, viz., "A making to stand or 
rise up; awakening, restoration."* 

Other Greek words are used when referring 
to the temporary awakening of dead ones who 
afterward died again, as in the case of Lazarus, 
Jairus' daughter and others; but neither the 
Greek word anastasis nor its English equivalent, 
resurrection, is used in such cases. We 
are not questioning that the English word resurrection 
is often used with only a limited signification; 
but we are calling attention to the 
restricted use of the Greek word. And we insist 
that it is only by giving it the full weight 
of its meaning that the importance of our Lord's 
work as man's Redeemer can be fully appreciated. 
To say that the ransom given once for 
all by our Lord secured a resurrection (anastasis) 
for all, and then to define that word as 
merely signifying a re-awakening, to a spark 
of life as now enjoyed, would be to rob the Lord 
of the honor of his great work, by robbing the 
word "anastasis" of its full import. Our claim 
is that this word contains the thought of a full 



restitution of all that was lost— human perfection 
—and not merely re-animation. It was all 
that was lost that our Lord died to recover; 
and the promise of a resurrection is therefore the 
promise of the restoration of what was lost and 
redeemed. This has been provided for all, and 
must be given or offered to all— whether then 
they accept of it or reject it. 

To get the full force of anastasis— "restoration," 
"rising up"— we must remember from 
what a height man has fallen into death. The 
resurrection (anastasis) secured for mankind by 
their Redeemer is a full and complete raising 
up (or restoration) to all that was lost, for all, 
by one man's (Adam's) disobedience. "For 
as by a man [Adam] came death [with all the 
degradation which that word implies— mental, 
moral and physical, culminating in utter dissolution 
—utter loss], even so by a man also [the 
man Christ Jesus] came [i.e. was secured] the 
resurrection" [anastasis— a complete restoration 
to all that was lost; a full rising up to the 
grand heights of perfection— the image and likeness 
of God at first enjoyed]. 

The Millennial age is to be the resurrection 
day for the world of mankind; but it will be 
optional with each individual whether or not 
he ever attains this grand perfection, provided 
for all in Christ. It may at first seem strange 
to say that the dead will be obliged to co-operate 
in the matter of their own resurrection 
(to perfection) or else never obtain it; but 
such is the Scriptural representation. The dead 
will not be required to aid or co-operate in 
their awakening from their graves; for "there 
is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom, in the grave" (Eccl. 9:10; Psa. 6:5), 
and they, therefore, could neither assent to 
nor oppose their awakening. That work will 
be done for the world by their glorified Redeemer, 
who declares, "All that are in their 
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man 
and come forth: [that is, all will be awakened; 



*In one exceptional passage another word is used, egersis 
(Matt. 27:53); but there are reasons for seriously 
doubting the genuineness of this verse and the preceding one. 
However, these peculiar verses are found in part in 
the oldest Greek Manuscript yet discovered; hence we 
may not discard them, although they are very difficult to 
harmonize with other scripture statements: for instance, 
if it was the earthquake which occurred at the moment of 
our Lord's death that opened those graves, it seems peculiar 
that they should stay thus three days before coming 



out of their graves after our Lord's resurrection (wrong or 
at least unusual word used for resurrection). And they 
could not be perfected by anastasis because it is written that 
Christ should be the first to thus rise from the dead. Then 
again, who were these "saints" or holy ones? They were 
not holy ones of the New or Gospel Dispensation; for it 
did not begin, and the disciples did not obtain "liberty to 
become sons of God" (John 1:12) until Pentecost, fifty 
days later. And if they were holy ones of the Jewish or 
previous dispensations, their awakening could be only similar 
to that of Lazarus,— to die again; because the Apostle 
Paul, later than this, after recounting the most notable 
of the holy ones of by-gone times, declared, "These all 
having obtained a good report through faith, received not 
the promise [chief of which is the resurrection of everlasting 
life], God having provided some better thing for us 
[the Gospel Church], that they without us should not be 
made perfect." (Heb. 11:39,40.) Hence the holy ones 
of by-gone dispensations are not (in the divine plan as 
here stated) to experience their full resurrection until after 
the Gospel age— until the Millennial age; for the entire 
period of the Gospel age is set apart to the development 
and perfecting of the Church which is Christ's "bride" or 
"body" or "temple." 

R1509 : page 102 

but there will be two classes, who will be 
awakened under different conditions, as our 
Lord proceeds to show, saying,] they that have 
done good [that is, those consecrated ones who 
are good and acceptable to God through 
Christ] to a resurrection life [That is to say, 
this class will come forth from death with a 
perfect life, a completely resurrected or raised 
up life, over which death shall no longer have 
any power or control]; and they that have 
practiced evil [surely this includes all of the 
fallen race except the few above referred to, 
the consecrated, holy ones] unto a judgment 
[or trial] resurrection" [—an opportunity for 
full raising up if they will conform to the discipline 
and chastisements of that thousand-year 
judgment-day of Christ's reign]. 

In harmony with this, the true and full meaning 
of anastasis— a complete or full raising up 
out of death— is our Lord's expression to the 
Sadducees who inquired concerning a woman 
of many husbands, "In the resurrection [anastasis] 
whose wife shall she be? (Luke 20:33.) 
Our Lord avoided giving them a direct reply, 
perhaps because it would have required a long 
discourse concerning the future, for which they 
in their cavilling spirit were wholly unready, 
and perhaps because the due time for information 
respecting God's methods and dealings 



during the Millennial age were not yet due to 

be explained. So our Lord's reply, in effect, 

was,— Ye err, because ye do not understand 

the Scriptures respecting how matters will then 

be, nor do ye appreciate the great power of 

God by which he is able to work all things according 

to the counsel of his own wise plan. 

Then, turning the subject away from the suppositionary 

case suggested by the Sadducees, 

our Lord took occasion to drop a word of instruction 

respecting the first or chief resurrection 

—the resurrection of the blessed and holy. 

(Rev. 20:6.) A knowledge of this resurrection 

would be meat in due season to them that 

stood by, while a direct reply to the question 

would not be, so our Lord said: "The sons 

R1510 :page 102 

of this period marry and are given in marriage, 
but those who shall be accounted worthy to 
obtain that period and the resurrection [anastasis] 
out from dead ones will neither marry 
nor be given in marriage; neither can they die 
any more: then, like the angels they will be, and 
sons of God— becoming sons by THE resurrection." 
The emphasis on "resurrection" and 
"dead" here, intensified by the expression 
"out from dead ones," leaves no room for doubt 
that the Lord referred to the First Resurrection. 

It will be perceived that in this statement 
our Lord omits any reference to the masses of 
the world and their opportunities for restitution 
to human perfection through a judgment-resurrection, 
a resurrection depending upon 
their co-operation, during Christ's Millennial 
reign, when, under him, their head, the saints 
(the holy ones who shall be accounted worthy 
of that first or chief resurrection to spirit conditions) 
shall judge the world.— 1 Cor. 6:2. 

RESURRECTION OF THE SOUL. 



There is nothing in the word resurrection, 
nor yet in the word anastasis, to limit or in 
any way determine the nature or organism of 
the one who experiences resurrection. If a resurrection 
of the body were predicted, then it 
would imply that exactly the same body would 
be raised up: and, since the human family are 
all flesh-beings, it would imply that the very 
same bodies now possessed, with exactly the 
same atoms of matter, would be "raised up." 
For the exact meaning of the word anastasis 



must be born in mind, viz., "restored" or 
"raised up."— Liddell & Scott. 

If then the human body which dies were the 
thing to which resurrection is promised, nothing 
more or less than the same body with its 
same atoms, same defects, and the same peculiarities, 
could be expected: and, as a result, 
resurrection would be merely a renewal of 
present, unfavorable, fallen conditions. 

But it is not the bodies of men that God 
promises to resurrect, but the men themselves 
—the beings (in the English Bible translated 
souls). It was Adam as a whole that sinned, 
—Adam, the living soul (being), and not merely 
his body. It was Adam as a whole, as a living 
soul (being), that was sentenced to death, and 
it was the souls of his posterity yet in his loins, 
unborn (Heb. 7:9,10; Exod. 1:5; 1 Cor. 15:22), 

R1510 :page 103 

that shared in him the penalty— "The 
soul that sinneth, it shall die." 

In harmony with this it would seem reasonable 
that when Christ redeemed man from this 
death-penalty, his soul must have paid man's 
penalty. And so we find it clearly stated of 
our Redeemer:— His anguish was a "travail of 
soul:" His soul was "exceeding sorrowful, 
even unto death:" "He poured out his soul 
unto death:" "He made his soul an offering 
for sin"— a corresponding price for the soul 
of Adam and all in him. Thus God redeemed 
our SOULS from destruction. -Psa. 49:15. 

And it is those souls condemned in Adam's 
soul, and redeemed by the sacrifice of Christ's 
soul, that are to have a resurrection. The 
Scriptures, when speaking of this, do not always 
use the word soul, but it is always implied; 
as, for instance, in the statement, "As in Adam 
all [souls— beings] die, even so all [souls, beings] 
in Christ shall be made alive;" and again, 
"There shall be a resurrection of the dead 
[souls, beings], both of the just [souls, beings] 
and of the unjust [souls, beings]." Wherever 
character is expressed, as here by the words 
"just" and "unjust," it is evident that not 
bodies but beings are meant; for although we 
might say lean or fat, beautiful or homely bodies, 
character cannot be predicated of bodies merely: 
a body cannot be either just or unjust: the soul 
or being is always understood where character 
is asserted or implied. [What is the "soul?" 
will be more fully discussed at some future time.] 

WITH WHAT BODIES WILL THEY COME 



FORTH? 



While a soul or being is more than a mere 
body, yet there can be no being, no existence, 
no soul, without a body. But then, again, there 
are different kinds of bodies,— "There is a 
natural [animal] body and there is a spiritual 
body" says the Apostle, explaining this question. 
(1 Cor. 15:44.) And the kind of body 
determines the nature of the being or soul. 

Beings with spirit-bodies are spirit beings, 
or heavenly beings— as God, and angels; a 
further distinction being shown amongst these 
spirit-beings in that those possessed of inherent 
life (immortality,— God, the Father, and our 
Lord Jesus Christ) are said to be "of the divine 
nature"— far above angels, etc. (Eph. 1:21.) 
And this is the grade of spirit body and being 
promised to the overcoming "bride" or "body 
of Christ," the "royal priesthood." 2 Pet. 1:4. 

Beings with the highest order of fleshly bodies, 
of the earth, earthy, are called human beings; 
—animal souls or beings; the highest of all 
earthly or fleshly beings or souls,— originally 
in God's likeness; and, as his representative 
Adam was, the King of Earth.— Psa. 8:5,6. 

Since the human family is evidently a fleshly, 
earthly race, and not a heavenly or spiritual 
one; and since the inspired Apostle assures us 
of this fact, saying, "That was not first which 
is spiritual, but that which is animal," "the 
first man was of the earth, earthy." (1 Cor. 15:46,47), 
we must conclude that, unless something 
should occur to work a change, the promise 
of a resurrection (anastasis, "raising up," 
"restoring"), when applied to Adam and his 
family, would mean simply a restoration of his 
being (soul) to its original powers possessed 
before his sin and fall— when he was the earthly 
likeness of his Creator, and upright.— Gen. 1:27; 
Eccl. 7:29. 

Since the word anastasis merely signifies to 
"raise up," as from a fallen to an upright, or 
from an imperfect to a perfect condition; and 
since it applies to the soul or being of man, it 
is evident that unless there be some change of 
nature since the fall of the race in Adam, raising 
up would imply nothing more and nothing 
less than raising all the way up to that standard 
of perfection and divine likeness represented 
and lost in Adam. Of the vast multitude of 
the human family it is true, that they are of the 
earth, earthy; of human nature, like father 
Adam, except that they have fallen farther from 



the divine image in which they were created in 
him. But this is not true of all, as we shall see. 
The Apostles Paul and Peter clearly explain 
to us that during this Gospel age God has been 
selecting a peculiar people, a little flock, to be 
joint-heirs with Christ, their Redeemer and 
Lord, in the Millennial Kingdom, which is to 
bless all the families of the earth. And they 
no less clearly assure us that those who shall 
be of that "bride" class will be changed in 

R1510 :page 104 

their resurrection, to a new nature, the divine 
nature, that thereafter they may be with their 
Lord, and be like him, and see him as he is.— 
See 2 Pet. 1:4; 1 John 3:2. Compare also 
our Lord's words in John 17:24. 

The same authoritative teachers assure us that, 
in order to secure such a change in their resurrection 
(necessary to all who will be members 
of that Kingdom), a certain change must take 
place in them before death. This latter change 
is Scripturally called a begetting of the spirit, 
and the resurrection change is called a birth of 
the spirit. That which is begotten and born of 
the spirit will be a spirit-being, and no longer 
a human-being. As that which is begotten and 
born of the flesh is flesh, so that which is begotten 
and born of the spirit is spirit. Nicodemus, 
and the Jews generally, thought that 
when the due time should come their nation 
would become God's Kingdom— a fleshly kingdom 
under a fleshly Messiah. But our Lord corrected 
Nicodemus' error, and assured him that 
all who would ever become members of that 
Kingdom, or who should even see it, would 
have to be begotten and born again,— a second 
time,— of the spirit of God.— See John 3:5-7. 

The Apostles explain that the begetting to 
this new nature comes only to believers, already 
justified by faith in the Redeemer; and that, 
while the justification of believers comes to 
each as a free gift through Christ, this begetting 
to be new creatures "of the divine nature" 
comes to us directly from the Father, and that 
as a result of our full consecration to him. 
The Truth, the word of God's grace,— "our 
high calling which is of God"— is the begetting 
and quickening influence which starts the new, 
consecrated life in all who are properly exercised 
thereby. The Apostle says: "The God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten 
us."-l Pet. 1:3. 

The Gospel age is exclusively devoted to this 
work of begetting and quickening and preparing 



of the true Church, the "little flock," for 
birth to the divine nature, and thus to an inheritance 
in the promised Kingdom which flesh 
and blood (souls or beings of human nature) 
cannot inherit, nor even see. (John 3:3,5.) 
The resurrection of the Church includes the 
resurrection of Christ Jesus, who is the head of 
the Church which is his body. (Eph. 1:22,23.) 
This resurrection is not only the chief or first 
resurrection in the sense of being the grandest 
and most wonderful "raising up," far above 
human and angelic natures— to the very pinnacle 
of glory and power, the divine nature— 
but it will also be first in order. And upon its 
completion, all other features of God's great 
plan for human salvation wait and depend. 
This first (chief) resurrection began over 
eighteen centuries ago, when the head of the 
Church arose, the first-born from the dead. 
Since then, one after another, a "little flock" 
of believers, after sharing in justification 
under the New Covenant sealed by the Redeemer's 
sacrifice, consecrating themselves to 
the Lord and becoming joint-heirs with Christ 
in the Abrahamic Covenant (Gal. 3:29), have 
been begotten and quickened to this course of 
action by the exceeding great and precious 
promises of God, and sealed by the holy spirit 
of promise, which continually, by God's Word 

R1511 :page 104 

and providences, bears witness that they are 
"accepted in the Beloved;" and that if they 
suffer with him they shall also reign with him; 
—if they be dead with him they shall also live 
with him. (Rom. 6:8; 8:17.) "Beloved, now 
are we the sons of God [begotten to the divine 
nature, witnessed by the spirit of adoption 
which enables us to recognize God as our Father]; 
but it doth not yet appear what we shall 
be [what shall be the peculiarities of our new 
bodies which we shall receive when born from 
the dead as sharers in Christ's resurrection], but 
we [do] know that when he [Christ] shall appear, 
we shall be like him; because we shall see 
him as he is [not as he was]; and none can see 
spirit beings as they really are except such as 
are also spirit beings— even as none except 
those begotten of the spirit can now understand 
spiritual things.— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

TWO ORDERS OR CLASSES RESURRECTED: 
ONE IN THE HEAVENLY, THE OTHER 
IN THE EARTHLY LIKENESS. 



The Apostle Paul gives a most complete discourse 
on this subject. (1 Cor. 15:12-28,35-55.) 
First, he proves that faith in a resurrection 

R1511 :page 105 

is a part of Christian doctrine, without which 

the entire fabric would be senseless. Secondly, 

having proved the doctrine, he shows that 

our Lord's resurrection is God's guarantee of a 

resurrection to all our race, for which Christ 

died. He proceeds to prove this fact and its 

reasonableness (verse 21) in that as by Adam 

came death to all, so by the man Christ Jesus 

the resurrection blessing is made applicable to 

all. Notice, however, that although a full resurrection 

up to perfection is made applicable 

to all, by God's plan, it does not follow that 

all will obtain it. It is only for those who 

shall successfully pass a judgment or trial to 

prove their worthiness of it under God's conditions 

—the New Covenant. It is made applicable 

to all, in that the terms will be such 

that all may avail themselves of the offer, in 

Christ. Next the Apostle shows that "as all 

in Adam died, even so all in Christ will be 

made alive [i.e., fully escape death], but each 

in his own order or class.— Verses 22,23. 

He next pointedly shows, in a few words, 
what we are here seeking to elaborate: namely, 
that only those who get into Christ by 
"faith in his blood" will ever get the perfect 
life which he has provided, and will make possible 
of attainment to all. And he shows that 
of these who come into Christ, into the household 
of faith, there will be more than one class or 
order— each one in Christ will be made alive, 
or fully "raised up" out of death, in his own 
proper class or order. These orders he shows 
to be two. The "first-fruit" class, the "members 
of his body," will be first in order and 
first in rank. Because associated with Christ 
in sacrificing, during this age, they shall be accounted 
worthy to have part in his resurrection 
—the chief resurrection.— Phil. 3:8-11; Rom. 6:5; 
Rev. 20:6. 

"Afterward [that is, next in order, or the 
remainder of those to be made alive in Christ, 
will be], those who are Christ's during his [second] 
presence [during his Millennial reign]. 
Then will come the end [the finish of the great 
salvation which he began by the sacrifice of 
himself once for all], when he shall deliver the 
[Millennial] kingdom to God the Father,— 



when he [Christ] shall have put down [by love 
or by force] all rale and all authority and 
power [opposed to righteousness, truth and 
love;— opposed to God and his perfect law]. 
For he must reign until he has put all enemies 
under his feet. [His Millennial Kingdom, having 
been arranged for the very purpose of releasing 
those who shall desire to be in harmony 
with God, when made fully aware of his real 
character and plan, and of destroying all who, 
under similar knowledge, are wilful opponents 
of God and righteousness, cannot cease until 
all these ends are fully accomplished. The 
enemies to be humbled in the dust include not 
only evil forces, moral and physical, but also 
all persons who wilfully become associates in 
and parts of those evil things. The enemies 
will therefore be both animate and inanimate.] 
Even the last enemy, THE death shall be destroyed: 
for he [the Father] hath subjected all 
things under his [Christ's] feet." 

It was an easy matter for those whom Paul 
addressed to believe that when the Millennial 
Kingdom should be in operation sin and sinners 
would be brought low; but the point most 
difficult to them, and the one which the Apostle 
was now seeking to impress, was that the 
death which had reigned over and conquered 
the race through Adam's sin had now become 
an enemy, an opponent of God's plan: and 
hence would surely be destroyed by the reign 
of Messiah. Death had not always been an 
enemy or an opposer of God's plan: once it 
was his servant, executing upon fallen man the 
penalty pronounced by God. But now, since 
Christ had paid the ransom price for Adam and 
for all condemned in him, this Adamic death 
is no longer to be accounted as a servant of 
God to execute justice, but as an enemy which 
the Redeemer of men is fully authorized and 
empowered to destroy— thus liberating from its 
bondage all for whom he died— "every man," 
all who died in Adam. (Rom. 8:31-39.) This 
destruction of the death from which Christ redeemed 
us, the enemy death, does not have any 
thing to do with the Second Death, to which, 
under Christ's rule, all will be subjected who, 
when released from the Adamic death and 
granted a new trial for life, are found wilful 
sinners. The second death will be the friend 

R1511 :page 106 

rather than the enemy of all who love righteousness; 
for in it "the abominable," and they 
only shall be destroyed— and that utterly. 



Verses 27,28, show that Jehovah alone is 
superior to our Lord Jesus, and that after subduing 
sin and death Christ as well as all things 
will be subject to the Father, who will be recognized 
as THE GREAT I AM, in whom the 
all in all of majesty and power will inhere. 

Having thus proved the fact of a general resurrection, 
and having shown the two orders— 
the Christ order, including every member of the 
body of the Christ who is to be like him and 
with him and a sharer of his glory and divine 
nature, and having shown the other class who 
will get life in Christ during the Millennial 
reign, the Apostle comes to particulars respecting 
these two classes (verses 35-54), in answer 
to a supposed question— "How are the dead 
raised up, and with what body do they come?" 

First, he treats the two classes together, saying, 
It is with man in death and resurrection 
as with the planting of grain and its reappearance. 
If you sow barley you expect barley; if 
you sow wheat you expect wheat to come up. 
So of whatever kind or nature a person is when 
he dies, he will be of that same nature, perfected, 
in the resurrection;— a resurrection will 
be a raising up of the same kind that goes into 
death. 

All men are of the human nature, of the Adamic 
family, of the earth, earthy. Hence, with the 
exception of those begotten by the word of divine 
promise to the new spiritual nature (and 
who by reason of this change belong to "the 
order of Melchisedec" and are "new creatures 
in Christ," "members of his body"), all the 
race of Adam die in Adam's nature, human nature; 
and if raised up to perfection would attain 
the perfection of man-hood. But those 
begotten of the spirit to the spiritual nature 
will, when resurrected, be perfect spirit-beings. 
To the Adamic seed God has given a grand and 
wonderful human or flesh body, whose grandeur 
may be conjectured if we can imagine all 
the grand qualities and gifts which we see exhibited 
exceptionally in poets, philosophers, musicians, 
orators, mathematicians and physical 
prodigies combined in one person. These human 
qualities lost by all the race to a greater or 
less extent will still belong to those of the 
Adamic seed who shall be fully resurrected out 
of the death-loss sustained in Adam's fall. But 
to the new seed, which is Christ (Head and 
members), God has promised a yet more glorious 
spirit-body, the wonders of which we but 
little comprehend as yet.— 1 John 3:2; 
1 Cor. 2:9-10. 

In verses 39-41, the Apostle introduces a description 



of the first or chief resurrection, in 
which the Church is especially interested, and 
shows that as there are various grades of earthly 
beings (fish, fowl, cattle and man), of which 
man is the lord or chief, so also in the spirit 
realm there are various degrees or grades of 
beings— the angelic being one, and the divine 
nature chief of all. So he reasons that as we 
can conceive of harmony and perfection, with 
variety, in the earth, perfect horses, dogs, cattle 
and men, so we can likewise conceive of similar 
variety in perfection amongst spirit beings. 
We may judge something of what human perfection 
will be by imagining all the wonderful 
powers of mankind exercised to the full by each. 
But although we know less about the spirit 
realm, we do know that spirits, powers and 
glories differ from human powers and glories. 
The glories yet diversities of the spirit world 
being well illustrated by those of the sun, moon 
and stars. 

THE FIRST RESURRECTION DESCRIBED. 



In verse 42 the Apostle fully reaches his topic 
saying, "Thus is the resurrection of the dead." 

Some who fail to see the two classes or orders 
in resurrection, and who claim that all will obtain 
spirit bodies in resurrection, urge that the 
above words apply to all who shall ever be resurrected, 
and that the description following is 
therefore applicable to all. But if the careful 
student will take his Emphatic Diaglott or any 
Greek New Testament he will see that the words 
"resurrection" and "dead" are both emphasized 
in verse 42; as though the Apostle would 
say, Thus will be the special or first resurrection, 
of the special class of the dead. To ignore 
this feature of the Greek is to blind one's 
self to the real force of God's Word. It may 

R1511 :page 107 

be asked, May it not have been a custom with 
the Apostle to use emphasis when speaking of 
the resurrection in general? We answer, No; 

R1512:page 107 

and refer the student to other instances of the 
use of the same expression without emphasis 
in the same chapter. (See verses 12,13,21.) 
And be it noticed that in each of these verses 
the words "resurrection" and "dead" do not 



refer to a special class and a special order of 
resurrection, as in verse 42. Furthermore, notice 
that whenever the Lord or the Apostles refer 
to the resurrection of the overcomers, the word 
resurrection is in every case made emphatic, and 
when the word occurs in a general way it is 
without emphasis. 

In the following texts anastasis is without the 
Greek article and hence shows no emphasis,— 
indicates no special peculiarity: Matt. 22:23; 
Mark 12:18; Luke 2:34; 20:27; John 5:29. 
(Here, instead of emphasizing the word anastasis 
by adding the article, the special resurrection 
is pointed out by calling it a resurrection 
of life, because those who share it will be perfected 
in life at once; the contrast being shown 
again in the statement that the others will come 
forth to a judgment-resurrection or a perfecting 
obtainable only through judgments, discipline, 
etc.); Acts 17:32; 23:6,8; 24:15-21. 
(As already noticed the Apostle is here showing 
that his faith in a resurrection or perfecting 
is not only for those now justified, but that it 
extends beyond this small class and includes a 
hope of perfecting for many now ignorant, sinful, 
unjustified), Acts 26:23; Rom. 1:4; 1 Cor. 15:12,13,21; 
Heb. 6:2; 11:35; 1 Pet. 1:3; 
3:21. 

In the following texts anastasis has the Greek 
article, showing emphasis and indicating that 
the first or special resurrection is surely meant: 
Matt. 22:28,30,31; Mark 12:23; Luke 14:14. 
(This text should not be understood to mean 
that Simon would be rewarded for his kind act 
by a share in the special resurrection, but that 
he would get a reward for it after the special resurrection 
of the Christ shall have introduced 
the new Kingdom— when Simon and the world 
in general will be granted full opportunity for 
life everlasting in and by a judgment-resurrection.); 
Luke 20:33,35,36; John 1 1:24,25; 
Acts 1:22; 2:31; 4:2,33; 17:18; Rom. 6:5; 
1 Cor. 15:42; Phil. 3:10,11; 2 Tim. 2:18; 
Rev. 20:5,6. 

Mark well that it is not our claim that anastasis 
without the article, never refers to the 
Lord's resurrection; but that the emphasis when 
used with anastasis always marks the statement 
as relating to the chief or spiritual resurrection. 
The apostles frequently spoke of our Lord's 
resurrection without calling attention to the 
fact that it was of a superior kind, just as we 
frequently do. They indeed often and properly 
enough use the word egeiro in speaking of 
our Lord's resurrection (as in Acts 5:30); but 
this word simply means, "to awaken, arouse, 



stir (Liddell & Scott). This word is used in 
speaking of the temporary awakenings of our 
Lord's miracles; as, for instance, in referring 
to the awakening of Lazarus (Jno. 12:1,9,17), 
of Jairus' daughter (Mark 5:41) and of the son 
of the widow of Nain (Luke 7:14). This word is 
also used without reference to dead people: for 
instance, when our Lord was asleep during the 
storm on the lake— the disciples "awoke [egeiro] 
him" and "he arose [egeiro] and rebuked the 
winds." (Matt. 8:25,26.) "It is high time 
to awake [egeiro] out of sleep," the Apostle 
urges. (Rom. 13:11.) And again he says, 
"Awake [egeiro] thou that sleepest." (Eph. 5:14) 
referring to the thoughtless. These comments 
apply also to the word anistemi frequently 
rendered arise, arose, etc., but never 
rendered resurrection. 

But not so with the word anastasis (resurrection): 
it is never used except with reference to 
the raising up of dead beings,— souls. And we 
hold that its use agrees in every instance with 
the thought of a full raising all the way up to 
perfection (and that it never refers to a mere 
reanimation or awakening) except it be in one 
instance out of the forty-three above noted. 
That one instance is in Heb. 1 1:35, where anastasis 
occurs twice, rendered raised to life again 
and resurrection. The first of these is generally 
understood to refer to the re-awakening of two 
children, by Elijah and Elisha; but we believe 
that had he referred to these the Holy Spirit 
would have guided the Apostle to the use of the 
word egeiro as in the case of Jairus' daughter 

R1512:page 108 

and the others awakened by our Lord. We 
prefer, therefore, to understand the word anastasis 
here the same as in the other forty-two uses 
of the word— a full raising up to perfection— 
and hence must suppose that the Apostle means 
that certain women, although not sharers in the 
battles, were sharers in the losses and the faith 
—their faith in God's promises permitting them 
to look into the future and to trust God for the 
resurrection of their dead ones; indeed, to sorrow 
not as others who have no such hope. This 
view finds support also in verse 39: "These all, 
whose faith was attested, did not obtain the 
promised blessing, God having provided a superior 
portion for us [the bride, the body of 
Christ], that they without us might not be made 
perfect. 

Finally, dear readers, let us remember that 
the reward, "Well done!" and the chief resurrection 



are not for those who have a clear 
knowledge and strong faith, merely, but for 
those who through their knowledge and faith 
become "overcomers" in deed and in truth. 
But the more clearly we see that a full, complete 
resurrection of being is freely provided for all 
of Adam's race in our great Redeemer's sacrifice, 
the more we can appreciate that sacrifice 
and the more we should love and esteem both 
the Giver and the Gift. And the more clearly 
we see that the attainment of the spiritual plane 
of perfect being, to which believers during this 
Gospel age have been called, is dependent on 
three things— (1) begetting of the spirit, under 
the sanctifying power of the word of his grace, 
(2) quickening to activity in God's service and 
to self-sacrifice by a still fuller appreciation and 
under the same sanctifying influences of the 
same spirit of the Truth, and (3) a resurrection-birth 
to the perfection of the new nature to 
which we were begotten and quickened— the 
more grace it will give us in considering what 
manner of persons we should be, as copies of 
our Redeemer, if we would make our calling 
and election sure. And the more clearly we 
see that a trial or judgment in the present life 
is essential to a part in the chief resurrection, 
the more reasonable it will appear that all of 
the world, who during the next age will be 
granted an opportunity for everlasting life under 
perfect conditions, must have a trial or judgment, 
and that therefore the period of Christ's 
reign is the thousand-year judgment-day and 
that a judgment-resurrection will progress therein 
—the willing and obedient obtaining perfection 
and life at its close, the disobedient, rejecting 
that gracious provision, being then "destroyed 
from among the people."— Acts 3:23. 

Let us who have been begotten of the Spirit, 
with the great Apostle, count all other prizes 
but as loss and dross that we may win Christ- 
win a membership in that glorious body— and 
be found in him; if by any means (by fellowship 
in his sufferings) we may obtain a share in 
his resurrection— the resurrection.— Phil. 3:8. 



R1521 :page 108 

THROUGH FAVOR OF OUR GOD. 



I'll live because Christ died for me, 
And lives again to set me free 



From imperfection and from death, 
Through favor of our God. 

No fear of death can bring me care, 
His robe of righteousness I wear; 
My sin is covered, praise the Lord, 
Through favor of our God. 

I've passed from death to newer life, 
I'm reckoned with the Bride, His wife, 
I wait the call to join the feast, 
Through favor of our God. 

I'll reap with Him while yet I may, 
And follow in the narrow way; 
From tares I'll separate the wheat, 
Through favor of our God. 

I'll see Him as He is, and reign 
With Him till thousand years shall wane, 
In giving life to countless dead, 
Through favor of our God. 

The "little flock," exalted then, 
With Christ, their Head, shall draw all men 
To Him, with golden cords of love, 
Through favor of our God. 

The King's highway of holiness, 

Will soon be opened up to bless 

The human race with lasting life, 

Through favor of our God. 

The earth like Eden then shall bloom, 
And sin and sorrow find no room, 
For one and all shall know the Lord, 

Through favor of our God.-HENRY FITCH. 



R1514:page 109 

ISRAEL RETURNING TO THE HOLY LAND. 



"There are now over 100,000 Jews in the 
Holy Land. The Jewish population there is 
larger than it has been at any time since the 
end of the first century of the Christian era. 
Nearly four-fifths of them have gone thither from 
other countries within the last few years, and 
they have been going thither this year more 
steadily than ever before. In former times only 
a small number of Jews were permitted to live 
in the country, but the restrictions upon their 



settlement in it and upon their ownership of 
land have been removed, and they are now at 
liberty to re-people it and take possession of it. 
The number of Jews who have returned to 
Palestine during the dozen years in which they 
have been free to enter has been greater than 
the number who returned after the Babylonian 
captivity, twenty-four centuries ago. 

"In the city of Jerusalem itself, according to 
a report of the British Consul there, the Jewish 
population is now fully 40,000, and a 
large part of the real estate in and around the 
city is in Jewish hands. The number of synagogues, 
schools of learning, hospitals, and other 
public institutions is constantly increasing, the 
water system has been improved, new streets 
have been opened beyond the walls, telegraphs 
and electric lights have been introduced, several 
factories have been set up, and the new 
railway to Jaffa has already stimulated the activity 
of the population in various ways. 'Palestine 
will soon be ready for the Jewish race,' 
says Rev. Dr. Kelt, of the Episcopal Church of 
Jerusalem, in a letter to the London Times. 

"The reports from the northern part of Palestine 
are favorable. There is activity at Acre 
and along the route to Damascus. The wheat 
raisers there are rejoicing in the prospect of 
finding markets for their crops; so are the raisers 
of olives and other fruits. The soil in that region 
is well adapted to the growth of cotton. 

"A number of important public works have 
been undertaken in various parts of the country 
between the river Jordan and the Mediterranean; 
and we hear of yet other projects in which 
the Hebrew capitalists of England and France 
are prepared to invest all the money that may 
be needed. 

"It will undoubtedly take a long time to regenerate 
Palestine, but we infer from the news 
received from Jerusalem that the work of regeneration 
has been begun. It must take a good 
many years to give the predominance to the 
Jewish element in Palestine; but if the number 
of Jews there should increase for the next ten 
years at the rate at which it has increased during 
the last ten years, the Jewish population in 
the Holy Land will run over a million very soon 
after the opening of the twentieth century. 

"The shutting out from this country of the 
Jewish as well as other European immigrants, 
has already had an influence upon the Palestinian 
movement." 

—New York Sun. 



R1513 :page 109 
TREASURES IN HEAVEN. 



Since we have become new creatures in Christ 
we are finding new treasures— treasures of divine 
knowledge which will never pass away, 
treasures of experience and wisdom developing 
in us what the Lord recognizes as precious 
graces of character, treasures of good works that 
shall not be forgotten when the day of final 
reckoning shall make them manifest, and treasures 
of heavenly friendships that shall never be 
severed while the years of eternity roll. 

O what joy there will be in heaven when we 
find our treasures there, all safely kept where 
moth and rust could not corrupt and where 
thieves could not break through and steal. 

When the heavenly Banker says, Well done, 
good and faithful servant, and the treasure of 
heavenly approval and love and commendation 
sinks down deep in our enraptured hearts, tell 
me, will we not feel that the measure of joy 
which began even here and was numbered 

R1513 :page 110 

among our choicest treasures has there gained 
compound interest? And when a precious 

R1514:page 110 

saint then glorified greets us with tender, grateful 
love, saying, You helped me hither, or You 
recovered me from falling when my feet had 
well nigh slipped; and when another and another 
of these treasures throng about us to bid 
us welcome to their midst, will we not indeed 
rejoice over the investment of toil or care or effort 
of any kind which has brought such results. 

Besides the treasures of friendship which will 
never die, there will be treasures of love that will 
never grow old, treasures of esteem for the sake 
of our work and personal sacrificing that will 
never be forgotten, treasures of experience that 
will serve us eternally, treasures of wisdom that 
will enrich us forever, treasures of divine approval 
that will wreath a halo of glory around 
us which shall never pale, and treasures of 
glory, honor and immortality beyond our present 
powers to fully appreciate. 

Let us heed the Master's words— "Lay not 
up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where 



moth and rust doth corrupt and where thieves 
break through and steal; but lay up for yourselves 
treasures in heaven, where neither moth 
nor rust doth corrupt and where thieves do not 
break through nor steal; for where your treasure 
is, there will your heart be also." 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1512:page 110 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



Mexico. 

The following letter, received by Brother 
Fuller, was recently sent us, and is of special 
interest as indicating the progress of the 
truth in Mexico. ~ 

My Dear Sir and Brother:— I have again 
to tender you my best thanks for your kind 
attention in sending me a number of "Zion's 
Watch Tower" and "Thy Word is Truth," 
which I received a few days ago. I read 
"The Plan of the Ages" with very great 
interest and pleasure: for it has confirmed 
many ideas I already possessed, and developed 
others which were latent and vague in 
my mind. I am happy and thankful to say 
that since my early youth, I was enabled to 
acquire, through God's grace and my dear 
father's instrumentality, much knowledge, 
which gave me much higher ideas of the 
Almighty's wisdom, justice and mercy than 
are generally possessed by nominal Christians. 
"The Plan of the Ages" did not come 
to me, therefore, as a revelation, but as a joy-giving 
confirmation of ideas I had already 
acquired. To a dear friend of mine, however, 
it has been a source of new light and 
of much comfort. He is delighted with it, 
and wishes to write to you on the subject. 

I enclose five dollars. Kindly take out one 
year's subscription for me to "Zion's Watch 
Tower" and for the remainder send me as 
many of the three volumes of "Millennial 
Dawn" as the money will buy, as I 
wish to send them to several friends both 
here and in Europe. I hope to find, in the 
"Watch Tower," articles which may do 
good in this country if translated and published 
in Spanish; I might even undertake 
the translation of the "Dawns," if I had the 
funds to have them published. 



I hope you will soon write to me again. 
Wishing you and yours abundant blessings 
in the new year, I remain, 

Yours fraternally, F. de P. STEPHENSON. 



Sing Sing Prison, New York. 
GENTLEMEN:— I have pleasure in acknowledging 
the receipt of three copies of the 
Tower, duplicate Tracts, etc., for which I 
have returned thanks to Him who bestows 
every good gift. I desire to say to Brother 

and Sister R that I received much light 

and strength in coming to the Lord, through 
the aid of The Plan of the Ages. It carries 
with it a substantial blessing to every reader 
who is seeking light and truth with a sincere 
heart. It takes away the hideous thought, 
that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob 
is a monster of cruelty, ignorance and injustice, 

R1513 :page 110 

and reveals, instead, that he is wisdom, 
justice and love. Truly the light shines 
more and more unto the perfect day. 

Great and mighty works has he wrought 
in me, and he is doing the same for others 
here, all so quietly, yet surely. Through the 
power of God and the grace of our blessed 
Lord, I am free from bondage to the old nature. 
I know and fully realize why the 
Apostle with such vehemence urged upon 
all to put on the whole armor of God. As 
a man, I have been exercised until I look 
upon my past life with shudders of horror. 

R1513 :page 111 

Again, I bless the Lord that he is no respecter 
of persons. What he has done for 
me, he is ready and willing to do unto all 
who will come to him with a full surrender 
of soul and body. 

I hope to send you, shortly, the necessary 
amount for subscription and helps. In the 
meantime I want you, if you can, to keep an 
eye on this Prison; the Lord is working here. 

May the grace and peace of the Lord 
Jesus Christ be with both of you, with all 
of your fellow laborers, and with all them 
who love our blessed Lord in truth and sincerity. 
Yours in the faith, . 



Sing Sing Prison, New York. 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY: 

I received in due course your postal card 
and Tracts, for which I beg to express my 
thanks. The papers were carefully read, 
and, I am frank to say, made clear to me 
many things which formerly appeared dark 
and unmeaning. As soon as I possibly can, 
I shall arrange for a regular supply of your 
semi-monthly WATCH TOWER; and I mean 
to procure, as soon as I can, the present volumes 
of Dawn. 

I am fully convinced that my perusal of 
the first volume of DAWN opened my eyes 
to the truth. I read the book eagerly, and 
consulted nearly all the Scripture references 
as I went along. The result was an awakening. 
I thought much over it, and perceived 
at last what it was to walk in the 
way of life. The Bible became like a new 
revelation to me. I read it with feelings 
of delight. It is not now a labor or a duty, 
as once it was, but I turn to it with eagerness 
and joy. 

There are souls here inquiring for the way 
of life. I speak of those who, quietly, and 
without intending to inform any one of it, 
are seeking God. They give evidence of sincerity. 
These I try to reach, for I consider 
the soil to be such as will bear fruit. As for 
the others (the great majority) all that seems 
possible now is to hope and pray that God 
will open a way whereby their hearts can be 
reached. Yours in His name, . 



New York. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., GENTLEMEN:- 
For enclosure please send me The Time is 
at Hand and the Watch Tower commencing 
with the January number. I have read 
and studied The Plan of the Ages, until 
the facts therein stated are perfectly clear to 
my mind. At first I rebelled against its 
teachings, could not have it so and would 
not. Then I said, If this is the truth, I 
must take it, whether it is palatable or not 
—like bitter medicine to a sick body: hard 
to take, but good in its effects. Truth is 
what my sin-sick soul needs; and it shall 
have it is the decision of my sanctified will. 

I did not intend to write you a letter 
(nothing but an order), but I know it will 
cheer you to know that your book has done 



me good, and that I have lent it to several 
others who have read it with benefit. 

May God bless the work you are doing, 
and bring many to the truth as it is in Christ 
Jesus our Lord, is my prayer. 

Yours Respectfully, A. WHITE. 



As an illustration of the text, "The entrance 
of thy truth giveth light," we subjoin 
extracts from four letters received within 
five weeks from a Brother in Iowa. Each 
letter represents a growth in knowledge and 
love and zeal. 

This shows what two tracts may do, under 
God's blessing, when put into good hands. 

TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY:-I 
hereby acknowledge the receipt of your 
Tracts, Thy Word is Truth and The Wonderful 
Story. I read them over with interest 
and benefit; and now, according to your 
offer, I send for Tract No. 12 and any other 
you may be pleased to send. At first reading 
of "An Answer to Ingersoll" I thought 
it too liberal, but on reading "Pulpit Infidelity" 
I apologize for any uncharitable 
thoughts I might have entertained. I am a 
learner, and anything that will teach without 
injury I want: others I do not want. 



Thanks for samples of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER received. At first I suspected a snare, 
and was ready at the first appearance of the 
cloven hoof or wolf in sheep's clothing to 
"flee away;" for nowadays we have to watch. 
But I keep in mind that as I am Christ's, 
no man is able to "pluck me out of my Father's 
hand." So I send you $ 1 .00 for the 
three volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN and 
Tracts. Have read February TOWER; and 
though on first reading its doctrine seemed 
strange, I find that it clears up many passages 
of Scripture hitherto not understood. 



I hereby acknowledge the receipt of the 
DAWNS. I do not know how to express 
myself: I am so delighted with them and 
your other publications. It was really Providential 



R1513 :page 112 



that I saw your tract The Wages 

of Sin. First I thought it was too Universalistic; 

then I thought it was too Purgatorial; 

and I did not know what to do until my 

regular Bible lesson (Ezek. 15:44-45) confirmed 

the tract. I find it is just like Christ 

Jesus to be just to all men. Oh! praise his 

name! the Scriptures began to unfold to my 

poor, benighted mind. I know what it is to 

fellowship with him in joy and pleasure, 

and am learning (slowly to be sure) to suffer 

with him; and know that I am accepted 

in the Beloved. I stand alone in my community, 

but I cease not to do the work he 

has appointed me, nor will I. 



I have read the three DAWNS critically as 
I can, and I must say they have to a great 
extent revolutionized me; and, though your 
DAWNS struck me a little contrary at first, 
I soon got righted. Oh, the blessedness of 
this truth! He has led me in a way I know 
not, but he doeth all things well. I have 
fought a good fight up to the present time 
and have the armor on awaiting his orders. 

You may be and probably are spoken 
against; but I am with you: not that I have 
hastily adopted these teachings; but I was 
ready for the DAWNS. I did not know what 
I wanted, but they filled the aching void. 

I have since shown my faith by my works, 
by handing in my resignation to the church 
to which I belonged, and am now free. I 
want your prayers for me, that I may see 
you at the marriage of the Lamb. 

ISAAC HAMPTON. 



page 112 



England. 
DEAR BROTHER:-Thanks for the knowledge 
of which you are the channel. A few 
weeks ago I came across your MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. I., and at the time I was struck 
with the facts therein enunciated, but did 
not take hold of them. However, I could 
not get away from the thoughts induced by 
the first reading, and so determined to have 
another perusal; and how any rational being 
could fail to perceive that plan as set forth 
in the Scriptures I should be at loss to 
understand, if I had not had experience with 



the blinding effects of tradition. "Take 
hearsay for granted, and never mind searching 
the Book" was my motto— and is that 
of many at the present time. 

True, I called myself a Christian, and did 
believe in Christ as a Redeemer, but I had 
absolutely no idea of the extent and benefits 
of the Redemption. But now, thank God, 
I know in what my duty consists, and am 
striving to run the race, keeping only the 
goal in view. 

I am in daily contact with Spiritualists 
and others of similar beliefs, and some with 
no belief at all, and would ask for your 
prayers, that the light may shine, and that 
I may be given the requisite strength to 
keep my light shining— not burning, simply, 
but shining. I shall not forget you; and 
may you long be spared to continue the work 
the Master has given you to do. 

Yours faithfully, C. MAW. 



California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The DAWN 
series has brought great light and joy and 
peace to our home. We had been studying 
and groping for some time, to find what the 
second advent of Jesus Christ meant to the 
world; and since we have come to "understand," 
we have had the pleasure of helping 
to lead some others into the Truth. 

Will you please give us in the WATCH 
TOWER an explanation of the first chapter 
of John? [This will be explained in next 
TOWER.] 

Your brother in Christ, C. C. BELL. 



R1513 :page 112 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Some time 
since, I bought MILLENNIAL DAWN of one 
of your colporteurs, and have given the three 
volumes a careful reading; and though your 
ideas are somewhat different from my own, 
yet I feel drawn towards you, as one after 
my own heart. For many year past, I have 
been making myself ready for the appearing 
of the glorious Bridegroom, having been 
connected with those expecting his soon appearing 
since 1842. 

While I have been a believer in restitution 



and in the reign of Jesus and his bride 
over the restored earth, I have not attached 
such importance to the ransom-price paid by 
the blessed Redeemer for all mankind, as I 
ought to have done. Truly it is the goodness 
of God that should lead men to repentance, 
and not his supposed wrath. 

Dear Brother, everything I have is on the 
altar, and has been since I was called out, 
seventy-three years ago. I still holding myself 
ready to do my blessed Master's will, 
to follow him through evil as well as good 
report, and to say at all times, "Not my will, 
but thine be done." 

Your brother in hope, DANIEL PERINE. 



page 114 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 

By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



INTERESTING ITEMS. 



R1515 :page 114 

CHURCH STATISTICS OF THE U.S. 

Dr. Carroll, Superintendent of religious statistics 
of the last census, presents some interesting 
facts. The membership of the Presbyterian, 
the Methodist Episcopal, the Reformed, 
the German Reformed, the Lutheran, the Congregational, 
the Disciples, the Roman Catholic 
and the Jewish churches shows a total of 12,487,382; 
while of this total the Roman Catholics 
are accredited with 6,250,045, or more than 
one half. These are the figures given by The 
Christian at Work. 

THE OUTLOOK. 

The Christian Union for April 1st, in the 
"Outlook," says, after speaking of the bitter 
opposition, by a member of the German Reichstag, 
to the Jews: "There are many indications 
that the anti-Semitic feeling in Germany is 
spreading." 

The same journal, speaking of affairs in Belgium 
—the working classes demanding universal 
suffrage— says, "In the event of a failure to 
make that concession, very serious industrial 
disturbances will undoubtedly take place." 

JEWISH RIOTS IN RUSSIA. 

A St. Petersburg dispatch, dated March 24, 
announces a peculiar riot. It says: "For the 
first time in the remembrance of Russia, Hebrews 
have assumed the role of rioters— in the 
town of Jarnitz." 

"The Hebrews residing in that part of Russia 
are, what with their own natural shiftlessness 
and the various late prohibitive laws which 
have kept them out of their regular easy and 
paying businesses, in a somewhat precarious 
condition anyway nowadays. They live mostly 
a from-hand-to-mouth existence, and have nothing 
to fall back upon in case of need. The 
late failure of the crops and the consequent 
famine have, therefore, come down with crushing 
force upon them, and their sufferings have 
been terrible. On top of this the winter has 
been extremely cold, and this suffering has been 
added to the others. At last the cold, hunger 
and need drove the poor inhabitants of the 
above mentioned town of Jarnitz, which may 



be taken as a sample of all the other towns of 
that region, to an extreme step. 

THE POOR IGNORED BY THE RICH. 

"On an appointed Saturday all the sufferers 
arranged to meet for a general consultation in 
the local synagogue. Once assembled there, 
for a long time they discussed their troubles 
and sought for some remedy. No one could 
suggest any remedy. At last it was decided 
that the local rich Hebrews had not done their 
duty and to make an appeal to them. The 
rich ones refused to pay any attention to the 
deputation, and ordered them away. 

"The result of this cold-blooded repulsion 
was almost electrical on the crowd. As one man 
they threw themselves into a street-riot. Honor, 
honesty, safety, all were forgotten under the terrible 
pangs of hunger and the stinging realization 
of the heartlessness of their co-religionists. 

"The riot lasted for five hours and was aimed 
exclusively at the houses of the rich. Windows 
and doors were broken in, all that could be was 
carried off, the rest destroyed. Nothing that 
could possibly be made away with was left. 

"Meanwhile the police had taken the alarm, 
but could at first do nothing in the face of the 
immense crowd. When, at last, help had arrived, 
the riot was nearly over. The Chief of 
Police was then about to take extreme measures 
and vowed to bring all the offenders to justice. 
When, however, upon investigation, he learned 
all the particulars, and that three Hebrews had 
died that same day from hunger, he decided 
that no further action was advisable in the 
matter. Not only that, but he himself started 
a subscription for the relief of the sufferers. 



R1514:page 115 

VOL. XIV. APRIL 15, 1893. NO. 8. 

"THE WORD WAS A GOD." 



"In the beginning was the Logos, and the Logos was 
with the God, and the Logos was a God. The same was 
in the beginning with the God. All things were made by 
him [the Logos], and without him was not anything made 
that was made."— John 1:1-3. 

The Apostle gives us in these words a brief 



statement of our great Redeemer's pre-human 
history. We adopt the word Logos as one of 
our Lord's many names. Dr. Adam Clarke 
also advocates its use in this manner, saying, 
"This term [Logos] should be left untranslated, 
for the very same reasons why the names Jesus 
and Christ are left untranslated. As every appellative 
of the Savior of the world was descriptive 
of some excellence in his person, nature or 
work, so the epithet Logos, which signifies a 
word spoken, speech, eloquence, doctrine, reason, 
or the faculty of reasoning, is very properly 
applied to him." 

Another difference, between the above translation 
and the common version, is the addition 
of the italicized words a and the. These are 
supplied in order to give the reader the true 
sense of the Greek text, in which the presence 
or absence of the Greek article is very important. 
In the above translation the represents 
the article, while a shows that the article is 
lacking. 

With this translation verified and appreciated 
(as can be done by consulting any Greek Testament 
or any Greek scholar), these verses, 
long doubtful and obscure to so many, become 
luminous. In them John tells the same story 
that our Lord tells us over and over again (See 
Rev. 1:8,11,17; 2:8; 3:14; 21:6; 22:13), 
that he is the beginning and the ending, the 
first and the last, of the creation of God. 

The Apostle Paul adds his testimony in the 
same line, saying, He "is the image of the invisible 
God, the first-born of all creation: for 
by him were all things created.... All things 
were created by him and for him." (Col. 1:15.) 
The Heavenly Father had no beginning, but 
is from everlasting to everlasting the same. 
Our Lord's great honor is shown in that he 
was not only the first of God's creation but the 
last. From this we are to understand that the 
great Jehovah did not directly employ his 
own power in creating either men or angels; 
but that he delegated his power to his Only-begotten 
Son— using him as his honored agent 
and representative in every case— in every respect 
giving him the pre-eminence over all 
others; second only to himself. 

THE ALMIGHTY. 



But although our Redeemer had always occupied 
the place of honor in the heavenly 
courts, it was not until his faithful obedience 



to the Father had been tested to the extent of 
his changing nature to that of man, and then 
giving himself as fallen man's ransom, that he 
received his present unexcellable glory and 

R1515 :page 115 

honor. It is since his resurrection that the 
message has gone forth— "All power in heaven 
and in earth is given unto me." (Matt. 28:18.) 
Consequently it is only since then that he could 
be called the Almighty (as in Rev. 1:8). The 
Heavenly Father has always been almighty, and 

R1515 :page 116 

this all-power or all-might was never given to 

him, but was his eternal possession. But now 

that he has given the same power to his Only-begotten 

and well-pleasing Son, our Saviour, 

both we and angels delight to know it, and delight 

to honor him whom the Father has so 

highly honored, and whom he has instructed 

us to honor, saying: "That all should honor 

the Son, even as they honor the Father."— 

John 5:23. 

The reasons leading up to our Lord's present 
great exaltation are clearly stated by the Apostle, 
as examined below. 

ROBBERY TO BE EQUAL TO GOD. 



The Apostle's words in Philippians 2:6 have 
(by a bad translation, at the hands of those 
whose judgments were warped by an erroneous 
view) been turned about and made to say the 
very reverse of what he intended. 

The Apostle is showing Christ's faithfulness 
or loyalty and obedience to the Father. Not 
satisfied with referring to his earthly course, he 
goes back of it to the time when our Lord was 
a spirit being, before he humbled himself by his 
translation or change of nature to a lower one, 
—from spiritual to human nature. The Apostle 
seems to have had Satan's course in his 
mind,— contrasting his wrong course and its 
end with Christ's proper course and its glorious 
results. Satan did not hesitate to rob God 
of his glory, saying, "I will ascend above the 
stars [above the other bright ones of the angelic 
host— I will be a leader, a chief], I will be like 
the Most High" [I will pose as another Potentate 
a rival and peer of Jehovah]. (Isa. 14:14.) 
But, says the Apostle, Christ, when a spirit being 



in God's form, thought not of robbery to 
be God's equal, "but [on the contrary, in obedience 
to the Father's plan] stripped himself 
[of the glory and dignity already enjoyed], 
taking a bond-servants form, being made in the 
likeness of men. And [afterward], being in 
the likeness of men ["Made flesh"— Jno. 1:14], 
he [still further, and in harmony with the same 
obedient spirit] humbled himself, becoming 
obedient unto death, [and, yet more humiliating] 
even the death of the cross. Therefore 
[because he did not attempt to usurp, but on 
the contrary was humble] God hath supremely 
exalted him, and given to him a name [honor, 
title, dignity] above every [other] name." 

What a wonderful contrast! Satan, who attempted 
to rob God of his honor and station, 
is cast out, and will ultimately be destroyed. 
Christ, who humbled himself in every sense of 
the word, has been exalted to the very position 
which Satan coveted. And the Apostle 
recounts this matter in order to enforce upon 
all followers of Christ that, like their Master, 
they should be humble and unassuming— humbling 
themselves that they, too, may be exalted 
in due time.— See the context: verses 3-5. 

THE GODHEAD. 



The word Godhead occurs three times in the 
Scriptures-Acts 17:29; Rom. 1:20; Col. 2:9. 
It is a meaningless word, and merely a bad 
translation. It should be rendered Divinity 
or Deity, and then would be intelligible. 

MIGHTY GOD, EVERLASTING FATHER. 



These are among the great titles of our glorified 
Lord, predicted through Isaiah— 9:6. 

In our issue of June, 1892, in which this subject 
was much more thoroughly examined, we 
showed the meaning of the word "God" to be 
mighty one. We gave instances in which this 
same word (in Hebrew, El and Elohim) is used 
when referring to great men and angels. Our 
Lord would be reverenced and titled Very 
Mighty or Very Great. 

The signification of the title, "Everlasting 
Father" or Father Forever, is seen when we 
remember that the special meaning of father 
is life-giver. Jehovah is the Life-giver of all 
creatures in the sense that he is the fountain 



from which all life originally proceeded. But 
after man had forfeited his God-given privilege, 
by disobedience, he needed a new life. 
And Jehovah sent forth his Only-begotten Son, 
to become man's Life-giver, by redeeming 
man's life with his own and then giving the 
new life to whoever will accept it under the 
terms of the New Covenant, which he mediated. 
Since all of our race have thus been redeemed, 
and restitution to human perfection 
is thus provided for all, through this Life-giver, 

R1515 :page 117 

he will be known to the redeemed world as 

their Father Forever, the one through whom 

their redeemed, restitution life was obtained. 

The propriety of this is evident when it is remembered 

that the restitution life which our 

Lord will give the world was purchased by him 

with his own precious [life] blood. 

The "little flock" now being selected as 
"members of his body," his "bride," would 
also have been of this class of children of Christ, 
were it not for their high-calling to become 
his "brethren," "body" or "bride," and to 
experience the change of nature which this 
calling implies and necessitates. To fit these 
for their "high-calling," they are begotten 
again (from the restitution-life hopes obtained 
through faith in Christ), to the divine nature. 
(2 Pet. 1:4.) This divine nature was not purchased 
by our Lord Jesus; hence he is not the 
father or giver of it. Jehovah alone gives it: 
hence the Apostle declares, "The God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten 
us," and Christ is "not ashamed to call them 
Brethren." 



R1516 :page 117 
JUDGE NOT. 



Judge not; the workings of the brain 
And of the heart thou can'st not see; 

What looks to thy dim eye a stain, 
In God's pure light may only be 

A scar, brought from some well-won field, 

Where thou would'st only faint and yield. 

The look, the air, that frets thy sight, 
May be a token that below 



The soul had closed in deadly fight 

With some internal, fiery foe, 
Whose glance would scorch thy smiling grace, 
And cast thee, shuddering, on thy face. 

The fall thou darest to despise: 

May be the angel's slackened hand 

Has suffered it that he may rise 
And take a firmer, surer stand; 

Or, trusting less to earthly things, 

May henceforth learn to use his wings. 

And judge none lost; but wait and see, 

With hopeful pity, not disdain; 
The depth of the abyss may be 

The measure of the height of pain 
And love and glory that may raise 
This soul to God in after days. —Selected. 



R1516 :page 117 
THE RACE IN ADAM. 



"Ye shall not surely die."— Satan— Gen. 3:4. 

God's blessing upon his prime agents, in his 
purpose of peopling the earth— "Be fruitful 
and multiply"— embraces in it the full power 
and authority of the agents to bring forth the 
race entrusted to them. 

God's purpose did not contemplate a dead 
race, but he had made bountiful provisions for 
the happiness of a race of perfect beings, reflecting 
moral and intellectual qualities the exact 
counterparts of his own; and while he well 
knew and had arranged for all possible contingencies, 
he did not design them. He could 
not design or "do evil that good might come." 
In his purpose the race was already alive, and 
hence alive in the agents prepared and empowered 
through his blessing. 

This recognition of things that are not (yet) 
is lawful and right in view of the certainty of 
the agents employed and the steadfastness of 
purpose in him who "worketh all things after 
the counsel of his will" and according to his 
own purposes. 

Contending for change of forms of Scriptural 
expressions upon the grounds of grammatical 
construction cannot affect the recorded condition 
and facts of experience. 

To say that "By Adam all die" does not 



change the relationship nor responsibility of 
Adam— Levi is said to have paid tithes to 
Melchisedec while yet in the loins of his father. 
(Heb. 7:10.) The case is not altered whether 
we say the tithes were paid by Abraham or in 
Abraham. Adam, then, did not represent a 
dead race, neither was he on trial for a dead 
race, but he certainly did stand for and represent 
a living race— God's purposes were centered 
here: outside of Adam God had made no 

R1516 :page 118 

provision, unless as contingencies should arise 

to make them necessary for the completion of 

his benevolent plans. In Adam were wrapped 

the destinies of the race; from him it should 

inherit life, and that life was in him, so that, 

instead of not living in him, mankind had no 

other source of existence; and when the hour 

of Adam's testing came, the crisis of the race 

had come, and the fatal sequence is that he entailed 

death upon mankind instead of any right 

to life. Thus by Adam all die, while yet in 

him, for none had yet been born when he fell 

under condemnation. The sentence was pronounced, 

and its justice is open to the investigation 

of all intelligences; and the very throne 

of Jehovah depends upon its being found 

"True and righteous altogether." 

Thus we see that the race never had life: its 
inheritance was death; for a condemned thing 
is already dead and can only resolve to "dust 
as it was." Evolution upwards, or out of death, 
is wholly impossible; for there is nothing left. 
The "dying now" is not "a double infliction 
of the penalty," but a carrying out of the 
sentence— destruction. 

There is no hope but in a Ransom— a man's 
life for a man's life. That only can remove 
the legal hindrance and permit the call, "Return, 
ye children of men," without impugning 
the exact justice of the penalty. 

Thus we see that Satan can devise no scheme 
offering hope for man except it be upon his 
prolific lie. And so we find this according to 
the latest deduction (erroneously drawn from 
Scripture statements of God's designs and foreknowledge) 
to be as follows: "Hence death 
as a result of sin could not have been, either 
in fact or design, more than temporary. The 
wages of sin is death— looking forward to deliverance 
—eternal life!" In other words, "Ye 
shall not surely die." 

Good men of all ages have conceived of deliverance 
upon reasonable hopes within their 



experience and conceptions of God, having no 
grounds for a formulated theory save the one 
that makes God a liar; but how much severer 
ought our judgment to be, if we, after seeing 
God in the amazing revelations of himself, 
should wilfully reject the only basis and means 
of the designed and soon to be accomplished 
deliverance, and insist upon the same errors? 
H. L. GILLIS. 



R1516 :page 118 
SELF-EXAMINATION. 



In 2 Cor. 13:5, Paul says, "Try your own selves 
whether ye be in the faith; prove your own 
selves. Or know ye not, your own selves, that 
Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?" 
The context apparently shows that the Corinthians 
had accused Paul of having no influence 
over them for good, and his ministry as being 
weak and insignificant. Paul replies by telling 
them to look at their present condition as 
compared with their past, see the change that 
has taken place in their lives, see the possession 
they now have, and in the light of these 
things let them say whether his influence over 
them has been for good or not, or if his ministry 
is weak and insignificant. Again, in 1 Cor. 11:28, 
the same Apostle says, "Let a man examine 
himself." But in this Paul means only 
to interpose a caution to prepare the receiver to 
eat the Lord's supper worthily. 

It is impossible to know ourselves by looking 
at the present. We only partly know ourselves 
as we see our life in the past. Every day 
our actions surprise us, and frequently we find 
that we have done the very thing we never 
thought we would do. I suppose Abraham 
did not really know the strength of his faith 
till called upon to sacrifice Isaac. In the 
light of that trial he could estimate the real 
strength of his faith. In the shortness of 
memory we fail to profit by past mistakes. In 
every action of ours there are so many details 
giving rise to so many causes of actions which 
may differ in each action, thus making it 
impossible for us to judge truly of our own 
condition. The Greeks had a favorite motto 
among their philosophers, "Know thyself;" 
but by this they did not mean to teach that by 
merely looking into their own actions they 



came to understand their own character and 
became able to estimate their real worth, but 

R1516 :page 119 

rather that each one should examine the basis 
and facts of his philosophy for himself, and 
not be content to receive them second-hand. 
Then, again, many people do not grow better 
from rigid self-introspection. The bad only 
see good and excuses for the evil in their lives. 
The good only see evil in theirs, and sadden 
their lives by deploring it. One of the saintliest 
women I ever knew, and whom all reverenced, 
began to direct her attention to her own 
life, to examine it, to search it, and to question 
whether she did truly believe or not, till 
in a few months she concluded she had no faith, 
that her life was full of evil deeds, that she was 
unsaved and had no hope, and that there was 
none for her; and in this state she lives to-day. 

We make a distinction between heart-searching 
and life-searching, which many fail to 
make. Our hearts, that is our wills, should 
be perfect; but our lives cannot be perfect, 
because "we have this treasure [our new wills 
or new hearts] in earthen vessels [in imperfect 
bodies]." He, therefore, who judges of 
his acceptableness with God by judging of his 
perfection or imperfection in thought, word 
and deed, must condemn himself, if he be 
honest and if he have a proper estimate of perfection 
in these respects. But he that judges 
his heart, his motives, his will, his intentions, 
should always be able to find it true to the 
Lord,— however much his life may come short 
of his new will,— the mind of Christ begotten 
in him by the exceeding great and precious 
promises of God's Word. 

We are not merely to ask ourselves whether 
we love God, but also whether our love takes 
the practical form of willing and trying to serve 
God. This, his Word indicates, is the real 

R1517 :page 119 

test;— not what we succeed in doing, but what 
we honestly and earnestly try to do. 

The mother never questions whether she loves 
her children or not, but shows her love by her 
services; the industrious man never stops to 
wonder if he is industrious. Christ says, He 
that heareth my words and doeth them, he it 
is that loveth me. 

We can know our hearts only as God, who 
sits as a refiner of gold, tries us: under the 



hand of his proving we learn to know ourselves. 
God does the searching to see if there 
be any evil way in us. He searches, tries and 
proves us, and not we our own hearts. The 
Christian only grows Godlike, strong in faith 
and hope, as he learns to look away from himself 
to the Son of Man. It is said that one of 
the gifted painters of the world stood before 
the masterpiece of the greatest genius of the 
age. This he never hoped to rival, nor even 
to equal, yet the infinite superiority did not 
crush him, nor cause him to despair. He saw 
realized those conceptions that had long floated 
vaguely before him in unsubstantial form; in 
every line and touch he felt a spirit immeasurably 
superior. As he stood gazing at it his 
heart swelled with emotion, his feelings became 
elevated, and he turned away exclaiming, 
"And I, too, am a painter." Let the hesitating 
believer look on Christ, the embodiment 
of the highest and holiest of all conceptions, 
till his heart can feel his spirit and touch, then 
he can turn to the world, believing and declaring, 
"I, too, am a Christian." — Sel. 



R1517 :page 119 

ROMANIST DESIGNS ON AMERICAN CITIES. 

BY C. CHINIQUY, A FORMER ROMAN CATHOLIC PRIEST. 



When, in 1852, it became evident that my 
plan of forming a colony of French Canadians 
on the fertile plains of Illinois was to be a success, 
D'Arcy McGee, then editor of the Freeman's 
Journal, the official paper of the Bishop 
of New York, wrote me to know my views, and 
he determined immediately to put himself at 
the head of a similar enterprise in favor of the 
Irish Roman Catholics. He published long and 
able articles to show how the Irish people, with 
few exceptions, were demoralized and kept 
down in the cities, and how they would soon 
be raised to the top if they could be induced 
to exchange city grog-shops and saloons for 
the rich lands of the West. Through his influence 
a large assembly, principally composed 
of Irish priests, to which I was invited, met at 
Buffalo in the Spring of 1853. But what was 

R1517 :page 120 



his disappointment when he saw that the greater 
part of these priests were sent by the bishops 
of New York, Albany, Boston, etc., to oppose 
and defeat his plans! He vainly spoke with 
the most burning eloquence for the support of 
his pet scheme. The majority of the priests 
coldly answered him in the name of their bishops: 
"We are determined, like you, to take possession 
of the United States and rule them; but 
we cannot do that except by acting secretly, 
and by using the utmost wisdom. If our plans 
were known they would certainly be defeated. 
What does a skilful general do when he wants 
to conquer a country? Does he scatter his soldiers 
over the farm lands and spend their time 
and energies in plowing the fields and sowing 
the grain? No. He keeps them well united 
around his banners, and marches at their head 
to the conquest of the strongholds. He subdues 
the large cities one after the other; he 
pulls down the high towers and the citadels 
which he meets on his way. Then the farming 
countries are conquered and become the price 
of his victory without moving a finger. So it 
is with us. Silently and patiently we must mass 
our Irish Roman Catholics in the great cities 
of the United States. Let us remember that in 
this country the vote of one of our poorest 
journeymen, covered with rags, has as much 
weight in the scale of power as the vote of the 
millionaire Astor, and that if we have two votes 
against the millionaire's one, he becomes as 
powerless as an oyster. Then let us multiply 
our voters, let us call on poor but faithful Irish 
Catholics, and gather them from the far corners 
of the world into the very hearts of those proud 
citadels which the Yankees are so proudly building 
up under the name of New York, Boston, 
Chicago, Albany, Buffalo, Troy, etc. Under 
the shadows of those great cities the Americans 
consider themselves as a giant and an unconquerable 
race. They look upon the Irish Catholic 
with the utmost contempt, as only fit to 
dig their canals, sweep their streets, or humbly 
cook their meals in their kitchen. Let no one 
awake these sleeping lions to-day; let us pray 
God that they may sleep and dream their sweet 
dreams a few years more. How sad will be 
their awakening when, with our outnumbering 
votes, we will turn them out, and forever, from 
every position of power, honor and profit! 
What will these hypocrite sons and daughters 
of the fanatical Pilgrim Fathers say when not a 
single judge, not a single school-teacher, not 
even a single policeman will be elected if he be 
not a devoted Irish Catholic? What will those 



so-called giants think and say of their unsurpassed 
ability, skill and shrewdness when not 
a single governor, senator, or member of congress 
will be elected if he be not sincerely devoted 
to our Holy Father, the Pope? 

"What a sad figure those Protestant Yankees 
will cut when we will not only elect the President, 
but fill and command the armies, man the 
navy, and have the key of the public treasury 
in our hands! It will then be the time for our 
devoted Irish Catholics to give up their grog-shops 
to become the governors and judges of 
the land. Then our poor and humble Irish 
mechanics will come out from the damp ditches 
and the canals to rule the cities in all their departments, 
from the stately mansion of mayor 
to the more humble, though not less noble, position 

R1518 :page 120 

of school-teacher. 

"Then, yes, we will rule the United States, 
and lay them at the feet of the Vicar of Jesus 
Christ, that he may put an end to their godless 
system of education, and sweep away those impious 
laws of liberty of conscience which are 
an insult to God and man." 

Poor D'Arcy McGee was left almost alone 
when the vote was taken. 

But the Irish Roman Catholics were taught 
to consider San Francisco as their "promised 
land," and the rich inheritance God had in 
store for them. The consequence is, that when 
you find only a few American, German and 
English millionaries in San Francisco, you 
count more than fifty Irish Catholic millionaries 
in that city. It is to San Francisco that 
you must come to have an idea of the number 
of great and powerful organizations with which 
the Church of Rome is preparing herself for 
the impending conflict, through which she 
hopes to destroy the system of education, and 
every vestige of liberty and human rights in 
the United States, as she bravely and publicly 
announced it not long ago in her most popular 

R1518 :page 121 

organs, the Catholic World, of New York, and 
the Catholic Review:— 

"The Catholic Church numbers one-third 
the American population, and if its membership 
shall increase for the next thirty years as 
it has for the thirty past, in 1900 Rome will 
have a majority, and be bound to this country 
and keep it. There is, ere long, to be a State 



religion in this country, and that State religion 
is to be Roman Catholic. The Catholic is to 
wield his vote for the purpose of securing Roman 
Catholic ascendency in this country. All 
legislation must be governed by the will of 
God, unerringly indicated by the Pope. Education 
must be controlled by Catholic authorities; 
and, under education, the opinions of the 
individual and the utterances of the press are 
included. Many opinions are to be furnished 
by the secular arm, under the authority of the 
church, even to war and bloodshed."— Catholic 
World, July, 1870. 

"While a State has rights, she has them only 
in virtue and by permission of the superior authority, 
and that authority can only be expressed 
through the church. Protestantism of every 
form has not had and never can have any right 
where Catholicity has triumphed, and therefore 
we lose the breath we spend in declaiming 
against bigotry and intolerance and in favor of 
religious liberty, or the right of any man to be 
of any religion as best pleases him."— Catholic 
Review, July, 1870. 

In order to more easily drill the Irish Catholics, 
and prepare them for the impending conflict, 
the Jesuits have organized them into a 
great number of secret societies. 

Almost all these secret associations are military 
ones. They have their headquarters in San 
Francisco, but their rank and file are scattered 
all over the United States, from the Pacific to 
the Atlantic ocean. They number 700,000 
soldiers, who, under the name of United States 
Volunteer Militia, are officered by the most 
skilful and able generals of the great Republic. 



page 121 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1517 :page 121 

SOLOMON AND HIS WRITINGS-PROVERBS, 



ECCLESIASTES AND SOLOMON'S SONG. 



These three productions come down to us 
from Jewish archives of sacred religious literature; 
and, notwithstanding the imperfections 
of the writer, they come with clear 
indications of divine supervision and inditement. 
The wisdom expressed is above that 
which is natural to our fallen humanity. 
It is not necessary to the reverent study of 
the moral philosophy therein set forth that 
we should either forget or ignore the defective 
moral character of Solomon; for even 
the story of his life with its checkered manifestations 
of virtue and vice is no inconsiderable 
part of the lesson of these books. 

In 1 Kings 3:11,12 we have the assurance 
of the divine inspiration of the wisdom of 
Solomon: "And God said unto him, Because 
thou hast asked this thing, and hast not 
asked for thyself long life, neither hast asked 
riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of 
thine enemies, but hast asked for thyself 
understanding to discern judgment, behold, 
I have done according to thy word. Lo, I 
have given thee a wise and an understanding 
heart, so that there was none like thee 
before thee, neither after thee shall any arise 
like unto thee." But while we recognize 
and duly appreciate the wisdom of Solomon, 
we also mark his typical character, and perceive 
that only as a type of Christ could the 
fulness of the promise belong, of wisdom 
and riches superior to any preceding or succeeding 
him. In this light the statement of 
our Lord (Matt. 12:42)— "A greater than 
Solomon is here"— is in perfect harmony 
with 1 Kings 3:12. His peaceful and prosperous 
reign, his famed wisdom and his 
marvelous wealth and glory were typical of 
the Millennial reign of Christ, though it all 
falls far short of the glory of the antitype— 
as types always do. As a type, the peace of 
his reign in contrast with the warlike reign 
of his father David is strikingly similar to 
the predicted peace of Christ's reign in 
contrast with the turmoil and war and confusion 

R1517 :page 122 

of the Gospel age which precedes and 
prepares the way for the reign of his Son 
and for the building and establishment of 
the glorious temple of God, whose living 



stones are now being made ready, even as 
David similarly prepared the materials with 
which Solomon built the typical temple. 

The Song of Solomon, though in the form 
of an oriental love song, is really an allegorical 
representation of the mutual love of 
Christ and the Church. 

The Book of Ecclesiastes seems to have 
been written in later life, when the heart 
had grown sick with excess of sensuous 
pleasures and the lack of the real happiness 
which comes from a close and perfect walk 
with God, when he turned from all his 
riches and honors with the sad refrain, 
"Vanity of vanities, all is vanity." From 
his own experience he proves the truth of 
his theme, and counsels to others a different 
course from that which he himself had pursued, 
saying, "Remember thy Creator in 
the days of thy youth. ...Fear God and 
keep his commandments; for this is the 
whole duty of man."— Eccl. 12:1,13. 

The Book of Proverbs was probably the 
latest production of Solomon, when not only 
the promised wisdom from above, but 
also an experience gained under very peculiar 
and varied circumstances found expression 
in numerous concise and pithy sayings 
for the guidance and instruction of all who 
would live godly. These are frequently 
quoted and referred to in the New Testament. 

R1518 :page 122 

WISDOM'S WARNING OF PRESENT DANGER. 



II. QUAR., LESSON V., APR. 30, PROV. 1:20-33. 

Golden Text— "See that ye refuse not him that speaketh." 
-Heb. 12:25. 

"The reverence of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, 
and the knowledge of the Holy is understanding." 

"The reverence of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, 
but fools despise wisdom and instruction."— Prov. 9:10; 1:7; 
Job 28:28; Psa. 111:10. 

The Book of Proverbs is a poem, the first 
nine chapters of which are a discourse on 
wisdom, which is personified. (The major 
part of the Book consists of the proverbs 
of Solomon, some of which— chapters 25-29 
—were collected and added later by King 
Hezekiah. Chapters 30 and 31, however, do 



not claim Solomon for their author.) 

It has been inferred that the personification 
of wisdom in this Book was meant to 
represent Christ; but when we consider that 
wisdom is one of the divine attributes, it is 
evident that wisdom existed even before our 
Lord Jesus, although he was the beginning 
of the creation of God, the first born of every 
creature. But so perfectly did our Lord Jesus 
exemplify the divine wisdom that it is not at 
all strange that some have inferred that wisdom, 
here, personified Christ, instead of recognizing 
Christ as the personification of that 
wisdom which from eternity was an attribute 
of Jehovah. It is described by the Apostle 
James (3:17) as coming "from above," and 
as being "first pure, then peaceable, gentle 
and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and 
good fruits, without partiality and without 
hypocrisy." 

In contrast with this heavenly wisdom he 
places what the Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 3:19) 
calls "the wisdom of this world," which 
James says "descendeth not from above, 
but is earthly;" and, worse than that, it is 
"sensual;" and, worse still, it is "devilish." 
It is the kind of wisdom which delights 
in envying and strife and confusion and 
every evil work. (Jas. 3:14-16.) It is 
the wisdom of selfishness which, regardless 
of the rights and interests of others, seeks 
to grasp and hold every thing for self. 
This kind of wisdom, Paul says, "is foolishness 
with God; for it is written [Job 5:13], 
'He taketh the wise in their own craftiness.'" 
-1 Cor. 3:19. 

All of the fallen human nature have more 
or less of the earthly wisdom of selfishness, 
which disposition continually gravitates 
lower and lower unless it is resisted and displaced 
by the heavenly wisdom whose fruits 
are love, mercy and truth. This heavenly 
wisdom, we are told, has its beginning in 
the reverence of the Lord. That is, we must 
look away from our own narrow thoughts, 
plans and schemes and allow our minds to 
dwell upon the grandeur of God's benevolent, 
loving and glorious character until a 
gleam of his glory awakens in us a feeling 
of admiration, veneration and love, and 
then of longing to be conformed to his image. 
And while we, as God's faithful 
children, thus look and hold ourselves in position 
to receive the impressions from above, 
the divine likeness is traced upon our hearts, 
as we study God's revelation; and the heavenly 



wisdom begins to manifest itself in the 
peaceable fruits of righteousness. 

Those who thus reverence him, the Lord 
is pleased to recognize as his sons, and to 
acquaint them with his plans for their salvation 
through the great redemption which his 

R1518 :page 123 

wisdom provided; and to such the counsels 

of these Proverbs are addressed, while warnings 

are given to others. Thus we read— 

CHAPTER l:8,9-"My son, hear the instruction 
of thy Father [God], and forsake 
not the law of thy mother [God's covenant 
of justification and regeneration in which 
we are begotten to newness of life]: for 
they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy 
head, and chains about thy neck." Those 
only are accounted sons, who are thus begotten 
of the truth and in covenant with God. 

VERSES 10-19. "My son, if sinners entice 
thee, consent thou not," etc. The counsel 
here, while it has reference to all enticements 
of sinners, has special reference to a 
condition of things which was prophetically 
foreseen— not necessarily by Solomon, but 
by the Lord who indited the matter, merely 
using Solomon as his mouthpiece. The picture 
drawn corresponds exactly with that 
condition of things predicted by other prophets, 
and by the apostles, which was to come 
to pass in the end or harvest-period of the 
Gospel age, when great Corporations, Trusts 
and Monopolies, on the one hand, and 
Unions and Labor Federations on the other, 
would offer their enticements to the iniquitous 
business of shedding innocent blood 
and fattening on the spoils of the slain.— 
SeeJas. 5:1-6; Mai. 3:5. 

These two parties are now addressing 
everyone: the Capitalistic party addresses 
its temptations only to those who have 
money and influence of which they desire 
to make use; the Labor-Union party addresses 
all others. But the voice of the Lord, 
the voice of true Wisdom, says to all God's 
people: "My son, if sinners entice thee, consent 
thou not." Both of these parties present 
worldly-wise arguments based on selfishness 
—opposed to justice as well as to love. 

Capitalism says, and truly, We have the 
brains, but are in the minority: we are prosperous, 
but less contented than ever. Let us 
enlarge our ambitions; let us unify our interests 
so that our rule and prosperity may 



be prolonged, even though the masses are 
awaking and may attempt resistance, in this 
dawn of a new era. 

Laborism says, and truly, If we were ignorant 
and asleep in the past, we are awake 
now; if we were contented in the past with 
less, we are discontented now with more. 
Let us unite our muscle and skill and squeeze 
Capitalism into subjection to us; let us appropriate 
the fruit of their brains. 

Both are saying, "Come with us [join our 
Union or Trust], let us lay wait for blood" 
[for opportunities to squeeze the life out of 
those under our power: let us make, for instance, 
a "corner" in wheat; let us buy up 
all the wheat in the market, fix our own 
prices and so control the market that we 
can financially kill the small dealers and 
wring the revenue out of the public— the 
masses, both rich and poor. Or let us play 
this game in oil or corn or any other commodity. 
Or let us make a corner in the 
skilled-labor market, by getting up a strong 
Union and ordering a strike; by "boycotting" 

R1519 :page 123 

all who oppose us, and by financially 

killing fellow workmen who will not join 

with us. Let us look out for Number One, 

—ourselves. Thus both combinations seek 

to prey upon each other for selfish ends, and 

generally to the disregard of justice]. "Let 

us lurk privily for the innocent without 

cause." [Let us watch for our opportunity 

to take advantage of their ignorance of our 

movements, etc. And generally it is the 

innocent who suffer most from such conspiracies.] 

"Let us swallow them up alive as 

the grave, and whole as those that go down 

into the pit." [Present efforts are not for 

existence merely (for all are prosperous as 

never before), but for control. Capitalism 

wants full control, and Laborism wants no 

less. Each would swallow up the smaller 

of his own kind, and then effectually crush 

the other. Thus, say they], "We shall find 

all precious substance, we shall fill our houses 

with spoil." Thus, like ocean wreckers, they 

would grow rich upon the losses and injuries 

of others. 

"Union" is the watchword of both these 
great opposing parties. Both sides cry 
(Verse 14):— "Cast in thy lot with us; let us 
all have one purse" [—let us put our money 
and skill together; thus only we can succeed, 



and control the markets, and reap the harvest]. 
But what saith the Lord?— 

"My son, walk not thou in the way with 
them; refrain thy foot from their path; for 
their feet run to evil, and make haste to 
shed blood. Surely in vain the net is spread 
in the sight of any bird. [Each party can 
see the devices of the other, and each "snare" 
and device will be check-mated by the other 
side; and ultimately each party will become 
entangled in the snare set for the other. As 
we read,— 

"But they [these conspirators] lay wait 
for their [own] blood; they lurk privily for 

R1519 :page 124 

their [own] lives. So are the ways of every 

one that is greedy of gain, who taketh away 

the life [or living] of the owners thereof" 

—for the time is coming when the overwhelming 

numbers of those oppressed by 

these systems will arise in their fury like the 

raging waves of the sea, and anarchy will 

prevail— the predicted "time of trouble such 

as never was since there was a nation." 

(Dan. 12:1.) And who but the blind cannot 

see this very trend of events to-day? 

But who but "the wise" will heed these instructions 

of the Lord— the instructions of 

Wisdom?-Dan. 12:10. 

"Wisdom [the voice of righteousness and of 
prudence— the voice of God] crieth without; 
she uttereth her voice in the streets; she 
crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the 
openings of the gates, in the city she uttereth 
her words." This is truer to-day than 
at any other time in the world's history. 
Never before were the obligations of human 
brotherhood forced upon the attention of all 
men as they are to-day; and men are coming 
to see, though they be not free to admit 
it, that the only solution of the great social 
problem now before the world is found in 
the "golden rule." 

"We will have to act on that new rule 
we hear so much talk of in the papers nowadays," 
said a business man recently to a 
perplexed associate. "What's that?" said 
his friend. "The golden rule," he replied, 
and his friend assented. Yes, the "golden 
rule" is coming to the front, even in the 
newspapers, and men are obliged to consider 
it, whether they are ready to act upon 
it or not. Thus wisdom crieth in the streets 
in the city— everywhere— saying, 



VERSE 22. "How long, ye simple ones, 
will ye love simplicity [—will you prefer to 
remain in ignorance of the just and right 
ways of the Lord]? and the [proud] scorners 
delight in their scorning [of justice and 
truth], and fools hate [that real] knowledge 
[which cometh from above, preferring the 
ways of selfishness]?" 

VERSE 23. "Turn you at my reproof." 
But they will not turn, because, as the Psalmist 
says (Psa. 2:1-3), they "imagine a vain 
thing"— they "take counsel together against 
the Lord and against his Anointed [King, 
who has come to rule in righteousness, and 
whose presence and power is now forcing 
upon the minds and consciences of men the 
perplexing questions of this eventful hour, 
and their only right solution]." However, 
they will not be permitted to plead the excuse 
of ignorance of the right ways of the 
Lord; for the Lord says,— 

"Behold, I will pour out [make manifest] 
my spirit [my disposition] unto you: I will 
make known my words unto you;"— notwithstanding 
the fact that they "hate" such 
knowledge. 

VERSES 24-27 are in exact agreement with 
the prophecy of Psalm 2:4,5 showing not 
only that men will not heed the reproofs 
and counsels of this hour, but also predicting 
the disastrous results that will ensue. 
When the Lord has clearly set before men 
the momentous issues of this "day of preparation," 
and they have disregarded them, 
and scorned the reproofs which the occasional 
outbreaks of dissatisfaction and discord 
shall have brought, then he will begin 
to speak to them in more positive and commanding 
tones, saying— "Because I have 
called, and ye refused; I have stretched out 
my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have 
set at naught all my counsel, and would none 
of my reproof: I also will laugh at your 
calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh 
—when your fear cometh as desolation, 
and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; 
when distress and anguish cometh 
upon you." 

The thoughtful observer of the present 
social and political aspect of the world can 
easily see that if the voice of Wisdom and 
Prudence be not heeded among men the 
culmination of the present unrest will be a 
terrific whirlwind. (See also Jer. 25:31,32.) 
"He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: 
the Lord shall have them in derision. Then 



shall he speak unto them IN HIS WRATH, and 
vex them in his sore displeasure." 

VERSES 28-32. It will not avert the trouble 
for men to call upon the Lord then. If 
they despise his counsel and reproofs to such 
an extent as to make necessary the exhibition 
of his wrath and righteous indignation 
for their correction, the Lord will not cease 
to scourge them because of their crying, but 
the penalty of their evil courses shall be 
given in such measures as to make a lasting 
impression. It will therefore be "a time of 
trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation;" "no, nor ever shall be" (Dan. 12:1; 
Matt. 24:21), because so thorough will 
be the correction that it will never again 
need to be repeated. "Therefore shall they 
eat the fruit of their own way [for the 
"whirlwind" of trouble will be the natural 

R1519 :page 125 

result of their selfishness], and be filled [to 
satisfaction] with their own devices. For the 
turning away of the simple [from their ignorance 
will be to the earthly wisdom of 
selfishness and not to the heavenly wisdom 
with its fruit of love and peace, and will 
work their injury. It] shall slay them, and 
the prosperity of fools shall destroy them." 
Their own feet will be caught in the snares 
they had set for others. The very fact that, 
by their selfish, oppressive and unrighteous 
course, they were able to amass great fortunes 
will, by inciting the jealousy and hatred 
of the masses, make them a prey in the 
time of trouble— special targets for the venomous 
arrows of hatred.— Jas. 5:1-6. 

VERSE 33 is a promise in which the few, 
who are wise enough to heed the instructions 
of Wisdom, may take comfort, even in 
the midst of the calamities that shall overwhelm 
the world. "The Lord knoweth 
them that are his," and "The angel of the 
Lord encampeth around about them that are 
his, and delivereth them.— Psa. 34:7. 

The voice of heavenly Wisdom found clear 
and forcible expression through the lips of 
our Savior, who was the personification of 
God's wisdom as well as of his love. His message 
was that Love, not Selfishness, should 
be the rule of life, if true happiness would 
be obtained. "Whatsoever ye would that 
men should do to you, do ye even so to 
them" states this law in practical form. It 
has sounded down the centuries since, awakening 



thought and civilization wherever 

heard. It is the greatest leveller and equalizer; 

for it ignores class and caste. 

But alas! many respect it merely because 
it lifts them up; and, when getting up from 
the slough of despond themselves, they forget 
to practice this precept toward others 
who are lower down than they. Thus many 
have used and are using the precept of Love 
in a selfish spirit. They desire that those 
more favored shall exercise this principle of 
Love toward them, but they will not exercise 
it themselves toward those above or 
those below their own social plane. 

Only the "little flock" are to any appreciable 
extent even seeking to obey in spirit 
this voice of God— this voice of heavenly 
Wisdom: and these are often misjudged and 
misunderstood, as was their Lord and Redeemer, 
by the world in general, whose motive 
power is Selfishness. 

The civilized world stands to-day in a 
false position: professing to be Christ's Kingdom 
and to be ruled by his law of Love, it 
is really the kingdom of the Prince of this 
world— Satan— and operates in general under 
his law of Selfishness. God will demonstrate 
this as soon as he has finished the 
selection of the "Bride," the "Body" of 
Christ. He will show the difference between 
the holding of a truth in unrighteousness 
and the practice of a truth in its real 
spirit or intent. The result will be the 
breaking into pieces of these false kingdoms 
of Christ (Rev. 19:15), the establishment 
of the true, spiritual Kingdom of Christ, the 
full enlightenment of all the people and the 
full establishment of the law of Love, in fact 
as well as in name. 

It is as a means toward this end that God 
is now permitting the world to run riot in 
the spirit of this world (Selfishness) that the 
counsel of heavenly Wisdom may be justified 
when those moved by earthly wisdom 
(Selfishness) shall be snared in their own 
devices. 

R1520 : page 125 

To his people God saith: "Wait ye upon 
me [Be patient, Brethren]; for my determination 
is to gather the nations, that I may 
assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them 
my fierce anger; for all the earth [society] 
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy; 
and then will I turn unto the people 



a language of sincerity [love will then mean 
love], and they shall all call upon the name 
of the Lord, to serve him with one consent." 
-Zeph. 3:8,9. 

R1520 : page 125 

THE VALUE OF WISDOM. 



II. QUAR., LESSON VI., MAY 7, PROV. 3:11-24. 

Golden Text— "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, 
and lean not unto thine own understanding."— Prov. 3:5. 

With a clear understanding of the purpose 
of this book, which, as we have seen, 
is for the moral instruction of all of the children 
of God (those who are now his children, 
or those who shall become his children 
during the Millennial age), there is less necessity 
for explanation than for careful personal 
consideration and application. They 
are certainly worthy to be bound about the 
neck and written upon the table of the heart. 
—Verse 3. 

VERSES 11,12 are given an inspired comment 
inHeb. 12:4-13. 

VERSES 13-18 represent the happiness and 
blessedness of the man that findeth wisdom 
—not the wisdom of this world which is 
foolishness with God, and which is earthly, 

R1520 :page 126 

sensual and often devilish (1 Cor. 3:19; Jas. 3:15), 

but the wisdom of meekness that is 

from above, and is "first pure, then peaceable, 

gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy 

and good fruits, without partiality and without 

hypocrisy." (Jas. 3:13,14,17.) Those 

who have this kind of wisdom— viz., that 

attitude of heart and mind which fits us to 

receive the instruction of the Lord and to 

profit by it— are sure to get understanding 

of whatever truth is meat in due season for 

them. "The wise shall understand." And 

in the understanding of God's ways there 

is joy and peace and blessing which the 

world can neither give nor take away. 

Verse 18 is a beautiful reference to the restitution 

to the trees of life and the Edenic 

bliss, of all who shall "lay hold upon" and 

"retain" that heavenly wisdom of meekness 

and entire submission to the will of God. 



And truly, "Her ways are ways of pleasantness, 
and all her paths are peace." 

VERSES 19,20. It was this same kind of 
wisdom, described above as pure, peaceable, 
merciful and kind, that actuated God when 
he established the heavens and founded 
the earth. And in consequence we see the 
beautiful harmony of the material universe, 
and experience the blessings of those beneficent 
laws of nature so beautifully adapted 
to our necessities. 

VERSES 21-26 are words which we cannot 
well afford to disregard: "Sound wisdom 
and discretion" (wise policy) are not 
only the course to eternal life, but even in 
the present time they bring grace, the favor 
of God, and preserve us from fear and from 
stumbling; and the Lord will keep the feet 
of all such from being caught in the snares 
of the adversary. 

VERSES 27-30 counsel fair dealing with 
our fellow-men. 

VERSES 31-35 counsel patient waiting for 
the rewards of righteousness and that we 
should not envy the wicked who prosper in 
the ways of oppression. 

R1520 :page 126 

FRUITS OF WISDOM. 



II. QUAR., LESSON VII., MAY 14, PROV. 12:1-15. 

Golden Text— "The fruit of the righteous is a tree of 
life, and he that winneth souls is wise."— Prov. 11:30. 

The simple teachings of these proverbs are 
so plain as to need no explanation; but they 
are worthy of careful and prayerful pondering. 
They suggest a series of questions for 
self-examination which every child of God 
would do well to propound to himself in 
the quiet retreat of his accustomed place of 
prayer. Let him not ask himself, Am I perfect 
in every thought, word and deed, knowing 
that none of the fallen are so; but let him 
ask (verse 1), Do I love instruction and 
knowledge? am I seeking for it daily in the 
line of God's Word and providences? and am 
I ready to consider and heed reproof rather 
than to spurn and resent it? VERSE 2. Are 
the purposes of my heart all pure and upright, 
bringing with them a constant sense of the 
Lord's favor? VERSE 3. Am I rooted and 



grounded in the principles of righteousness, so 
that I will not swerve and cannot be moved? 
VERSE 4. Am I faithfully acting my part in 
my station in life— in my relationships to 
my fellow-men and my family? 

VERSE 5. Am I keeping a vigilant guard 
over my thoughts, that they stray not into 
forbidden paths? VERSE 6. Am I ever ready 
to defend the righteous against the snares 
of the wicked? In these days when the 
wicked are devising perverse doctrines to 
overthrow the faith of the righteous, am I 
zealous in my endeavors to establish them 
in the right ways of the Lord? VERSES 7 and 8 
are precious promises to the righteous. 
VERSE 9. "He that is despised and laboreth 
for himself is better than he that aimeth 
after honor and lacketh bread." How true! 

VERSE 10. The truly righteous extend 
their tender mercies to the lower creation, 
as well as to human kind. VERSE 11. The 
true child of God is no idler or visionary 
dreamer. VERSES 12-14. The rewards of 
virtue and the penalties of wrong-doing are 
sure to follow, sooner or later, and every act 
will meet its just deserts in due time. 

VERSE 15 cannot be too carefully considered 
—"The way of a fool is right in his 
own eyes." Herein is the danger of an evil 
course: it is deceptive to those who take it: 
the wrong-doer, having succeeded in justifying 
himself, finds the downward course 
smooth and slippery, until the retracing of 
his steps becomes almost impossible. "But 
he that hearkeneth unto the counsel of the 
Lord is wise." 

The Golden Text is very suggestive. A righteous 
life may indeed be compared to a tree of 
life of whose virtues others may partake and 
live. And blessed are those whose wise and 
righteous course of life becomes a constant incentive 
to virtue, winning others away from 
the path of sin and ungodliness to righteousness, 
peace, faith and trust in God. 

R1520 : page 127 

WISDOM OF TEMPERANCE. 



II. QUAR., LESSON VIII., MAY 21, PROV. 23:29-35. 

Golden Text— "Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging 
and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise."— 
Prov. 20:1. 



Here we have a pen picture of the drunkard, 
true to life; and those who pursue this folly 
find themselves finally bound in the galling 
yoke of a terrible slavery. Would that this 
curse were banished from every land. And, 
thank God, the time is not far distant when, 
under the established Kingdom of God, this 
evil shall be thoroughly and promptly dealt 
with. No such stumbling stones as enticing 
saloons will then be permitted to stand in the 
way to tempt the weak. Gather out the stumbling 
stones and cast up a highway for the 
people, says the Prophet (Isa. 62:10); and when 
this is done not a single evil— licensed or unlicensed 
—shall be permitted a footing. 

But a highway, a broad thoroughfare (the 
established new covenant), gently sloping upward 
to life (for a grand reversal of public 
sentiment will make the way easy of ascent) 
will be there; and the ransomed of the Lord 
(the whole human race) shall go up thereon. 
Every step in this way shall bring its reward of 
peace and joy: and they shall come to Zion 
with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads 
...and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. 
(Isa. 35:10.) Blessed times of restitution and 
refreshing! Our hearts sing for joy in anticipation 
of the nearness of those blessings for all 
mankind. 

R1520 :page 127 

A WISE WOMAN. 



II. QUAR., LESSON IX., MAY 28, PROV. 31:10-31. 

Golden Text— "Favor is deceitful, and beauty is a 
breath: but a woman that reverenceth the Lord, she shall 
be praised." 

This lesson is poorly chosen: it is an ideal 
woman, pictured by an uninspired pen, which 
is not at all the present ideal. This is not a 
part of Solomon's writing, but, as stated in 
verse 1, was written by King Lemuel. We 
have no sympathy with the thought that a true 
wife should purchase fields and plant vineyards 
(verse 16), spin, weave, even toiling into the 
night (verse 18,19), and rising before daylight 
prepare breakfast (verse 15); and all this while 
her husband, well fed and well clothed, sits a 
member of the City Councils.— Verse 23. 



R1521 :page 127 

Energy, economy and forethought are of 
course commendable in both men and women; 
and without these no home can be either comfortable 
or happy. But this is an extreme view. 

The Golden Text is the best of this lesson; 
especially the latter clause. The Christian 
woman, like the Christian man, while careful to 
be faithful in the duties of home and family 
will "seek first [chiefly] the kingdom of God 
and [conformity to] its righteous requirements," 
making the fields, vineyards, silks and wealth 
quite secondary considerations. Few, if any, 
women of the Lord's choice— few of those who 
will be of his "little flock"— will have all the 
points of Lemuel's ideal woman. 

King Lemuel's wisdom on strong drink (verses 6 and 7) 
is also contrary to the true wisdom. 



page 127 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



Massachusetts. 

DEAR BROTHER:-We would have liked so 
much to be with you at the Memorial this year, 
as once or twice before. However, we were 
present with you in spirit. At about the same 
time you and others of the Church were commemorating 
the death of our precious Redeemer, 
we, in this place, were assembled for the same 
purpose, there being twenty-two present, seven 
of whom symbolized by immersion the entire 
consecration and baptism of their wills into 
Christ. 

We enjoyed a very precious season: our 
dear Head seemed to be very near and dear to 
us at that particular time. We also remembered 
our loving Father, and how much it must 
have cost him to give such a valuable gift as a 
ransom for us. In closing, we sang Hymn 276, 
and went each to our homes, there to ponder 
over all that occurred on that memorable night 
and the day following, in which he was delivered 
for our offenses. 

We trust, dearly beloved in the Lord, that 
you likewise enjoyed sweet communion with 
Him who loved us and gave himself for us. May 
we, even as he did, be true to our consecration, 
until the sacrifice is wholly consumed upon the 
altar. This is the earnest prayer of 



Your humble brother and servant, 
W. J. THORN. 



California. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We observed the 
Lord's Memorial Supper at our house on the 
night of the 30th. Though few in numbers 
(twelve), and poor in oratory, we had a blessed 
season of harmonious communion, while with 
much joy of heart we symbolized the appropriation 
to our unworthy selves of the life and 

page 128 

righteousness of our Redeemer, and pledged 
ourselves afresh to follow voluntarily in his footsteps 
even unto death. Pray for us, dear brother, 
that by his grace we may faithfully fulfil our 
covenants. 
Your fellow servant in love, 

W. J. WEBB. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Our little meetings 
proved a season of sweet refreshing and 
communion to the few permitted to meet together. 
We spent parts of two days in study 
and thanksgiving, ending last evening by keeping 
our Lord's supper in commemoration of 
his death. After a careful study of the symbols, 
bread and wine, discerning the Lord's 
broken body and shed blood, realizing that the 
whole body or "loaf" is to be broken as the 
head has been, and thanking God for the gift of 
his Son and for the privilege of being broken 
in his service, we gladly partook of the emblems. 
Those of "like precious faith" know from experience 
the blessedness and peace which come 
to our Father's children at such times. 

We sang, 
"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 
Which before thy cross I spend," 
and then parted— I trust with a deeper sense 
of our own unworthiness and of Christ's sufficiency. 
May those precious moments and blessings 
often be our experience. 

Yours in love and hope, C. C. WRIGHT. 



Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-About eight interested 



ones met here to commemorate the 

death of our dear Redeemer. In the afternoon 

we had a grand experience meeting— grand because 

each one had something to say about the 

wonderful way he had found the precious truths 

now due to the truth hungry. 

The meeting was opened by the reading of 
the first chapter of 2 Peter. Especially appreciated 
were the words: "Whereby are given unto 
us exceeding great and precious promises: 
that by these ye might be partakers of the divine 
nature, having escaped the corruption that 
is in the world through lust." 

In the evening we came together to partake 
of the bread and wine in remembrance of the 
sacrifice our dear Master made on the cross for 
our redemption, and it was truly an impressive 
time. Brother Cole conducted the service by 
prayer and reading appropriate Scriptures, followed 
by some profitable remarks which were 
listened to with earnest interest. Others also 
spoke with much feeling and gratitude for such 
a display of God's love for poor humanity. 

We remembered the dear brethren and sisters 
elsewhere who were enjoying the same blessed 
privilege, knowing that the same love and affection 
for our dear Master filled your hearts as it 
did ours, and doubting not that you remembered 
us with the same kind feelings. 

Your brother in Christ, A. B. PERINE. 



Maryland. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-On Thursday evening 
March 30th, at 7:30 P.M., the Anniversary 
of our Lord's death was celebrated at my 
house. There were eighteen in attendance, the 
number being larger than on any previous occasion. 
The meeting was opened by an appropriate 
hymn, followed by prayer; then another 
hymn, after which a portion of Scripture was 
read and a suitable article selected from the 
TOWER. 

We considered the true import of the emblems, 
how they not only signified our Lord's 
sacrifice by which we are justified to human life 
and all its rights, but also how they signified 
our own consecration to be joined in sacrifice 
with him and to be dead with him. With additional 
remarks I endeavored to make the subject 
clear, and as plain as possible. After the 
lesson we sang another hymn, then prayed, after 
which the sacrament was administered. Then 
a final prayer and closing hymn. 

I was very glad to read Brother Adamson's 



letter in March 15th TOWER. It did me much 
good. The next day after reading it, I started 
out to distribute some tracts. A few days later 
a gentleman called to thank me for the tract I 
had left at his office, and desired to know 
whether he could not get more for his Sunday 
School. Have supplied him with 150 copies 
of Thy Word is Truth, which he has promised 
to distribute next Sunday. I hope some good 
may result therefrom. On a separate sheet I 
enclose his subscription to the TOWER. 
Your brother in the Redeemer, 
H. N. RAHN. 



New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-For the Memorial 
Supper and all day Friday meetings, we obtained 
the use of a small Baptist meeting house. 
About sixty brethren and sisters of this city and 
vicinity met to commemorate the Lord's death. 
We had a very blessed season, the Lord manifesting 
his grace among us. On Friday about 
forty gathered for a season of Bible study and 
communion. Friday evening we had baptism 
services, and fifteen symbolized their immersion 
into Christ. Since then four others have asked 
to be baptised. 

With love and greetings in Christ, 
S. D. ROGERS. 



page 130 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



INTERESTING ITEMS. 



KEEP ORDERS SEPARATE. 

We are always pleased to hear from TOWER 
readers everything pertinent to their spiritual 
welfare and the progress of the truth. In fact, 
we are disappointed to get a mere business 
order, and nothing more, from personal friends. 
But please always keep your general letter 
separate from your business order. This will 
be to your advantage, as well as ours. 

MARKED CLIPPINGS IN ENVELOPES. 

Friends who have access to Literary Magazines 
and prominent daily papers often notice 
interesting items of news more or less related 



to the topics discussed in the TOWER; and many 
of them send these to the Editor. This kindness 
is very helpful, and is highly appreciated. 
We suggest to these friends that, instead of 
sending the entire paper, they clip the interesting 
items, and write on the back, or on the 
margin, the name and date of the paper or 
magazine from which it is taken. In an unsealed 
envelope, one cent postage will do. 

ADDRESSES FOR FREE READING MATTER. 

Many of the friends send in long, written 
and printed lists of excellent addresses, of parties 
likely to become interested, to have TOWERS 
and TRACTS sent them. This is an excellent 
work, and we are glad to send out matter freely 
to such. But just now the office is so overcrowded 
with work that many of these lists 
must lie over for a long time, because no one 
has the time to address the wrappers. 

We suggest, therefore, that our friends who 
have the time for it can help along the cause 
by writing the addresses in a plain hand on 
wrappers (about the center), and mailing us 
the addressed wrappers, which can readily be 
filled and sent out. The wrappers should be 
about 5x10 inches; or address-labels could 
be written 1x3 inches, which we could have 
pasted on wrappers. These can be mailed to 
us at the rate of two ounces for one cent. Those 
who have many addresses, but who cannot procure 
suitable paper, may drop us a postal card, 
and we can send what is needed. 

This, of course, does not apply to cases where 
only a few names are sent in, nor when the 
sender lacks the time for writing the labels. 

Colporteurs, who would water the seeds of 
truth which they are planting, should be careful 
to note those they meet who seem to be 
specially consecrated to the Lord, and should 
send in their addresses for TOWER samples. 

1893 "DAILY BREAD CALENDARS" FREE. 

Messrs. Ward and Co., of New York City, 
importers of "Our Daily Bread" Calendars, 
for 1893, have kindly donated to our readers 
the remnant of their stock of these calendars. 
So now whoever will send five cents each for 
the mailing may order them of us. If several 
TOWER readers choose to order together, they 
may do so. 

Of course over one-third of the year is gone, 
but daily texts for over two hundred days are 
as good as ever. This food, taken at or before 



breakfast, should mean a blessing for the entire 
day. These Calendars retail generally at 35 
to 50 cents, plus postage. 



Do not forget the Missionary Envelopes. We 
have them in good supply now at the reduced 
price of 25 cents per hundred, or $2.00 per 
thousand. This includes free delivery to you at 
your Postoffice. 



R1521 :page 131 

VOL. XIV. MAY 1, 1893. NO. 9. 

THE TWELVE APOSTLES. 

THEIR CALLING, OFFICE AND AUTHORITY. 



"Jesus answered them, Have not 
I chosen you twelve?"— John 6:70. 

RECOGNIZING our Lord Jesus as the divinely 
appointed and worthy head of the 
Church, which is his body, let us mark with 
what deep concern and wise forethought he 
considered all the interests of that body, even 
to the end of the Gospel age— the period of the 
Church's probation. 

Immediately after his forty days of meditation 
and peculiar temptation in the wilderness, 
we find our Lord preaching the gospel of the 
coming kingdom; and from among those who 
heard him gladly, with hearing of faith, and 
who became his disciples, he made choice of 
twelve men to be the apostles of the new dispensation. 
These were men from the humbler 
walks of life: Four were fishermen; one was 
of the despised publicans; the callings of the 
others are not mentioned. 

Concerning this choice of the twelve, we 
learn that, while under various circumstances 
the Lord called each individually to forsake all 
and follow him, which they promptly did, (See 
Matt. 4:17-22; Mark 1:16-20; 3:13-19; Luke 5:9-11.) 
there was also a special occasion upon 
which he dedicated them to their office as 
apostles. Of this Luke gives an account, saying 
that prior to this event our Lord withdrew 
to a mountain to pray— evidently to take counsel 
of God with reference to the interests of the 



prospective Church; and that he continued all 
night in prayer— "And when it was day, he 
called unto him his disciples [Greek, mathetas, 
learners or pupils]; and of them he chose twelve, 
whom also he named apostles [apostolos— ones 
sent forth]."— Luke 6:12,13. Thus the twelve 
were marked as a distinct and separate class 
among the Lord's disciples. Verse 17 also 
makes the distinction very clear between these 
twelve and the other disciples. 

The other disciples, not so chosen, were also 
beloved of the Lord, and were doubtless in full 
sympathy with this appointment, recognizing 
it as in the interests of the work in general. 
And in making the choice the Lord doubtless 
took cognizance, not only of the willingness 
of heart on the part of these twelve, but also 
of the circumstances and fitness of the individuals 
for the pioneer work that was before them. 
Thus, for instance, when he called the sons of 
Zebedee to leave all and follow him, he did not 
call their father. The following was to be, not 
merely a mental following of his doctrines, etc., 
but the leaving of business, home, friends, and 
earthly plans and prospects, etc., to go about 
with him or under his direction in the work 
of the Lord. 

That our Lord at that time revealed much of 
the great importance attaching to his solemn 
setting apart of the twelve, is not at all probable, 
as it would have been impossible for 
them to comprehend it then; but these dear 
brethren, chosen from the humbler walks of life 
to be the Lord's special ambassadors, appreciated 
their privilege, notwithstanding the facts 
that privation and persecution would certainly 
be their immediate reward, and that the reward 

R1521 :page 132 

of the future could not then be clearly discerned. 

Our Lord's object in selecting the twelve at 
that time was that he might begin with them a 
course of instruction and training which would 
fit them for their future work as apostles; for 
they did not fully enter upon that work until 
after the day of Pentecost. After their ordination 
the twelve were fully under the Lord's 
direction and much in his company; and they 
were careful students of his character, his gospel 
and his methods. 

THE COMMISSION OF THE APOSTLES. 



The commission of the apostles was, in the 
main, the same as the commission of the Lord 
and of the whole Church. It was to preach 
the gospel of the Kingdom. (Compare Isaiah 61:1,2; 
Luke 4:17-21; Matt. 10:5-8; Mark 3:14,15; 
Luke 10:1-17.) And to this work 
they zealously devoted themselves during the 
time of the Lord's presence with them, as well as 
subsequently; though we are not informed that 
their success in the work was any more marked 
during that time than was that of the seventy 
whom the Lord also appointed to this ministry, 
though not to the apostleship. (Luke 10:17.) 
But in addition to this general commission 
to preach the gospel of the kingdom, the 
Lord by and by showed the twelve that he was 
preparing them for a special work in the future 
—that they were to be his witnesses to bear 
testimony of him after his death. They must 
be witnesses, too, upon whom the people could 
rely as having been with him from the beginning 
of his ministry, and therefore manifestly 
acquainted with his doctrine and purpose. 
(John 15:27; Luke 24:48.) And not only so, 
but these twelve were also chosen to become, 
under divine providence, the founders and special 
teachers of the gospel Church, when in due 
time they should be endued with power from 
on high. 

In other words, our Lord's object in selecting 
or ordaining these twelve was to so train 
and empower them, and to so establish their 
testimony concerning the truth of God, that, 
through them, such as hunger and thirst after 
righteousness might be convinced of the truth, 
and that from among such "a people for his 
name" (a bride for Christ— a Church) might 
be selected, trained and prepared for their exaltation 
as "joint-heirs with Christ" in his 
kingdom. This purpose in the selection of the 
twelve was implied in the prayer of our Lord 
just prior to his crucifixion (See John 17:6-9,20,21) 
—"I have manifested thy name unto 
the men [the apostles] which thou gavest me 
out of the world: thine they were, and thou 
gavest them to me; and they have kept thy 
word. Now they have known that all things 
whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee; for 

R1522:page 132 

I have given unto them the words [the doctrine] 
which thou gavest me, and they have received 
them. ...I pray for them: I pray not 
for world, but for them which thou hast given 
me; for they are thine.... Neither pray I 



for these [apostles] alone, but for them also 
which shall believe on me through their word 
[the entire gospel Church— to the end of the 
age]: that they all may be one [in heart and 
purpose and love], as thou, Father, art in me, 
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us 
[and then he shows the ultimate purpose of 
this selection, both of the apostles and of the entire 
body of Christ, in the following words]— 
that the world [that 'God so loved, even while 
they were yet sinners'] may believe that thou 
hast sent me"— to redeem and restore them. 

The number of the apostles corresponded to 
the number of the sons of Jacob, the representatives 
and founders of the tribes of Israel, 
which in one phase of their typical character 
stood for the entire gospel Church, and in another 
for the whole world. (See Tabernacle 
Shadows.) And in the Book of Revelation 
these apostles are designated as the twelve 
foundations of the New Jerusalem, the glorious 
Church. (Rev. 21:14; Eph. 2:20,21.) Just 
so the foundation which sustains the Church is 
designed ultimately to sustain the whole world. 
But if these foundation stones were laid in the 
sand, the building reared upon them would be 
very insecure, and could not stand forever. 
(Matt. 7:25-27.) But they were not laid in 
the sand, but upon the sure and steadfast rock, 
Christ Jesus.-Matt. 16:16-18; 1 Pet. 2:4-8. 

While all of the twelve were chosen early in 
the Lord's ministry that they might be his witnesses, 

R1522:page 133 

because they had been with him from 

the beginning, when one of them (Judas) 

dropped out, having proved a traitor to his 

trust, the Lord supplied his place with Paul, 

who was made a witness of his glory after his 

resurrection and ascension. (Acts 26:13; 1 Cor. 15:8.) 

And thus the testimony, of the eleven 

eye and ear witnesses of the Lord's ministry, 

death and resurrection, and of the twelfth as to 

his glorious exaltation, is a firm foundation for 

the faith of the whole Church, to the end of 

the age. The election of Matthias by the eleven, 

to fill the place of Judas (Acts 1:23-26), was 

simply a human error— an over-officiousness on 

their part to attend to the Lord's business without 

his direction. It was done previous to the 

day of Pentecost and the descent of the holy 

Spirit. The eleven chose two, and asked the 

Lord to take his choice of them, and indicate 

the same by directing upon which the lot should 

fall. Of course the lot must fall upon one of 



them; but that was no indication of the 
Lord's will; and the Lord simply ignored their 
choice and in due time indicated his own in 
the election of Paul. And in his subsequent 
Revelation he describes twelve foundation 
stones in the New Jerusalem, not thirteen. 
Matthias was probably a very excellent brother; 
but he was not an apostle. 

But, we inquire, What evidence is there that 
these twelve ordinary men were ordained to fill 
the important office of apostles in the Church? 
True, we see that, after our Lord's resurrection 
and ascension, the apostles were the strength 
and consolation of the infant Church. Having 
been the constant companions and disciples 
of the Lord, and eye-witnesses of his miraculous 
power, and having proved their loyalty and 
faithfulness to him by bearing his reproach 
with him, very naturally the saints of their day 
found in them props for their faith; and they 
rested upon their teaching, took courage from 
their example and wisely heeded their counsel. 
But were they ever intended to be more than 
such helps?— were they ever intended to be 
authoritative teachers whose words, more than 
those of others, would express the divine mind? 

We answer, Yes; and the Lord clearly indicates 
that he would have the Church so regard 
them, and the helpful service he purposed to 
have them perform for the entire body of the 
Anointed. Let us hear the testimony:— 

(1) As already noted, we have seen that 
these men were specially called and solemnly 
ordained, as a class distinct and separate from 
the other disciples, and given a particular and 
significant name— the apostles— to distinguish 
them from the others. 

(2) We have also noticed that, although 
during our Lord's earthly ministry the work of 
the apostles differed nothing from that of "the 
seventy," nor were their labors any more signally 
blessed (Luke 9:6; 10:17), yet they were 

more directly and continually under his training, 

and that either some or all of them were 

the chosen witnesses of every remarkable feature 

and event of his course during the three and a 

half years of his ministry. They were the witnesses 

of his teachings and of his personal 

character and manner of life; and of his miracles 

and the effects of his teachings and work 

in his day. They were the only ones invited to 

partake with him of the last Passover Supper, 

and to receive the instructions of that solemn 

hour with regard to its typical significance and 

with regard to the changed features of that institution 

which would make it commemorative 



thenceforth of the real Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world. They were 
the witnesses of the agonies of Gethsemane and 
of his betrayal and arrest, as well as of his 
calm submission to the fate which he knew 
awaited him. They were the witnesses, too, of 
all the circumstances of his crucifixion, death 
and burial; and also of the fact of his 
resurrection. 

(3) After his resurrection we find our Lord 
promptly taking up his work just where it had 
been broken off by his death— the work of still 
further preparing the apostles, his chosen witnesses, 
to bear reliable testimony to the whole 

Church. We find that while he appeared to 

many other disciples besides the apostles, and 

to upwards of five hundred at one time (1 Cor. 15:5-8), 

he was specially careful to very clearly 

establish the fact of his resurrection to the 

apostles. We find him carefully looking up 

each one of "the eleven"— sending the women 

R1522:page 134 

who were first at the sepulcher to communicate 

the fact of his resurrection to each of them, 

and specially mentioning Peter, lest he should 

be overcome with discouragement on account 

of his previous unfaithfulness (Mark 16:7); 

opening the understanding of the two (Luke 24:27,32) 

on the way to Emmaus; satisfying 

doubting Thomas with tangible evidence; specially 

re-affirming Peter's commission; and 

fully convincing all and sending them out into 

the work again. -John 20:26-28; 21:15-17; 

Acts 1:1,2; Luke 24:52. 

(4) We find further that "the eleven" were 
the chosen witnesses of the Lord's ascension, 
and that there is no evidence of the presence 

of any others on that occasion. Compare Acts 1:1-13, 

specially noticing verses 2,4,9,11. 

The expression, "Ye men of Galilee" signified 

"the eleven," all of whom were Galilaeans. 

See also Luke 24:48-51 and 

Matt. 28:16-19. 

The apostles were thus the special witnesses 
of the Lord's resurrection, although he was 
seen by others; and thus the Lord made sure 
of having in them competent witnesses, that 
our faith in their testimony might be clearly 
established. Peter says, "And we are witnesses 
of all things which he did, both in the 
land of the Jews and in Jerusalem; whom they 
slew and hanged on a tree. Him God raised 
up the third day, and showed him openly, not 
to all the people, but UNTO WITNESSES CHOSEN 



BEFORE OF GOD, even TO US, who did eat and 

drink with him after he rose from the dead. 
And he commanded us to preach unto the 
people," etc. --Acts 10:39-43. See also Acts 13:31; 
1 Cor. 15:3-8. 

(5) We see that, while the testimony of the 
apostles was at first restricted to the Jews, the 
Lord, after his resurrection, taught them that 
repentance and remission of sins must be 
"preached in his name among all nations, beginning 
at Jerusalem." And then he added, 

"And ye are witnesses of these things;. ..but 

tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem until ye be 

endued with power from on high. "..."Ye 

shall receive power after that the holy Spirit is 

come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses unto 

me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and 

in Samaria, and UNTO THE UTTERMOST PART OF 

THE EARTH." (Luke 24:48; Acts 1:8.) Since 

"the uttermost part of the earth"— America, 

for instance— could not be reached and thus 

ministered to during the life-time of the apostles, 

it is manifest that the major part of this 

witnessing was to be done through their writings 

and after their death. Thus they testify to us, 

and we consider this commission from the Lord 

to them to do so, and the particular training 

they received from him, as the best possible 

endorsement of their testimony and guarantee 

of its reliability. 

(6) In obedience to the command to wait for 
the promised power, the apostles and the other 
disciples, about a hundred and twenty in number, 
tarried in Jerusalem, assembling together in an 
upper room, and waiting in prayerful expectancy 
from day to day until the day of Pentecost 
brought the promised blessing— the "power 
from on high," the baptism of the holy spirit. 
(Acts 1:14.) In this great blessing, specially 
promised to the apostles, apparently all of the 
faithful souls present with them shared. "They 
were all filled with the holy Spirit and began to 
speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave them 
utterance." However, from Acts 2:7 it would 
appear that "the eleven" (all of whom were 
Galilaeans) were the public speakers. It evidently 
brought to their minds clearer visions 

of divine truth, filling their hearts with joy and 
praise; so that out of the abundance of their 
hearts they spoke the wonderful words of life 
as the Spirit miraculously gave them utterance 
in the various languages of the peoples represented 
there. And as a result of that power 

R1523 : page 134 



three thousand souls were converted that day. 
While all of the faithful waiting ones shared the 
special outpouring of the Spirit that day, and 
the same Spirit was also poured out upon the 
Gentiles later (Acts 10:44-47), and has continued 
with all the consecrated and faithful 
ever since, we are particularly assured that all 
of "the eleven" were there, and that not one 
of them failed to receive this gift of the Spirit 
without which their apostleship could not be 
recognized.— See Acts 1:13,14; 2:1. 

(7) Although it may seem remarkable that 
the Lord permitted a Judas to appear among 

R1523 : page 135 

the apostles, while Saul of Tarsus verily thought 

he was doing God service as a Pharisee of the 

Pharisees, and was permitted to remain in ignorance 

of the truths of the new dispensation 

until all the privileges of the Lord's presence 

and personal instruction, etc., and even the 

outpouring of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost, 

which the others enjoyed, were entirely 

past, there was in this also, as we are now 

privileged to view it, another master-stroke 

of wise policy; for Paul was made a witness 

of the Lord's glory— "as one born out of due 

time"— as one "born from the dead" before 

the time— before the time for the Church's 

exaltation and glory, when, being made like 

the Lord, they shall see him as he is. (1 Cor. 15:8; 

1 John 3:2.) And in visions and revelations 

the Lord more than made up to Paul 

what he lacked to make him a competent and 

reliable witness to us.— 2 Cor. 12:1-4,7; 

Gal. 1:11,12; 2:2. 

And when the Lord himself testifies to us 
(Acts 9:15), "He is a chosen vessel unto me, 
to bear my name before the Gentiles and kings 
and the children of Israel," that is all the endorsement 
Paul needed to put him on at least 
an equal footing with the others, as one of the 
chosen twelve. In addition to this testimony 
of the Lord and to the worthy zeal of Paul in 
bearing witness to the truth, and to the manifestation 
of the power of the holy Spirit in 
him, we have also Paul's own testimony concerning 
himself. He says, "I certify you, 
brethren, that the gospel which was preached 
by me is not after man; for I neither received 
it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the 
revelation of Jesus Christ." (Gal. 1:11,12.) 
And again he says, "He that wrought effectually 
in Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision 
[the Jews], the same was mighty in me 



toward the Gentiles."— Gal. 2:8. 

Paul was pre-eminently the apostle to the 
Gentiles, and the others more particularly to 
the Jews. Hence Paul has by far the more to 
say to us through his numerous epistles; but in 
their day "the eleven" were more prominent 
in the Church than he— Peter, James and John, as 
Paul says, being regarded as pillars among them. 
(Gal. 2:9.) Paul was the pushing pioneer, and 
his work among the Gentiles of his day was by 
no means a light, nor an honorable task, in the 
estimation of men. It exposed him to all sorts 
of danger, persecution and humiliation. And 
even in the Church his zeal was not fully understood 
and appreciated; for he had occasionally 
to produce the evidences of his apostleship, 
and to remind them, and thus prove to them 
that he was "not a whit behind" the others in 
authority and power. — 1 Cor. 9:1; 2 Cor. 11:5. 

But let us inquire further as to the office of 
the apostles in the Church: Is it merely their 
historic testimony of the Lord and his teachings 
upon which we are to depend? or was their 
witnessing to include more than this? 

Evidently they were to bear witness to all 
they knew, and to all they learned under the 
special guidance of the holy Spirit. Only thus 
would they be faithful stewards of that which 
was intrusted to them. "Let a man so account 
of us as. ..stewards of the mysteries of God," 
said Paul. (1 Cor. 4:1.) And the same intent 
was expressed by the Lord when he said, "I 
will make you fishers of men," and again, 
"Feed my sheep" and "lambs." Again, Paul 
says that "the mystery [the deep truths of the 
gospel concerning the high calling of the 
Church— the Christ] hidden in other ages, 
is now revealed unto his holy [justified and 
consecrated, and so reckoned 'holy'] apostles 
and prophets, by the Spirit," and that the object 
of its being revealed to them was "to make 
all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery 
[upon what terms they may have the privilege 
of fellowship in this mystery— of join t-heirship 
with Christ], which from the beginning of the 
world hath been hid in God." (Eph. 3:3-11.) 
And, again, after speaking of how the Church 
was to be built upon the foundation of the 
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being 
the chief corner stone (Eph. 2:20-22), he 
says, "For this cause [viz., the building up of 
the Church, the temple of God] I, Paul, [am] 
the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles." 
-Eph. 3:1. 

Thus we see that the apostles were not only 
to bear historic testimony of Christ, but they 



were also specially prepared and empowered, 
through the influences of the holy Spirit, both 

R1523 :page 136 

to discern and teach the deep things of God, 
which they did as wise and faithful stewards of 
the blessings intrusted to them for the good 
and edification and building up of the whole 
Church. "Freely ye have received, freely 
give," said the Master; and they were careful 
to obey the injunction, and through them the 
same blessings have come down to us— even 
"to the uttermost part of the earth." 

But still we would reverently press our reasonable 
investigation a step further and inquire, 
Are these apostles to be regarded as in any sense 
lords in the Church? or, in other words, When 
the Lord and Head of the Church departed, did 
any of them take the place of the head? or did 
they together constitute a composite head, to 
take his place and assume the reins of government? 
Or were they, or any of them, what the 
popes of Rome claim to be as their successors 
—the vicars or substitutes of Christ to the 
Church, which is his body? 

Against such a hypothesis we have the plain 
statement of Paul— Eph. 4:4,5— "There is one 
body" and "one Lord"; and therefore among 
the various members of that body, no matter 
what may be the relative importance of some, 
only the one Lord and Head is to be recognized. 
This the Lord also clearly taught when, addressing 
the multitudes and his disciples, he said, 
"The Scribes and Pharisees. ..love... 
to be called Rabbi; but be not ye called Rabbi; 
for one is your Master, and all ye are brethren." 
(Matt. 23:1,2,6-8.) And again, addressing 
the apostles, Jesus said, "Ye know that those 
presuming to rule over the Gentiles exercise 
lordship over them; and their great ones exercise 
authority over them, but it shall not be so 
among you; but whosoever will be great among 
you shall be your servant, and whosoever of 
you will be the chiefest shall be servant of all; 
for even the Son of man came not to be ministered 
unto, but to minister, and to give his life 
a ransom for many."— Mark 10:42-45. 

Nor have we any evidence that the early 
Church ever regarded the apostles as lords in 
the Church; or that the apostles ever assumed 
such authority or dignity. Their course was 
very far indeed from the papal idea of lordship. 
For instance, Peter never styled himself "the 
prince of the apostles," as papists style him; 
nor did they ever title each other, or receive 



such homage from the Church. They addressed 

or referred to one another simply as Peter, John, 

Paul, etc., or else as Brother Peter, John or 

Paul; and all the Church were similarly greeted 

—as brothers and sisters in Christ. (See Acts 9:17; 

21:20; Rom. 16:23; 1 Cor. 7:15; 8:11; 

2 Cor. 8:18; 2 Thes. 3:6,15; Philemon 7,16.) 

And it is written that even the Lord himself 

was not ashamed to call them all brethren (Heb. 2: 1 1), 

so far is he from any domineering attitude 

in the exercise of his lordship or authority. 

True, there were "bishops" (those who, like 
the apostles, had a general supervision and 
oversight of the work at home and abroad); 
and "elders" (those older and more advanced 
in the knowledge of the truth, etc., who took the 
general oversight and supervision of local congregations 
—Acts 14:23); and "deacons" (those 
specially charged with the temporal business 
matters of the various congregations— Acts 6:1-3); 
and "evangelists" (or traveling preachers 
of the Word); but they never used these 
terms as honorary titles. The conditions of fitness 
for these services in the Church are clearly 
set forth in 1 Tim. 3:1-13; 2 Tim. 4:1-5. 

Nor did any of these leading servants in the 
early Church go about in priestly robes, or with 
cross and rosary, etc., courting the reverence 
and homage of the people; for, as the Lord 
taught them, the chiefest among them were those 
who served most. Thus, for instance, when 
persecution scattered the Church and drove 
them out of Jerusalem, the eleven bravely stood 
their ground, willing to do whatever might come, 
because in this trying time the Church abroad 
would look to them at Jerusalem for encouragement 
and help; and had they fled the whole 
Church would have felt dismayed and panic-stricken. 
And we find James perishing by the 
sword of Herod, Peter with a similar fate in 
view, thrust into prison and chained to two 
soldiers (Acts 12:1-6), and Paul and Silas 
beaten with many stripes, and then cast into 
prison and their feet made fast in the stocks, 
and Paul enduring "a great fight of afflictions." 
(Acts 16:23,24; 2 Cor. 11:23-33.) Did they 
look like lords or act like lords? We think not. 

R1523 :page 137 

Peter was very explicit in this matter, when 
counseling the elders to "feed the flock of God" 
(He did not say your flock, your people, your 
church, as many ministers to-day speak, but 
the flock of God.), not as lords of the heritage, 
but being patterns to the flock— patterns of humility, 



faithfulness, zeal and godliness. (1 Pet. 5:1-3.) 

And Paul says, "I think that God 

hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed 

to death; for we are made a spectacle 

unto the world and to angels and to men. We 

R1524 : page 137 

are fools for Christ's sake,. ..we are despised; 
...we both hunger and thirst and 
are naked and are buffeted and have no certain 
dwelling place, and labor working with our 
own hands. Being reviled, we bless; being 
persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat: 
we are made as the filth of the world and 
the offscouring of all things." (1 Cor. 4:9-13.) 
Not much like lords in all this, were they? 
And in opposing the idea of some of the brethren 
who seemed to be aspiring to lordship over 
God's heritage, Paul ironically says, "Now ye 
are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as kings 
without us;" but further along he counsels the 
only right way, which is that of humility, saying, 
"Be ye followers of me" in this respect. 
And again, Let a man so account of us as of 
the ministers [servants] of Christ, and stewards 
of the mysteries of God.— 1 Cor. 4:8,1. 

And, again, the same apostle adds: "As we 
were allowed of God to be put in trust with the 
gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, 
but God, who trieth our hearts. For neither at 
any time used we flattering words, as ye know, 
nor a cloak of covetousness: God is witness. 
Nor of men sought we glory— neither of you, 
nor yet of others, when we might have been 
burdensome as the Apostles of Christ. But we 
were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth 
her children."— 1 Thes. 2:4-7. 

Nor did the apostles ever claim a monopoly 
of the teaching or of the pastoral work of the 
Church; nor did the Lord ever intimate that 
they should do so. Paul says, "He [Christ] 
gave some apostles, and some prophets, and 
some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, 
for the perfecting of the saints, for the 
work of the ministry, for the edifying of the 
body of Christ, till we all come in the unity 
of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son 
of God unto a perfect man— unto the measure 
of the full stature of the Anointed one— that we 
henceforth be no more children, tossed to and 
fro and carried about by every wind of doctrine, 
...but, speaking the truth in love, may grow 
up into him in all things, which is the head, 
even Christ."-Eph. 4:11-15. 

God has raised up these various helps, and 



has abundantly blessed their labors, both in 

the early Church and all along throughout the 

Gospel age. But the prominent and leading 

position of the apostles, as those specially empowered 

to minister to us in spiritual things, 

is clearly indicated. The Lord's personal supervision 

and appointment of the various orders or 

grades of teachers and helps is clearly indicated 

by the Apostle Paul's words— "God hath set 

[placed] some in the Church— first, apostles; 

secondarily, prophets; thirdly, teachers; after 

that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, 

directors and diversities of tongues." Then 

he inquires, "Are all apostles? are all prophets? 

are all teachers? are all workers of 

miracles?" etc. (1 Cor. 12:28,29.) No: certainly 

not; and if we would be led of the 

Lord we must recognize this order of his appointment 

—those whom "God hath set" in 

the Church for its instruction and edification. 

And of these we must always remember that 

the apostles are first, though every member of 

the body may declare the unsearchable riches 

of Christ-See Heb. 5:12. 

In recognizing this priority of the apostles 
we are not underrating or casting any discredit 
upon the ministry of the other helps and helpers 
which the Lord provided for the edification 
of the Church. Thus, for instance, the testimonies 
of the "evangelists" Mark and Luke 
and Stephen are as trustworthy as those of the 
apostles; for they all had "the same mind and 
spoke the same things." And to such faithful 
witnesses whom the Lord has raised up from 
time to time all through the Gospel age, we 
find the apostles committing their charge ere 
they were called to rest.— 2 Tim. 4:1-6. 

Thus, when the noble apostle to the Gentiles 
was about to finish his course, we find him committing 

R1524:page 138 

the interests of the work to the "elders" 
of the Church (the faithful advanced and 
active ones); and his charge applied not only 
to such persons then living, but down even to 
our day. After declaring his own faithfulness 
as a servant of the Lord and the Church, and 
his solicitude for the great work, he said to 
them, "Take heed, therefore, unto yourselves 
and to all the flock over which the holy Spirit 
hath made you overseers, to feed the Church of 
God, which he [Christ] hath purchased with his 
own blood; for I know that after my departure 
shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not 
sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall 



[ambitious] men arise, speaking perverse things, 
to draw away disciples after them.... And 
now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the 
word of his grace, which is able to build you up 
and to give you an inheritance among all them 
which are sanctified.... I have showed you 
all things how that so laboring ye ought to 
support the weak, and to remember the words of 
the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed 
to give than to receive.'"— Acts 20:17,28-35. 

And Peter likewise exhorts the "elders," saying, 
"Feed the flock of God which is among 
you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, 
but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but 
of a ready mind. Neither as being lords of 
God's heritage, but being ensamples to the 
flock."-l Pet. 5:1-3. 

But in judging of such teachers whom we 
have reason to believe the holy Spirit has appointed 
in the Church, it is our duty always to 
see that their teachings are the same as those of 
the Lord and the apostles— of the Head of the 
Church and of those whom he has so clearly indicated 
as specially empowered to instruct us in 
the deep things of the divine plan, which were 
not due to be declared in the days of his personal 
presence, but which he made known subsequently 
to his holy apostles and prophets. 
(John 16:12; Eph. 3:5.) The truth, thus divinely 
inspired and first announced by the 
Lord's chosen agents, the apostles, even they 
themselves, had they fallen away, could not 
nullify. (But that none of them did fall away 
is manifest from Rev. 21:14.) This Paul distinctly 
states in Gal. 1:8-12. 

The early Church rightly reverenced the piety 
and the superior spiritual knowledge and wisdom 
of the apostles, and, regarding them, as 
they really were, as the Lord's specially chosen 
ambassadors to them, they sat at their feet as 
learners; yet not with blank, unquestioning 
minds, but with a disposition to try the spirits 
and to prove the testimony. (1 John 4:1; 1 Thes. 5:21; 
Isa. 8:20.) And the apostles, in 
teaching them, enjoined this attitude of mind 
which required a reason for their hope, and 
they encouraged it, and were prepared to meet 
it— not with enticing words of man's wisdom 
(of human philosophy and theory), but in demonstration 
of the Spirit and of power, that the 
faith of the Church might not stand in the 
wisdom of men, but in the power of God. (1 Cor. 2:4,5.) 
They did not cultivate a blind and 
superstitious reverence for themselves. 

We read that the Bereans "were more noble 
than they of Thessalonica in that they received 



the word with all readiness of mind and searched 
the Scriptures daily [to see] whether those 
things were so." And it was the constant effort 
of the apostles to show that the gospel which 
they proclaimed was the very same gospel darkly 
expressed by the ancient prophets, "unto 
whom it was declared that not unto themselves, 
but unto us [the body of Christ] they did minister 
the things now reported unto you by them 
[the apostles] that have preached the gospel 
unto you with the holy Spirit sent down from 
heaven" (1 Pet. 1:10-12); that it was the 
very same gospel of life and immortality brought 
to light by the Lord himself; and that its 
greater amplification and all the particular details 
discovered to the Church by them, under 
the leading and direction of the holy Spirit— 
whether by special revelations or by other and 
more natural means, both of which were used 
—were in fulfilment of the Lord's promise to 
the apostles, and through them to the whole 
Church— "I have yet many things to say unto 
you, but ye cannot bear them now: howbeit, 
when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will 
guide you [the apostles first, and through them 
the whole Church] into all truth; for he shall 
not speak of himself [independently of me], 
but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak 

R1524 : page 139 

[i.e., he will be my messenger to you]. ...He 
shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, 
and shall show it unto you. All things that 
the Father hath are mine [there is no conflict 
between us: his plan is my plan, and his way 
is my way]: therefore said I that he shall take 
of mine, and shall show it unto you."— 
John 16:12-15. 

It was right, therefore, for the Bereans to 
search the Scriptures to see whether the testimony 
of the apostles agreed with that of the 
law and the prophets, and to compare them also 
with the teachings of the Lord. Our Lord 
also invited a similar proving of his testimony 
by the law and the prophets, saying, "Search 
the Scriptures,... for they are they that testify 
of me." The whole divine testimony must be 
in harmony, whether it be communicated by 
the law, the prophets, the Lord or the apostles. 
Their entire harmony is the proof of their 
divine inspiration. And, thank God, we find 
that harmony existing, so that the whole Scriptures 
of the Old and New Testaments constitute 
what the Lord himself terms "the harp of 
God." (Rev. 15:2.) And the various testimonies 



of the law and the prophets are the 
several chords of that harp, which, when tuned 
by the holy Spirit dwelling in our hearts, and 
swept by the fingers of the devoted searchers 
after divine truth, yield the most enchanting 
strains that ever fell on mortal ears. Praise 
the Lord for the exquisite melody of the 
blessed "song of Moses and the Lamb," which 
even we have learned through the testimony of 
his holy apostles and prophets, of whom the 
Lord Jesus is chief. 

R1525 : page 139 

But although the testimony of the Lord and 
the apostles must harmonize with that of the 
law and the prophets, we should expect them 
to testify of things new, as well as old; for so 
the prophets have led us to expect. (Matt. 13:35; 
Psa. 78:2; Deut. 18:15,18; Dan. 12:9.) 
And so we find them not only expounding the 
hidden truths of ancient prophecy, but also 
disclosing new revelations of truth. 

It may be well here to notice a further claim 
of that great antichristian organization, the 
church of Rome, viz., that Peter is the rock upon 
which the Gospel Church is built, and that 
to him and his successors, the popes, were confided 
the keys of the kingdom of heaven with 
power to open and to shut, to admit or exclude, 
whomsoever they will, and to bind or loose 
whomsoever and whatsoever they please. 

The scripture upon which this doctrine is 
founded is Matt. 16:15-19. In reply to the 
Lord's question, "Whom say ye that I am?" 
Peter answered, "Thou art the Christ, the Son 
of the living God." And the Lord replied, 
"And thou art Peter [petros— a stone]; and upon 
this rock [petra— a rock, a large stone] I 
will build my Church." Thus, in harmony 
with numerous Old Testament references, such 
as Isa. 8:14, the Lord is seen to be the great 
rock upon which the Church is built, while 
Peter is one of the living stones in the glorious 
temple of God built upon that rock, which he 
had just confessed as the rock of our salvation 
—the Christ. And Peter himself freely admits 
the relationship of all the living stones, himself 
included, to the great foundation stone— 
the rock Christ Jesus— saying (1 Pet. 2:4,5), 
"To whom coming as unto a living stone, disallowed 
indeed of men, but chosen of God, 
and precious, ye also as lively [living] stones are 
built up a spiritual house," etc. 

As shown in several of our Lord's parables, 
the Gospel Church is the Kingdom of Heaven 



(Matt. 13) in its incipient and preparatory 

state; and its privileges and powers were about 

to be opened to both Jews and Gentiles. It was 

really the Lord that opened the door into his 

Church: Peter was merely the agent chosen to 

do the work in the name of the Lord— opening 

the door to the Jews in his discourse on the 

day of Pentecost (Acts 2:14,40), and opening 

the same door to the Gentiles in his discourse 

to Cornelius and his household, three and a 

half years later. (Acts 10:33,46.) This honorable 

service is what is symbolically referred 

to as using the "keys of the kingdom." (Matt. 16:19.) 

But, the door once opened, neither 

Peter, nor any other man, can close it. Our 

Lord declares that he has "the key of David" 

(Rev. 3:7); and the door into his kingdom 

will not be shut until the last member of the 

chosen and faithful Church has entered into 

its glory— viz., at the close of the Gospel age. 

R1525 : page 140 

The key which Peter used was the dispensational 
truth then due, and first made clear to 
the mind of Peter, by the holy Spirit. 

The ability to bind and loose on earth and in 
heaven, was granted not only to Peter but to all 
the apostles; and we believe signified that God 
would so guide the words of the apostles in 
their presentation of the truth to the Church, 
that all the faithful might have full confidence 
in their teachings. Whatever they bound upon 
the Church as duties, we may know are so 
recognized in heaven; and whatever they loosed 
as respecting the Mosaic Law, etc., we may 
know that they were supernaturally directed to 
do so, and that the same are loosed or set 
aside in heaven. 

APOSTOLIC INSPIRATION. 



Having observed with what particularity the 
Lord chose, empowered and commissioned his 
twelve apostles to serve the Church, our next 
inquiry is whether we are to consider their 
teachings as verbally or otherwise inspired. In 
pursuing our inquiry we would call attention 
to the following observations:— 

(1) We notice that the promise of the Comforter, 
the holy Spirit, though it was ultimately 
to reach the whole Church through the ministration 
of the apostles, was specially given 
to them. (John 16:13-15.) This was given 



to the eleven on the night of the last Supper, 

after Judas had gone out (John 13:31); and 

when Paul, the twelfth, was ordained, it applied 

to him also with equal force, and was so fulfilled. 

The promise reads, "But the Comforter, 

which is the holy Spirit, whom the Father 

will send in my name, he shall teach you 

all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, 

whatsoever I have said unto you;... 

and he will show you things to come."— 

John 14:26; 16:13. 

Thus we learn that the apostolic inspiration 
was to be threefold in its character, consisting 
(a) of a guidance into all truth concerning the 
divine purposes and plan; (b) of such refreshment 
of the memory as would enable them to 
recall and reproduce all of the Lord's personal 
teaching while he was with them; and (c) of 
special subsequent revelations of things to come 
—of the "many things" the Lord had to tell 
them, which they were not able to bear until 
after his death and resurrection and the descent 
of the holy Spirit— John 16:12. 

(2) Beginning with the second of these propositions 
—the refreshment of the memory— we 
think it is manifest that the promise did not 
imply a dictation of the exact order and phraseology 
in which they should express those things. 
Nor do their writings give evidence of such 
dictation, although this promise is of itself a 
guarantee of the correctness of their accounts. 
In each of the four gospels we have a historic 
account of the Lord's earthly life and work, 
and in each the individuality of the writer appears. 
Each, in his own manner and style, 
records those items which seem to him most 
important; and, under the Lord's supervision, 
all together furnish as complete an account as 
is necessary to establish the faith of the Church 
(a) in the identity of Jesus of Nazareth with 
the Messiah of the prophets; (b) in the fulfilment 
of the prophecies concerning him; and 
(c) in the facts of his life, and the divine inspiration 
of all his teachings. If the inspiration 
had been verbal (i.e., by word for word 
dictation), it would not have been necessary 
for four men to rephrase the same events. But 
it is noteworthy that while each thus exercised 
his own individual freedom of expression, and 
his choice of the most important events worthy 
of record, the Lord so supervised the matter that 
among them nothing of importance was omitted, 
and that all that is needed is faithfully recorded 
and is thoroughly trustworthy, as evidenced 
both by the personal integrity of the 
writers, and also by the promise of the influence 



of the holy Spirit to refresh their memories. 

In this connection it is a noteworthy fact that 

the Apostle John's record supplements those 

of the other three— Matthew, Mark and Luke— 

and that he mentions, chiefly, discourses, circumstances 

and incidents of importance omitted 

by the others. A glance at the Table of 

Gospel Harmonies in your Bagster or Oxford 

"Teachers' Bible" will show this. 

(3) Another proposition of the promise was, 
"He will guide you into all truth" (or "teach 
you all things"— concerning the truth). Here 

R1525 :page 141 

we have the promise of just what we see evidenced 
in the writings of all the apostles; 
though they were plain and unlearned men, 
their Scriptural exegesis is most remarkable. 
They were able to confound the wisdom of the 
wisest theologians, not only of their own time, 
but ever since. No eloquence of error can 
stand before the logic of their deductions from 
the law and the prophets and the teachings of 
the Lord. The Jewish rulers and elders and 
scribes marked this, and "took knowledge of 
them that they had been with Jesus"— that 
they had learned his doctrine and caught his 
spirit. -Acts 4:5,6,13. 

We notice that a large proportion of the 
apostolic epistles, particularly Paul's, consists 
of such logical arguments, based upon the inspired 
writings of the Old Testament and the 
teachings of the Lord. And those who have 
partaken of the same spirit, by following the 
lines of argument they thus present, are led 
by them to the same truthful conclusions; so 
that our faith does not stand in the wisdom 
of men, but in the power of God. ( 1 Cor. 2: 1 ,4,5 .) 
But in this sort of teaching, as well 
as in the historic testimony, we see no evidence 
of word for word dictation, and that the 
apostles were mere mechanical amanuenses; 
but, rather, they clearly show that they were 
filled with a knowledge of the truth and with 
the spirit of the truth— with a holy enthusiasm 
to declare the good tidings, which burns and 
glows upon every page, and which kindles in 
the hearts of all of God's people the same sacred 
flame. 

(4) The last proposition of this promise is 

that the spirit would show them (and by implication 

the whole Church through them) things 

to come. Thus they were also to be prophets 

or seers to the Church. Some of the things 

to come were evidently shown to the apostles 



by this superior illumination of the mind or 
quickening of the mental forces— the guidance 
of judgment— in the interpretation of law and 
prophecy and the teachings of the Lord. 

But more than this was necessary, and therefore, 
special visions and revelations by the holy 
Spirit were granted to instruct them concerning 
the things to come. Among these were— 

(a) The vision of the coming glory of the 
kingdom with its earthly and heavenly phases, 
as seen on the mount of transfiguration- 
Matt. 17:2-9. See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., 
Chapter xiv.; 

(b) Paul's vision of the third heavens or 
Millennial kingdom (Eph. 3:3-6; 2 Cor. 12:1-4), 
which so wonderfully influenced his life 

and writings, although not due and hence not 
permitted to be plainly expressed in his day; 

R1526 :page 141 

(c) Paul's vision of the Macedonian desire 
and call for his services— Acts 16:9,10; 

(d) Peter's vision of clean and unclean 
beasts, directing him to use the keys of the 
Kingdom (Matt. 16:19) in opening the door 
to the Gentiles, of whom Cornelius was the 
first convert (Acts 10); and 

(e) The remarkable revelation to John on 
Patmos, which consisted of a series of visions, 
portraying in sign language all the prominent 
features of the course of Christianity until the 
end of the age. This partakes more of the 
character of the ancient prophecies; for though 
John saw and faithfully recorded these visions 
for the future benefit of the Church, he himself 
could not have fully understood them because 
the seals were not yet opened in his day, and 
the truths therein symbolized were not yet 
meat in due season for the Lord's household. 
But now as it does become meat for the 
household, the honor of the apostles and the 
importance of their service for the Church in 
connection with it will be more and more 
appreciated by all who partake of its refreshment 
and strength— other helps and servants 

being now used of the Spirit in setting forth 
those truths. 

Thus the apostles were divinely instructed 
with reference to the deep and hitherto hidden 
things of God. When supernatural means were 
necessary such means were used, but when the 
natural means were sufficient, they were directed 
in the use of the natural means, the Lord always 
guiding them into correct presentations of 
the truths from which he designed to feed his 



Church, at the hands of other servants, during 
the entire Gospel age. Indeed we may rest assured 
that the divine Word, given or elaborated 
through the twelve apostles, will constitute the 

R1526 : page 142 

text book from which the world also will be 
instructed during the Millennial age. 

APOSTOLIC FALLIBILITY. 



Five circumstances mentioned in the New 
Testament are usually considered as opposed 
to the thought of apostolic infallibility, which 
we have presented foregoing. These we will 
examine separately, as follows: 

(1) Peter's denial of our Lord at the time 
of the crucifixion. It is not disputed that this 
was a serious wrong, and one for which Peter 
was sincerely penitent. But it was committed 
before he had received the Pentecostal blessing; 
and, besides, the infallibility claimed for the 
Apostles is that which applied to their public 
teachings— their writings— and not to all the acts 

of their lives, which were affected by the blemishes 
of their "earthen vessels," marred by the 
fall in which all of the children of Adam suffered 
—which blemishes are forgivable through 
the merit of Christ's righteousness. The Apostolic 
office for the service of the Lord and the 
Church was something apart from the mere 
weaknesses of the flesh. It did not come upon 
perfect but upon imperfect men. It did not 
make their thoughts and actions perfect, but 
over-ruled those thoughts and actions, so that 
the teachings of those twelve are infallible. 
And this is the kind of infallibility now claimed 
for the popes— that when a pope speaks ex-cathedra, 
or officially, he is over-ruled of God, and 
not permitted to err. This they claim as apostles 
—claiming that they possess apostolic office 
and authority. But all this is contradicted by 
various Scriptures: twelve alone were chosen, 
and not in succession, but at once (Luke 6:13-16); 
and when one failed and another took 
his office (Acts 1:26), there were still but 
twelve; and the last pages of inspiration show 
us that only the teachings of the twelve are 
foundations for the faith of the Church, or will 
he recognized as such in the New Jerusalem. 

(2) The fact that Peter "dissembled" or 
acted in a two-faced manner on one occasion, 
in dealing with Jews and Gentiles, is pointed 



to as proof that the apostles were "men of like 

passions" as others, and were not infallible in 

conduct. Again we concede the charge, and 

find that the apostles conceded this (Acts 14:15); 

but we repeat that these human weaknesses were 

not permitted to mar their work and usefulness 

as apostles— as those who preached the gospel 

with the holy spirit sent down from heaven (1 Pet. 1:12; 

Gal. 1:11,12)— not with man's wisdom 

but with the wisdom from above. (1 Cor. 2:5-16.) 

And this error of Peter God at once 

corrected, through the Apostle Paul, who kindly 

but firmly "withstood him to the face, because 

he was to be blamed." (Gal. 2:11.) And it 

is quite noticeable that Peter's two epistles show 

no trace of wavering on the subject of the equality 

of Jews and Gentiles in Christ, nor any fearfulness 

in acknowledging the Lord. 

(3) The Lord left the apostles in uncertainty 
respecting the time of his second coming and 
kingdom— simply telling them and all to watch, 
that when due they might know and not be in 
darkness on the subject, as the world in general 
will be. It is manifest, too, that the apostles 
rather expected the second advent and kingdom 
within the first or second centuries; but 

their lack of knowledge on this subject has in 
no wise marred their writings, which, under divine 
direction, made no such statements, but 
on the contrary declared— "that day cannot 
come, until there come a great apostasy, and the 
man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition" 
—Antichrist.— 2 Thes. 2:3. 

(4) Paul, who wrote, "I, Paul, say unto 

you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit 

you nothing" (Gal. 5:2), caused Timothy to 

be circumcised. (Acts 16:3.) And we are 

asked, Did he not thereby teach falsely, and in 

contradiction to his own testimony? We answer, 

No: Timothy was a Jew, because his 

mother was a Jewess (Acts 16:1); and circumcision 

was a national custom amongst the Jews, 

which began before the Law of Moses and which 

was continued after Christ had "made an end 

of the Law, nailing it to his cross." Circumcision 

was given to Abraham and his seed, four 

hundred and thirty years before the Law was 

given to Israel as a nation at Mount Sinai. 

Peter was designated the apostle to the circumcision 

(i.e., to the Jews), and Paul, the 

apostle to the uncircumcision (i.e., to the Gentiles). 

-Gal. 2:7,8. 

R1526 : page 143 

Paul's argument of Gal. 5:2 was not addressed 



to Jews. He was addressing Gentiles, 
whose only reason for desiring or even thinking 
about circumcision was that certain false 
teachers were confusing them, by telling them 
that they must keep the Law Covenant, as well 
as accept Christ— thus leading them to ignore 
the new Covenant. In Gal. 5:2, Paul shows 
them that for them to be circumcised (for any 
such reason) would be a repudiation of the New 
Covenant, and hence of the entire work of 
Christ. 

That Paul found no objection to Jews continuing 
their national custom of circumcision 
is evident from his words in 1 Cor. 7:18,19, 
as well as in his course with Timothy. Not 
that it was necessary for Timothy or any other 
Jew to be circumcised, but that it was not improper, 
and that, as he would be going amongst 
Jews to a considerable extent, it would be to 
his advantage, giving him the confidence of the 
Jews. But we see Paul's steadfast resistance, 
on this subject, when some who misconceived 
the matter sought to have Titus circumcised— 
a full-blooded Greek.— Gal. 2:3. 

(5) The account of Paul's course, recorded 
in Acts 21:20-26, is reflected upon as being contrary 
to his own teachings of the truth. It is 
claimed that it was because of wrong doing in 
this instance that Paul was permitted to suffer 
so much as a prisoner and was finally sent to 
Rome. But such a view is not borne out by 
Scripture-stated facts. The record shows that 
throughout this entire experience Paul had the 
sympathy and approval of all the other apostles, 
and, above all, the Lord's continued favor. 
His course was at the instance of the other 
apostles. It was testified to him by prophecy, 
before he went to Jerusalem (Acts 21:10-14), 
that bonds and imprisonment awaited him; and 
it was in obedience to his convictions of duty 
that he braved all those predicted adversities. 
And when in the very midst of his trouble, we 
read, "The Lord stood by him and said, 'Be 
of good cheer, Paul: for as thou hast testified 
of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness 
also at Rome'"; and later we find the Lord 
again showing him favor, as we read, "There 
stood by me the angel of God, whose I am, and 
whom I serve, saying, Fear not, Paul; thou 
must be brought before Caesar: and lo, God 
hath given thee all them that sail with thee." 
(Acts 23:11; 27:23,24.) In view of these 
facts, we must seek an understanding of Paul's 
course in correspondence with his uniformly 
bold and noble course— esteeming very highly 
the work and testimony which God not only 



did not reprove, but on the contrary approved. 

Coming then to the examination of Acts 21:21-27, 
we notice (verse 21) that Paul had not 
taught that Jewish converts should not circumcise 
their children; nor did he repudiate the 
Mosaic law— rather, he honored it, by pointing 
out the greater and grander realities which 
Moses' law so forcibly typified. So far, therefore, 
from repudiating Moses, he honored Moses 
and the Law, saying, The law is just and 
holy and good, and that by it the knowledge of 
the heinousness of sin had been increased; that 
the Law was so grand that no imperfect man 
could obey it fully, and that Christ, by keeping 
it, had won its rewards, and now under a 
New Covenant was offering everlasting life and 
blessings to those unable to keep it, who, by faith, 
accepted as the covering of their imperfections, 
his perfect obedience and sacrifice. 

Certain ceremonies of the Jewish dispensation 
were typical of spiritual truths belonging 
to the Gospel age, such as the fasts, the celebration 
of new moons and Sabbath days and 
feasts. The apostle clearly shows that the Gospel 
of the New Covenant neither enjoins nor 
forbids these (the Lord's Supper and Baptism 

R1527 : page 143 

being the only injunctions of a symbolic character 
commanded us, and they, new ones).— 
Col. 2:16,17; Luke 22:19; Matt. 28:19. 

One of these Jewish symbolic rites was that 
observed by Paul and the four Jews, which we 
are now examining, termed "purifying." Being 
Jews, they had a right, if they chose, not 
only to consecrate themselves to God, in Christ, 
but also to perform the symbol of this purification. 
And this is what they did— the men who 
were with Paul having made, additionally, a 
vow to humiliate themselves, before the Lord 
and the people, by having their heads shaven. 
These symbolic ceremonies cost something; and 
the charges presumably made up the "offering" 

R1527 : page 144 

of money— so much for each, to defray the expenses 
of the Temple. 

Paul never taught the Jews that they were free 
from the Law,— but, on the contrary, that the 
Law had dominion over each of them so long 
as he lived. He showed, however, that if a 
Jew accepted Christ, and became "dead 
with him," it settled the claims of the Law 
Covenant upon such, and made them God's 



freemen in Christ. (Rom. 7:1-4.) But he did 
teach the Gentile converts that they had never 
been under the Jewish Law Covenant, and that 
for them to attempt the practice of Jewish 
Law ceremonies and rites would imply that they 
were trusting in those symbols for their salvation, 
and not relying wholly upon the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice. And to this all of the apostles 
assented. See Acts 21:25; 15:20,23-29. 

Our conclusion is that God did most wonderfully 
use the twelve apostles, making them 
very able ministers of his truth, and guiding 
them supernaturally in the subjects upon which 
they wrote— so that nothing profitable to the 
man of God has been omitted— and in the very 
words of the original manifested a care and wisdom 
beyond what even the apostles themselves 
comprehended. Praise God for this sure 
foundation. 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 

Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word! 

What more can he say than to you he hath said? 

You, who unto Jesus for refuge have fled." 



R1527 : page 144 

THE GROWTH OF RITUALISM. 



"THE Order of the Holy Cross, a monastic 
order representative of the extreme ritualistic 
or 'Catholic' party of the Episcopal Church, 
publishes a little monthly magazine, in the April 
number of which we find this paragraph: 

'"The progress we are making toward the 
recovery of the full enjoyment of our Catholic 
heritage is very noticeable. Fifty years ago an 
altar raised above the floor of the sanctuary and 
a font properly placed called forth a warm remonstrance 
from a holy prelate. To-day it 
would be hard to find a church recently built 
without these and many other marks of the 
Catholic revival. It was pleasant to find in St. 
Louis, in a mission chapel supported by the 
Church people of the city in general, the daily 
mass, lights, colored vestments, wafer bread, 
the mixed chalice and a reverend ritual.' 

"The progress of ritualism in the Episcopal 
Church was also shown in the ceremonies of 
last Palm Sunday. At Trinity Church the altar 
cloths and the vestments of the clergy were of a 
color symbolic of the Passion; and palms, which 
had previously been blessed, were distributed 



to the departing congregation. In other Episcopal 

churches of the town palms were also distributed, 

and the ceremonies generally were of 

so pronounced a ritualistic character that they 

would have shocked the Episcopalians of a generation 

ago as indicative of a perilous tendency 

Romeward. In several of them the services 

were marked by the pomp and the careful regard 

for symbolism which were formerly associated 

with Roman Catholicism only. Even 

in churches which are classified as Low or Broad, 

the celebration of the day was carried to a ritualistic 

extreme that would have provoked 

surprise even in the distinctively ritualistic 

churches as they were known thirty or forty 

years ago. 

"The confessional is now well established in 
the extreme ritualistic Episcopal churches and 
in some that do not receive that designation. 
We believe, for instance, that the Rev. Dr. 
Houghton, of the Church of the Transfiguration, 
or the 'Little Church Around the Corner,' as 
it is familiarly known, is the 'father confessor' 
to great numbers of people. 

"This tendency to ritualism is extending to 
Protestant churches which in the past have rejected 
liturgical services the most strenuously. 

"It seems that the doctrinal skepticism and 
theological doubt and denial of the Protestantism 
of this period have generated a desire for 
more impressive forms of worship. The religious 
sentiment is as strong as ever, apparently, 
but it finds its expression in devotional ceremonies 
appealing to the aesthetic sense, rather than 
in settled conviction as to the standards of 
faith."— New York Sun. 



page 146 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



INTERESTING ITEMS. 



R1529 : page 146 

A VALUABLE MANUSCRIPT FOUND. 

"Very little authentic information is obtainable 
thus far concerning the discovery by 
some ladies of a palimpsest manuscript of the 
Gospels in the library of the Convent of St. Catherine 
at Mount Sinai, except that the find is 
looked upon by Biblical scholars all over the 

R1530 : page 146 

world as a most important one. Dr. Isaac H. 
Hall, curator of the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art, is a well-known student of Syriac, and 
knew of the discovery long before the news 
was made public in the newspapers. He said 
yesterday that he expected to receive definite 
information from Syria in a few weeks. 

"As much as he knows now is that these 
ladies were visiting the convent last year, and 
while looking over some manuscripts saw one 
to be a palimpsest. This is the name given to 
a parchment roll from which the original writing 
has been erased in order that the parchment 
may be written on again and which has 
been written on again. No matter how well 
the original ink is removed, in the course of 
time the chemicals in the fluid assert themselves, 
and a faint marking of the original tracings 
can be seen. 

"In the case of the present find the ladies 



did not know whether the parchment was of 

any value or not, but, being equipped with cameras, 

they photographed several pages and carried 

them back to London. There the copies 

were studied by Messrs. Burkitt, R. L. Bensley, 

and J. Rendel Harris, who found that this was 

a very old Syriac version of the New Testament. 

These gentlemen were shortly afterward sent 

to Mount Sinai by the Pitt Press at Cambridge 

to make a complete copy and recovery of the 

valuable Syriac text. 

"They have thus far learned that the new 
manuscript contains the Gospels complete, but 
whether it contains more of the New Testament 
than the Gospels has not yet been told. This 
palimpsest omits the last twelve verses of the 
Gospel of St. Mark, which Biblical scholars 
have for a long time considered spurious, and 
which the two oldest Greek manuscripts omit. 

"The library of the Convent of Mount Sinai 
has been a very fruitful field of discovery. In 
1844 Tischendorf found there the famous Sinaitic 
manuscript of the whole New Testament 
and parts of an old Greek Biblical manuscript 
of the fourth century." —New York Sun. 

page 146 

MILLENNIAL DAWN CLOTH BOUND. 

A SPECIAL LOT CHEAP. 

Through a mistake of the binders we have 
on hand a large lot of cloth-bound DAWNS of 
the three volumes, which are not perfect matches 
—the color of the cloth covers is the same, 
dark green, but the shade varies a little. 

The retail price of the DAWNS in cloth is 
one dollar per volume, the wholesale price fifty 
cents (TOWER subscribers being supplied at 
wholesale rate for their own use and for use in 
selling, loaning and giving to others). But 
these books are not up to the standard we wish 
hereafter to adopt, so we now make a special 
offer of them to our readers. We will sell 
these imperfectly matched volumes at twenty-five 
cents each, plus postage ten cents, or the three 
volumes postpaid for one dollar. Or order as 
many as you choose by express or freight, at 
your own charges, for twenty-five cents each. 

This will give some, who loan many books, 
a chance to lend the cloth-bound, which will 
stand more usage and scuffing. And some who 
have felt too poor to have the cloth-bound 
edition can now get them, and have their paper 
covered set for loaning. Order soon! 



R1527 : page 147 

VOL. XIV. MAY 15, 1893. NO. 10. 

TAKING GOD'S NAME IN VAIN. 



"Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God 
in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless 
that taketh his name in vain."— Exod. 20:7. 

WHILE it is true, as the Apostle Paul states 
(Col. 2:14; Eph. 2:15), that the handwriting 
of the ordinances or decrees of the 
Jewish law, which was found to be only unto 
death, was taken away by the vicarious sacrifice 
of Christ Jesus, so that there is now no 
condemnation to them that are in him, by 
faith in his blood, and also that the ceremonial 
or typical features of the law, having been 
fulfilled, have likewise passed away (Rom. 8:1; 
Matt. 5:18), it is nevertheless true that the 
moral precepts of that law never have passed 
away, and never will, because they are parts of 
the eternal law of right. 

Among these precepts is the above, generally 
known as the second commandment— "Thou 
shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God 
in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless 
that taketh his name in vain." It behooves 
us, therefore, to consider what the Lord 
would esteem as a vain use of his name. The 
expression, "in vain," signifies falsely, or, to 
no purpose; and, it will be seen, is a finer distinction 
of irreverence than either profanity or 
blasphemy. To profane the name of God is 
to use it with disrespect and irreverence; and 
to blaspheme his name is to revile, calumniate, 
reproach and abuse it. While, therefore, it is 
unquestionably wrong to either profane or abuse 
the holy name of our God, those also who in 
a milder sense take it in vain, are, we are assured, 
not held guiltless. 

"Behold," says the Psalmist (51:6), "thou 
desirest truth in the inward parts"— in the 
heart; and the Apostle Paul exhorts, saying, 
"Let every one that nameth the name of Christ 
[Jehovah's representative] depart from iniquity." 
(2 Tim. 2:19.) "But unto the wicked 
God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my 
statutes [laws], or that thou shouldest take my 
covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hatest 



instruction and castest my words behind thee. 
When thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst 
with him, and hast been partaker with 
adulterers. Thou givest thy mouth to evil, 
and thy tongue frameth deceit. Thou sittest 
and speakest against thy brother; thou slanderest 
thine own mother's son."— Psa. 50:16-20. 

The prophet Isaiah (29:13) prophesied of 
such a class; and alas, many have arisen in fulfilment 
of his words. Our Lord applied the 
prophecy to some in his day, saying, "Ye 
hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you, 
saying, This people draweth nigh unto me with 
their mouth, and honoreth me with their lips, 
but their heart is far from me. But in vain do 
they worship me, teaching for doctrines the 
commandments of men."— Matt. 15:8,9. 

Seeing with what aversion the Lord regards 
anything short of simple candor and honesty of 
heart in those who claim to be Christians or 
children of God, with what carefulness should 
we take upon us his worthy name! In claiming 
to be the divinely recognized children of 

R1527 : page 148 

God and followers of his dear Son, we stand 
before the world as God's representatives, and, 
presumably, all our words and actions are in 
harmony with his indwelling spirit. We stand 
as guideposts in the midst of the world's dark 
and uncertain way; and if we are not true to 
our professions we are deceitful sign-boards 
causing the inquirer to lose the right way and 
to stumble into many a snare. To take the 
name of God, then, claiming to be his sons, 
and Christians, or followers of Christ, without 
a fixed determination and careful effort to fairly 
represent him is a sin against God, of which 
none who do so will be held guiltless. 

"Let every one," therefore, "that nameth 
the name of Christ, depart from iniquity." 
"If I regard iniquity in my heart," says the 
Psalmist, "the Lord will not hear me." (Psa. 66:18.) 
To undertake the Christian life is to 
engage in a great warfare against iniquity; for, 
though the grace of God abounds to us through 

R1528 : page 148 

Christ to such an extent that our imperfections 
and shortcomings are not imputed to us, but 
robed in Christ's imputed righteousness we are 
reckoned holy and acceptable to God, we are 
not, says the Apostle (Rom. 6:1,2), to continue 
in sin that grace may abound; for by our 



covenant with God we have declared ourselves 
dead to sin and that we have no longer 
any desire to live therein. But having made 
such a covenant with God and taken upon us 
his holy name, if we continue in sin or cease 
to strive against sin, we are proving false to our 
profession. 

"Shall we," then, "who are dead to sin, live 
any longer therein?" God forbid. Let not 
sin reign in your mortal body, but reckon yourselves 
to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive 
unto God, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. 
(Rom. 6:1,2,11,12.) This means a great 
deal. It means a constant warfare against 
the easily besetting sins of our old nature; and 
the struggle will be long and constant until the 
power of sin is broken: and then only constant 
vigilance will keep it down. A Christian, 
therefore, who is true to his profession is one 
who daily strives to realize an increasing 
mastery over sin in himself, and who, therefore, 
is able from time to time to distinguish some 
degree of advancement in this direction. He 
grows more Christ-like— more self-possessed, 
more meek and gentle, more disciplined and 
refined, more temperate in all things, and more 
fully possessed of the mind that was in Christ 
Jesus. The old tempers and unlovely dispositions 
disappear, and the new mind asserts its 
presence and power. And thus the silent example 
of a holy life reflects honor upon that 
holy name which it is our privilege to bear and 
to represent before the world— as living epistles, 
known and read of all men with whom we 
come in contact. 

The formation of such a noble and pure character 
is the legitimate result of the reception 
of divine truth into a good and honest heart. 
Or, rather, such is the transforming power of 
divine truth upon the whole character when it 
is heartily received and fully submitted to. 
"Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word 
is truth," was the Lord's petition on our behalf; 
and let none of the faithful fall into the 
error of some— of presuming that the sanctifying 
work can go on better without the truth 
than with it. We need the instruction and 
guidance and inspiration of the truth for holy 
living; and our Lord's words imply that all 
the truth that is necessary to this end is in the 
Word of God, and that consequently we are 
not to look for any further revelations through 
visions or dreams or imaginations of ourselves 
or others. The Word of God, says the Apostle 
(2 Tim. 3:16,17), "is profitable for doctrine, 
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in 



righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, 
thoroughly furnished unto all good works." 

It reveals to us the spirit, mind or disposition 
of God, and exhorts us to let the same 
mind dwell richly in us; and, in conjunction 
with the study of the mind of God as revealed 
in his Word and communion with him in 
prayer, we receive the blessed influences of his 
spirit, which bring us more and more into conformity 
with his perfect will. To live a holy 
life is not to do some great and wonderful 
things: it is only to live from day to day a life 
of quiet unostentatious conformity to the will 
of God, of secret communion with him in our 
closet devotions and daily walk, and of zealous 

R1528 : page 149 

activity to the extent of our ability and opportunity 
in his service. There is in reality no such 
thing as the "wonderful piety," the "eminent 
piety," or the "wonderful faith" of which 
we often hear and read. There is nothing 
wonderful about piety: we ought to be pious. 
Why not? And when our piety becomes 
"eminent," let us beware of self -righteousness 
and sanctimonious vain-glory. Neither is there 
anything wonderful about a clear and steady 
faith and confident trust in the sure promises 
of God. Why should we not have faith sufficiently 
sure and strong? The Christian who 
bears the strongest testimony for God is the 
one whose faith is just simple enough to take 
him at his word, and whose piety consists 
simply in reverent and loyal obedience to the 
will of God and in the faithful study of his 
will, with a view to personal conformity to it. 
Such need not hesitate to take the name of God 
—to declare themselves the children of God, 
and Christians or followers of Christ, and to 
openly profess that thus they are daily submitting 
themselves to God to be led of his 
Spirit. 

But let us beware of the error of those whom 
the Psalmist in the above words describes as 
"wicked"— who bear the name of Christ in 
vain, who claim to be God's children and to be 
led of his spirit, but whose actions show that 
they hate instruction and cast the words of the 
Lord behind them— who make common cause 
with the "thieves and robbers" who are striving 
to teach men to climb up to life by some 
other way than that of God's appointment, and 
whose whole course is in opposition to God 
and his truth while they proclaim themselves 
his representatives and ambassadors. Let us 



indeed beware of such a lamentable condition 
—of so taking the name of God "in vain." 
And let all such hear the solemn inquiry and 
accusation of our great Judge— "What hast 
thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou 
shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth?" 
etc. The words of our text assure us that such 
shall not be held guiltless. Nor will those be 
who in any way become the aids or abettors of 
these; for if we consent with "thieves" and 
become partakers with "adulterers," we shall 
surely share their reward of divine indignation. 

The Lord would have his people separate and 
distinct from all such, and would not have 
them fellowship or aid them in any way. He 
does not own them, and would not have us bid 
them God speed. Nor would he encourage 
them to bear his name, to assemble with his 
people for prayer and praise, or to pose as his 
ambassadors of truth. The only proper course 
for such to pursue is to repeat their first works 
—to repent and turn humbly to God and to 
heed his instruction. 

When we thoughtfully consider what it is to 
take the name of God in vain, we are overwhelmed 
with the thought of how many are 
doing it. Few indeed are applying their hearts 
unto instruction, yet, without the least hesitation, 
multitudes are taking the name of God 
and of Christ in vain. Some do so recklessly 
because it is customary among respectable 
people— because Christ's name is a passport of 
some value in social and business life. Others 
assume the name as a cloak for false doctrines, 
as, for instance, "Christian Scientists," whose 
deceptive doctrines sap the very foundations 
of Christianity, even denying the personal existence 
of God and seeking to mystify the very 
evidence of our senses as to actual human existence. 
And what gross and hideous doctrines 
have not shielded themselves under the name 
Christian, vainly taken? "In vain they do 
worship me," saith the Lord, "teaching for 
doctrines the commandments of men." (Matt. 15:9.) 
Therefore, let all that name the name 
of Christ depart from iniquity and apply their 
hearts unto instruction, and verily they shall 
be led of God in green pastures and beside 
still waters— their table will be richly and 
bountifully spread, and their cup of blessing and 
joy and gladness will overflow; while the wrath 
of God will in due time be revealed against all 
who take his hallowed name in vain, however 
they may band themselves together, and however 
loudly they may proclaim themselves 
heaven's appointed messengers. 



'"Not my own!' my time, my talent, 

Freely all to Christ I bring, 
To be used in joyful service 

For the glory of my King." 

R1530 :page 150 

A GRACIOUS PRINCE! 

SOMEWHERE there is told a strange old story, 

Of a grand young Prince of royal birth, 
Who forsook His sceptre, crown and palace, 

Just to mingle with the poor on earth: 
Just to serve as lowliest of the lowly, 

With a tender love unknown before, 
Just to win the hearts of all the wretched, 

And persuade them to His palace door. 

For He longed to have their feet, all weary, 

Find a rest upon His golden floor; 
Yearned to spread a banquet for the fainting, 

That they might not hunger any more; 
Open all His secret, priceless treasures, 

Even give the best that was His own, 
Clothe them in His robes of beamy splendour, 

And invite them to his kingly throne. 

So it came: His feet were often weary 

With the way— that others might find rest; 
And His crownless head at night unpillowed, 

That other heads might pillow on His breast. 
And the midnight of His soul grew blacker, 

'Neath the shadow of the olived gloom; 
That other souls might catch the sunny glory 

Falling from a grand, eternal noon. 

It was He who opened living fountains, 

While He drank the wormwood and the gall; 
It was He who hushed His own heart's crying, 

Just to hear another's feeble call. 
He could give a crown of lovingkindness, 

And himself be crowned with cruel scorn; 
He could put on other brows a glory, 

While His own still wore the stinging thorn. 

While He gave the joy of heaven to others, 

He himself was crushed to earth with woe; 
And He spoke His words of consolation, 

From an inner anguish none could know. 
When the Father raised His face of glory, 

And the shades of death came o'er His eyes, 
He could turn to help a soul belated, 

Groping for the Gates of Paradise. 

Heaven and earth have taught us whispered lessons, 



From the depths beneath, and heights above; 
But the clear voice of the princely Teacher, 

Spans the ages with its chords of love. 
Tis His voice that calls us to His service, 

Tis His hand that reaches down to lead, 
'Tis He bids us set our feet, well sandalled, 

In the very footprints He has made. 

Everywhere "His lowly" need our caring, 

All around "His blinded" need our sight; 
Many a soul sits darkly in grief-shadows, 

Waiting for our hand to bring the light. 
Hiding deeply all our selfish sorrows, 

'Neath a love that "seeketh not her own," 
Filling sunny hours with heavenly service, 

We shall hear at twilight His 'Well done!' 
--Alice W. Milligan. 



R1528 :page 150 

RESURRECTION WITHOUT COMMOTION. 



AS shown in our issue of April 1, the resurrection 
of the Church will be in spirit 
bodies, quietly, unknown to human beings, who 
cannot see spirit beings. But with the world 
in general, how will it be? They, we have 
seen, will be raised human beings, and hence 
will be visible to all mankind; will not their 
resurrection cause a great commotion, and, indeed, 
consternation? Would not the appearing 
of millions of human beings, needing food 
and clothing and shelter, produce a general 
famine and shortage for all, and interrupt all 
the affairs of the world? 

We answer: No. Although our Father's 
Word has not given us clear and direct information 
on these points, we who have come to 
some knowledge of his wisdom and power, and 
of his orderly methods of working out his great 
designs, can safely trust all to him. 

Nor should we "speculate" on these subjects, 
not clearly revealed, in the sense of accepting 
or setting forth our ideas as anything more than 
our opinions or suggestions— carefully guarding 
lest we ourselves, or others, should take 
our suppositions for the Word of the Lord, 
which liveth and abideth forever. What follows, 
then, is not the Word of the Lord— nor 
our opinion based upon certain explicit statements 
of God's Word, but merely inference or 
mental deductions, based upon general principles, 



and, so far as we can see, in harmony 
with the scriptural declarations, touching the 
divine character and general dealings, past and 
present, and as revealed for the future. 

R1528 :page 151 

Let us suppose ourselves living in A.D. 
1915, or thereabouts, that we are of the world, 
and not of the elect Church, at that time the last 
member of the latter having been "changed, 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," to 
be like and with the Lord and the glorified 
spirit-host— although the world will not be 
aware of this, because the change will come in 
the moment of dying. By that time society 
will be in a chaotic condition— nineteenth century 

R1529 :page 151 

light, with selfishness, having worked general 
discontent, and led to the rejection and 
overthrow of good as well as evil views and institutions. 
The light of truth having shaken 
the foundations of sectarianism, which for so 
long misrepresented the Word of God, the natural 
result followed: When sectarianism began 
to fall, it unsettled faith in the Bible. 
Next followed a union or confederacy of Protestants 
and an affiliation with Catholics, to 
rule the world on lines of morality and formalism. 
This had its day; but finally the masses, 
freed from the chains of superstition, revolted 
against class and clerical domination, and overthrew 
them (probably not many years before 
or after A.D. 1909). Then followed various 
efforts to establish peace, prosperity and general 
welfare, according to various theories- 
Nationalism, Single Tax, Socialism, Nihilism, 
Communism and, finally, Anarchism. Each 
proved impracticable— all failed to do good. 
Altogether they proved worse than the worst of 
earth's despotic governments, because really 
based on selfishness, while theoretically built 
on love; leaders selfishly aggrandizing themselves, 
while violently declaiming against others 
who had done the same under previous social 
arrangements. 

And now (A.D. 1915) the world has sickened 
of its own futile efforts to institute and maintain 
satisfactory, and peace and prosperity-giving 
government. The time has come for God's 
Kingdom to begin to reconstruct society upon 
the principles of righteousness and love. The 
spiritual Kingdom (Christ and the Church) 
present in the world, and having all power (but 



invisible to humanity), begins its work by resurrecting 
the faithful overcomers of the past 
(mentioned in Heb. 11). They come forth 
perfect men, because they passed their trial in 
this life, and that satisfactorily in God's sight 
(Heb. 11:39), and men, because they belonged 
to the human family for which God has provided 
restitution— to that nature whose perfections 
were lost by the fall. "These all" are but few; 
and their appearance amongst the regathering 
Jews in Palestine is not wholly a surprise, since 
all are looking for some favor of God to Israel. 
Their appearance, no less than their superior 
talents and wisdom, contrast strongly with 
those of imperfect men around them, and bring 
them at once the reverence and obedience of 
Israelites. Taught to believe in the resurrection, 
the people are ready to surmise who they 
are, even without their giving any explanation. 
Soon they are the recognized rulers of Palestine. 

Such news, reaching anarchistic Europe and 
America, excites the sympathy of the worldly-wise 
for the poor Jews, so easily deluded; and 
the news goes the rounds that certain impostors 
have arisen amongst the Jews who, claiming 
to be "Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the 
prophets," have deluded the people and seized 
the government. Soon, however, the news is 
that Palestine is prospering under these new 
governors; as never before attention is drawn 
to their laws and methods, which bring the very 
results so long and so fruitlessly sought otherwise 
and elsewhere. Finally, the world in general 
petitions for the same government and laws, saying 
(in the language of the prophet): "Come, 
let us go up to the mountain [kingdom] of the 
Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; 
and he will teach us of his ways, and we will 
walk in his paths." (Micah 4:2.) In some such 
way the earthly representatives of the spiritual 
Kingdom of God will come into control of the 
world; and then will begin the work of restitution; 
—the formation of the "new earth" 
[new social order] under the "new heavens" 
[the spiritual Kingdom, the glorified Church]. 
The "new heavens and new earth, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness." 

Now let us step about fifty years farther into 
the Millennial age, and take a view.— The 
blessings of peace and wise government by perfect 
rulers, in whose hearts selfishness has no 
place, have wrought wonders: they have really 

R1529 :page 152 

transformed the world; the people are happy, 



industrious and contented; the idle rich are 
gone, the unemployed poor are gone, "walking 
delegates" and breeders of discontent are 
gone; Love and Wisdom and Justice and 
Power are in control, under the name of the 
Kingdom of God. Education is general; for, 
under the new order, wastes are saved, and all 
have an abundance, and that with fewer hours 
of labor; besides, now wisdom is general, and 
saves woful waste, while yielding increased 
comfort. Aside from climatic changes, the 
wisdom of perfect rulers is causing the earth to 
yield great increase in quantity as well as in 
quality of food. Machinery now is marvelous, 
and the results benefit all the people. Health 
is good, proportionately, as people obey the 
laws of the Kingdom; and none now die except 
the wilfully perverse, who resist all the 
beneficent arrangements provided for their 
welfare, now and everlastingly. And those who 
do die now have no hope of future trial;— for 
all living now are living under the second trial 
secured for all by our Lord's ransom-sacrifice, 
and failure now means second death— "everlasting 
DESTRUCTION from the presence of the 
Lord and from the glory of his power." 

The knowledge of the Lord is now general: 
the knowledge of the Lord fills the whole earth, 
and none need say to his neighbor, Know thou 
the Lord; for all know him, from the least to 
the greatest. Seeing that the blessings of restitution 
enjoyed are the result of the ransom-sacrifice 
of our Lord, and that it was "a ransom 
for all— to be testified in due time," and that 
the Scriptures teach that all the world must be 
awakened from death and brought to a knowledge 
of the truth and to an opportunity thus 
to reach full restitution or full resurrection— 
up to the perfection lost— talk about this, and 
when and how it will come about, is general. 

Finally, used to trust in the Lord and pray 
to him, some unite in prayer for a dear old 
father and mother, whom now they could make 
so comfortable, and so readily and gladly provide 
for. The Lord's time having come for 
this step in his plan, the prayer is answered, 
and father and mother walk into the home;— 
from whence they know not, but themselves 
they know. It is a miracle, but without the 
least confusion. 

The matter will for a time be doubted by 
many, as faith-healings are now doubted. By 
some it may be falsely accredited to evil agencies, 
as by many now the powers of Spiritism, 
although Satanic, are often falsely accredited 
to good agencies. There will be room to 



doubt on the part of all who prefer to doubt— 
who prefer to lean to a perverse understanding, 
despite the abundant manifestations then provided, 
showing the goodness of God and expounding 
his gracious plan for human 
restitution. 

It may readily be surmised that it will be 
those who have done the most good in life, 
those who have exercised and developed patience, 
benevolence, etc., that will first be thus 
tenderly thought of and longed for and prayed 
for. Not until nature and invention shall have 
made the necessities and comforts of life quite 
abundant, nor until the hearts of the world 
have become greatly enlarged with generosity 
and sympathy, will the viler characters of the 
world be remembered and prayed for. Those 
remembered as brutal and devilish, such as 
Calegnia, Nero, Diocletian, Torquemada, and 
thousands less notorious, may be expected 
amongst the last. They will "come forth to 
shame and lasting contempt." (Dan. 12:2.) 
By that time the world of mankind will be 
much nearer perfection than now, and, with 
their greater powers, will be able to read 
through and through the minds, the very 
thoughts, of these miserable, depraved, fellow-creatures. 
The evil tendency of their lives of 
selfish gratification will then be seen. They 
will shun the pure, the generous, the good, 
and will loathe themselves. 

But, although in contempt with all, all will 
recognize that a share in the great redemptive 
sacrifice of Christ belongs to even these; because 
Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted 
death for every man. Yet even while despising 
their miserable characters, all will be ready 
and anxious to help them to a knowledge of 
God and Christ, and to direct their faith and 
hope. And all will rejoice at every evidence 
of progress toward God and righteousness and 

R1529 : page 153 

restitution and eternal life. And whichever 
of these shall, by full consecration, yield himself 
entirely to the Lord, shall proportionately 
lose the contempt of the godly, and gain, instead, 
their love; and on those who then, after 
seeing righteousness and sin fully contrasted, 
choose the ways of sin, the wrath of God and 
the contempt of all who love righteousness will 
abide, and they "shall be punished with an 
everlasting destruction"— the second death. 

Thus will be the "coming forth" of "all 
that are in their graves." And it is written 



that "They that hear [give attention to, or 
obey the voice of the Son of Man, at that time] 
shall live." Their awakening will not be reliving, 
in the full sense of the word live. Their 
condition, when they "come forth," will resemble 
the present condition of men— a dying 
condition. But theirs will properly be called 
a living state; because the merit of our Lord's 
great sacrifice will then be fully operative toward 
all, and because the general tendencies 
surrounding all will then be life-tendencies instead 
of, as now, death-tendencies. And all 
who under those favored circumstances do not 
oppose, but hear and obey, the Lord will find 
themselves coming more and more into man's 
original estate, "very good," the earthly image 
of their spiritual Creator, and finally be accounted 
worthy of perfect life. 



R1530 : page 153 
PRACTICAL QUESTIONS. 



A TOWER reader writes that she recently met 

some of like precious faith, who, while 

recognizing Sanctification as she does, did not 

seem to have an ecstatic joy, accompanied by 

great emotion, but, on the contrary, seemed to 

hold the doctrine of full consecration by a 

process of mental reasoning. She was disappointed 

in finding them, as she thought, too 

cold and calculating. She found, too, that 

they did not hold to an instantaneous change 

of character;— from sin to perfection in holiness, 

at one bound. She desires our expression 

on the subject in the TOWER. 

We are glad of the opportunity thus afforded 
us of giving a word of caution on both sides 
of this question. It is a mistake with some, to 
cultivate and appreciate only the intellectual 
side of God's grace, while others appreciate 
and cultivate chiefly the emotions aroused by 
God's grace and truth. And while we should 
realize that these extremes result often from a 
difference of temperaments, this should be no 
reason for neglecting to alter or modify our 
natural tendencies, to have them conform to 
the Lord's pleasure, as indicated to us in his 
Word. 

Our Lord's prayer for his people clearly indicates 
what is the proper means for our sanctification. 
He prayed, "Sanctify them through 



thy truth;" and then, making us doubly sure 

of his meaning, he added, "thy Word is truth." 

Those, therefore, who attempt to be sanctified 

by feelings or by errors or in any other way 

than by the truth are seeking a good thing in 

a wrong way; and results will surely be unsatisfactory 

until the Lord's method is adopted. 

But that is no less serious a mistake which 
some others make, who, while devouring God's 
Word, get from it merely relief from fears and 
a satisfaction for their curiosity. Curiosity is 
insatiable; and if they fail to get what God 
designed to give them through the truth (Sanctification), 
they will ere long be devouring one 
error after another to feed their curiosity, and 
will delude themselves into supposing that 
they are continually feeding upon truth;— although 
they are well aware that each new thing 
devoured is soon abandoned as error, while 
their curiosity continues the devouring process, 
but never is satisfied. These the Apostle describes 
as "ever learning, but never able to 
come to a knowledge of the truth."— 2 Tim. 3:7. 

The proper course unites the head with the 
heart in the search for truth. The heart 
searches that it may know or prove what is that 
good and acceptable will of God, that it may 
please and serve him. The head, as the servant 
of the heart, searches to test or prove the 
truth, that the honest heart be not deceived 
into believing and serving amiss. But when 
the head undertakes to do all the truth-seeking 
and feeding, the real design of the truth— sanctification 

R1530 :page 154 

—is not attained. The result is merely 

a reasoning about the truth, and not a practicing 

of the truth;— the word of truth is handled 

and dissected, but the spirit of it is not received 

into good and honest hearts; because 

it is not a heart-hunger that is being fed, but a 

curiosity-hunger. 

But where the heart hungers and thirsts after 
righteousness (after right views of God and of 
fellowmen and of the proper use of our time 
and influence and talents), and the head, as the 
heart's servant, engages in searching God's 
Word, the case is different; because then each 
morsel of truth received is at once applied in 
the life, and the sanctifying work begins and 

R1531 :page 154 

progresses. To this true heart to know the 
Lord's will means to at once strive to do what 



is seen; and not merely to see the duty or privilege. 

Where truth is seen, and when the heart falls 
in love with it so that it delights to conform 
itself to it, even at the cost of convenience or 
friendships, or other selfish advantages,— there 
the sanctifying influence or spirit of the truth 
is at work;— there the results sought and intended 
by our Lord are being attained. Joy 
will accompany, and peace and trust and love. 
And zeal will never be lacking in a thoroughly 
sanctified heart, although all may not manifest 
it in the same way. With one it may be manifested 
boisterously and with great activity, as 
a mountain stream when suddenly swollen by a 
cloud burst; with another it may be that deep 
and unshown current of spiritual life which enables 
its possessor to go more calmly forward in 
a life of sacrifice and faithfulness to duty, against 
all opposition;— as an iceberg, moved by the 
under current of the ocean, moves steadily and 
irresistably with that current, against all the 
surface currents of the ocean. 

To enter into the spirit of the Lord's plan, 
as revealed in his Word, is to be sanctified by it; 
and this is impossible without some knowledge 
of it. And whoever catches the spirit of the 
truth will have some emotions, whether or not 
they are manifest to others. Sanctification is 
the truth acted upon— put into the affairs of 
life; and, under present-age conditions, always 
leads to self-denials, self-sacrificings in the 
service of God, and Truth, and fellow-men. 

Kansas. 

BROTHER RUSSELL:-I would like to ask 
a question. Knowing that the world and its 
ways are of the enemy, at present under his 
control, and that the saints have no fellowship 
with the unfruitful works of darkness, how are 
we to escape serving as jurors. We might say 
that we cannot conscientiously serve, but the 
reply is, The court knows no law of conscience. 
We might say that we do not believe in going 
to law, and that we are not American citizens; 
but to all these statements the court has an 
evasive answer. The question is, Is it proper 
for the saints to serve as jurors, hold offices, 
swear or affirm? 

I believe it is not; but how to escape to the 
best advantage for the cause of Christ and his 
Kingdom, is what myself and others wish to 
know. About twelve or fifteen years ago, I 
saw that the enemy is the ruler of this world, 
and, as I could not serve two masters, I gave 
up politics, and have not voted since. Again, 
the Word says, "Swear not at all." I have 



raised these questions before the court of this 
district and have been dismissed; and others, 
also, have begun to see that they were serving 
the enemy when they thought they were doing 
God's service. Yours, etc., G. W. HANEY. 

REPLY:— Serving on a jury is in no sense 
taking part in political affairs. A jury has 
nothing to do with politics. As far as judging 
is concerned, the Apostle Paul remarked that, 
since we are to be judges in the weighty affairs 
of the next age, we ought to be able to judge in 
the small matters of the present.— 1 Cor. 6:2,3. 

The law governing juries is very simple. 
The judge instructs the jury on the points of 
law involved in the case, and each juror is required 
to reach a conclusion in his own mind 
with reference to the facts brought out by the 
evidence. In serving as a juror, he has nothing 
whatever to do with the law, whether it be 
good or bad, right or wrong: he merely decides 
what the verdict shall be, according to 
the law given by the judge. When called upon 
to serve as a juror, it becomes a duty to respond, 
and one should ask to be excused only 
in a case of necessity. 

The above would apply even in murder cases, 
although in such instances most of us would 
prefer to be excused. But if it is necessary to 
serve, and if the verdict be murder in the first 
degree, it does not imply that the jury either 

R1531 :page 155 

gives the sentence or executes it. The law 
provides what shall constitute murder in the 
various degrees, and the jury merely finds to 
which of these degrees the facts and circumstances 
point. It remains, then, for the judge, 
as the representative of the law, to sentence 
the culprit, and for the sheriff to execute the 
laws commands. 

In the matter of being sworn in as a juror: 
We see nothing in this to conflict with our 
Lord's words, "Swear not at all;" but for 
those who do, the law makes provision, permitting 
them solemnly, sincerely and truly to 
"affirm." 

As concerns voting, the case is somewhat 
different, and we fully agree with you in the 
view expressed— that our covenant with the 
Lord, and our fidelity to him, practically make 
us aliens in our relations to all human governments, 
and that, therefore, we would best take 
no part in the election of officers or in the 
management of the affairs of this world. 



R1531 :page 155 

GRACE AND PEACE MULTIPLIED. 

-2 PET. 1:1-4.- 



MANY Christians refer with special delight 
to the day when first they realized the 
pardoning grace of God and the consequent 
peace that silenced all their fears and enabled 
them to realize the love of God to them personally. 
And well indeed may we sing with 
all such— 

"O happy day that fixed my choice 
On thee, my Savior, and my Lord." 

But if we have to refer back to the day when 
we took our first steps as babes in Christ, as the 
happiest day in our life, there has been something 
wrong in our experience: we have not 
been developing as we should and experiencing 
that wealth of divine favor which is the privilege 
of every consecrated and faithful soul. 

To all such the Apostle Peter sends greeting, 
saying, Grace and peace be multiplied unto you. 
If our hearts leaped for joy when we realized 
the first droppings of grace and peace, how 
should our songs abound now, with the increasing 
evidences of divine favor— with the multiplication 
of grace and peace now experienced. 

R1532:page 155 

But is it really so with us? are grace and peace 
really multiplied to us? The Apostle indicates 
that such should be the experience of all who 
have obtained like precious faith with him 
(verse 1); and, further, that this increase of 
blessing should come through an increasing 
knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord. 
—Verse 2. 

Some Christians seem to look for the increase 
of divine favor and peace through other agencies 
than the knowledge of God; but such is 
not God's order. Our Lord prayed for his disciples, 
saying, "Sanctify them through thy 
truth; thy word is truth." The knowledge of 
the truth is the sanctifying power, the peace-and-joy-imparting 
power, and is the precious 
evidence of divine grace or favor. Those who 
expect to be sanctified without this divinely 
provided agency and who expect to enjoy 



abiding peace without it, make a great mistake. 
Their peace may last while the sun of prosperity 
shines, and so long as they do not permit 
themselves to think beyond the immediate present, 
or to consider future possibilities; or they 
may for a time, upon a very slight knowledge 
of the truth, build up beautiful castles of wood, 
hay and stubble, with here and there a precious 
stone of truth, and for a time be filled with 
even ecstatic joy over them; but soon such 
flimsy structures must fall, and the transient joy 
end in bitter disappointment— in a loss of both 
joy and peace and, measurably at least, of the 
realization of the divine favor. 

But such disappointments are never realized 
by those whose peace has its fountain in the 
perennial springs of God's eternal truth; for, 
the Apostle says, he "hath given unto us all 
things that pertain unto life and godliness, 
through the knowledge of him that hath called 
us to glory and virtue." But this knowledge 
of God is not only an intellectual knowledge 
of his great and loving plan: it includes also 
a personal acquaintance with God, a heart to 
heart communion and fellowship with him— an 
established sympathy of love and common interest 

R1532:page 156 

and co-operation. Such a knowledge or 
acquaintance with God is gained through the 
study of his precious word with reverence and 
diligence, through the personal application of 
the principles of that word in every day life 
and through secret prayer and communion with 
God. 

If we would have this inspiring acquaintance 
with God we must not forget our privilege of 
secret prayer. Remember the Lord's words,— 
"Enter into thy closet, and when thou hast 
shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is invisible, 
and thy Father which seeth in secret 
shall reward thee." "The Father himself 
loveth you, because ye have loved me and have 
believed that I came out from God." And 
again, "If a man love me he will keep my 
words, and my Father will love him, and we will 
come unto him and make our abode with him." 

Thus it is our privilege to know God; but 
only those who have had the blessed experience 
can appreciate how greatly the grace and peace 
of God can be multiplied to us through the 
knowledge of him thus acquired. As we draw 
near to him in prayer and communion and the 
study of his precious Word, we are made to 
understand the wealth of the divine love and 



favor toward us who are in Christ Jesus, and 
who, through entire consecration of ourselves 
to God, have escaped the corruption that is in 
the world through lust [the worldly desires and 
ambitions]. We learn that to us are given exceeding 
great and precious promises, that by 
these we might be made partakers of the divine 
nature; that we are called to be heirs of God 
and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ; that, if we are 
faithful to our covenant of entire consecration 
to God, we shall be made like him and see him 
as he is; that we may behold the King in his 
beauty; and that through us in the ages to come 
God will manifest the exceeding riches of his 
grace. Oh, what heights of glory are we called 
to share with our beloved Lord; and what 
fathomless love is manifested toward us in 
Christ Jesus! 

In humble thankfulness let us ponder these 
precious promises more and more as in secret 
we bow at the throne of the heavenly grace; 
and here let the holy spirit of God apply the 
instruction to our hearts, and so may we be 
filled with the spirit, and grace and peace be 
multiplied unto us. 



R1531 :page 156 

ARE THE LATTER DAYS AT HAND? 



"FROM barbarous Russia comes the news of 
renewed persecution of the Hebrew people. 
In Germany the crank and half madman, 
Ahlwardt, finds bigoted thousands to listen to 
his barbaric screeds against the sons of Abraham, 
notwithstanding the fact that the giant 
intellect of the great Bismarck points out the 
radical, inherent and illogical viciousness of the 
antisemitic cry. 

"From Austria comes the flat refusal to receive 
as one of the representatives of our enlightened 
nation one whose only real offence 
is that his ancestors fed their flocks among the 
Judean hills. In our own borders, in the 
country's metropolis, the portals of its most 
noted club are closed against a man who admittedly 
possesses in a high degree every requisite 
for its membership, but is objectionable 
to a few miserable beings unworthy of the name 
of Americans or Republicans, who assign as 
their only objection the fact that he is of the 
same race as He whom they pretend to worship 



as the Savior of all men. 

"But even more significant than all are the 
statements made in a discussion now going on 
with regard to the proselyting of the Hebrews 
of New York City. A young member of the 
race, Warzarviak by name, intended for its 
priesthood, in the course of his preparatory 
studies to that end, became convinced of the 
truth of Christianity and embraced that faith. 
He was repudiated by his parents and friends, 
and even his wife and children forsook him. 
Nothing daunted, he came to New York City 
and commenced Christian missionary work 
among the members of his race. He attracted 
many of them to hear his preaching, with one 
result, that a few weeks ago several Jewish rabbis 
took up the matter and made a vigorous 
assault upon him and his work. They claimed 

R1531 :page 157 

that the Hebrews who were alleged to have 
been converted had been bribed by money and 
other valuable inducements to pretend to forsake 
their ancient faith and that their conversion 
was a myth. In support of this they produced 
several affidavits from Hebrews claiming 
to have played this despicable game. 

"These statements led, of course, to a lively 
rejoinder by the parties principally concerned 
and to considerable discussion and criticism of 
the whole subject through the city press. On 
the one hand it was contended that Christians 
should convert the heathen before seeking to 
proselyte a race of sufficient intelligence and 
civilization to judge for themselves as to their 
religious faith, which is also so closely related 
to Christianity, and also that the work was 
really a waste of time and money, and no true 
converts resulted. On the other hand such men 
as the Rev. Dr. Lyman Abbott contend that 
the work is entirely proper and that it has been 
largely successful in New York City. 

"The claim is made that since the work commenced 
fully 1,000 members of the race have 
honestly embraced Christianity, largely through 
the efforts of Mr. Warzarviak, whose wife, impressed 
with his honesty of purpose, has rejoined 
him with her children, although she has 
not yet finally embraced Christianity. In this 
incident, no doubt, many will claim to see the 
beginning of the fulfilment of the Scriptural 
prophecies interpreted to mean the conversion 
of the Jews in the latter days." 

—Pittsburg Times. 



page 157 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1532:page 157 
REVERENCE AND FIDELITY. 



II. QUAR., LESSON X., JUNE 4, ECCL. 5:1-12. 

Golden Text— "Not slothful in business; fervent in 
spirit; serving the Lord."— Rom. 12:11. 

In the book of Ecclesiastes, presumably 
written in Solomon's later years, we have 
an important question raised, considered in 
various aspects, and answered from the 
standpoint of a wide and varied human experience. 
The question (chap. 1:3) is— 

"What profit hath a man of all his labor 
which he taketh under the sun?" 

The question is an important one, especially 
for the young; but all would do well 
to carefully consider it in the light of Solomon's 
experience, and with the prayer of 
the Psalmist in their hearts— "So teach us 
to number our days, that we may apply our 
hearts unto wisdom."— Psa. 90:12. 

Hear the words of the Preacher. He says, 
"I, the Preacher, was king over Israel in 
Jerusalem. And I gave my heart to seek 
and to search out by wisdom concerning all 
things that are done under heaven: this sore 
travail hath God given to the sons of man 
to be exercised therewith. I have seen all 
the works that are done under the sun; and, 
behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit." 
-1:12-14. 

Thus testifies one of the most successful 
men, from the world's standpoint, that ever 
lived. He had all the comforts and blessings 
that wealth and power and honor and 



fame and natural qualifications of mind and 
body and education, and even specially 
granted superhuman wisdom could bestow 
upon him. And all of these he used chiefly 
for his own personal, present gratification. 
He says, "I said in my heart, Go to, now, I 
will prove thee with mirth. ...I sought 
to give myself unto wine; I made me great 
works; I builded me houses, I planted me 
vineyards, I made me gardens and orchards; 
I got me servants and maidens and had 
servants born in my house; also I had great 
possessions. I gathered me also silver and 
gold and the peculiar treasure of kings and 
of the provinces. I got me men singers and 
women singers and musical instruments of 
all sorts: also my wisdom remained with me." 

Thus he proceeds from chap. 1:12 to 2:26 
to show how he delved into every luxury 
to seek full satisfaction and to find in 
these things the chief end of his existence. 
But, after all, he pronounces the whole experience 
"sore travail." 

In chapters 3, 4, and 5 Solomon gives us 
the results of his wide experience and observation 
from a business and social standpoint. 

R1532:page 158 

He sees men laboring hard to amass wealth, 

and wisely inquires (3:9), "What profit hath 

he that worketh in that wherein he laboreth?" 

Then he adds— and how truthfully 

his experience agrees with all our own observation 

and experience— that "He that 

loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; 

nor he that loveth abundance, with increase. 

When goods increase, they are increased that 

eat them; and what good is there to the 

owners thereof, saving the beholding of them 

with their eyes?" (5:10,11.) So business 

prosperity he regards as an empty bubble, 

and the excessive labor to accomplish it as 

laboring for the wind. 

In the adjustment of human affairs he 
further perceives that iniquity and injustice 
prevail everywhere, and to such an extent 
that there is really no redress and no comfort 
to those who lay it to heart, except in 
the thought that God is above all the judges 
of the earth, and that his judgments will some 
day be manifest and prevail. (5:8.) 

Chapter 6 shows how vain and unsatisfactory 
is every earthly good, when there 
is no hope beyond the present life. Chapter 7 
gives some advice which, from the 



standpoint of present selfish advantage, is 

good. It counsels such as seek merely present 

ease, etc., to be careful to maintain a 

good name (verse 1), not to be hasty tempered 

(verse 9), to be sympathetic with those 

in sorrow (verse 2), etc. But since righteousness 

is not rewarded in the present 

time with prosperity, but rather with adversity, 

the ease and pleasure seeker will 

find it to his present advantage not to be 

"righteous over much," neither to be "wise 

over much." Neither should he be either 

wicked or foolish. (Verses 16,17.) In other 

words he should keep his finger on the 

popular pulse, and regulate himself according 

to popular ideas. This is not the proper 

course for the children of God, but it is the 

wise course from the standpoint of worldly 

policy, which, alas! is too often adopted 

by his professed children. It is the policy 

of the "tare" element in the nominal Christian 

church; but it is not the policy of the 

truly consecrated children of God who prefer 

to suffer for righteousness' sake, rather 

than to win a good name among men by a 

compromising policy. 

In chapter 8:16,17 and chapter 9, Solomon 
declares that, in view of God's mighty 
works, he had sought to find out the deep 
mysteries of his plan for his creatures, but 
that he had sought in vain. A knowledge 
of his plan was not then due; and so (chap. 9) 
he considered that the righteous and the 
wise and their works are in the hand of 
God, but he could not tell certainly from the 
book of nature whether God loved or hated 
them; for he said, "All things come alike 
to all: there is one event to the righteous 
and to the wicked." So from this skeptical 
view he concluded to take all the pleasure 
he could out of the present— to make merry, 
and live as joyfully as he could, seeking, first 

R1533 :page 158 

of all, his own ease and pleasure, and, secondarily, 
the pleasure of others so far as it 
did not interfere with his own. Upon these 
very principles Solomon acted until, surfeited 
with self-gratification and sick at heart, he 
cries out at last, as does every one who 
drains the cup of worldly pleasure, "Vanity 
of vanities; all is vanity." 

Chapter 12 now turns away from the disgusting 
sweets of worldly pleasure, and 
counsels youth to pursue a different course 



from that the king had taken, saying, "Remember 
now thy Creator in the days of thy 
youth," etc., and adds that the conclusion of 
the whole experience of his life is that the 
proper course is to "Fear God, and keep his 
commandments; for this is the whole duty 
of man; for God shall bring every work into 
judgment, with every secret thing, whether 
it be good or whether it be evil."— 
Verses 1,13,14. 

Well would it have been with Solomon 
had he learned this lesson in his youth from 
the law and the prophets, instead of ignoring 
these and turning to poor human philosophy 
—his own reasonings— and then, by the 
experience of a wasted life, finally proving 
the vanity of every other course save that 
of God's appointment and direction, and 
losing the reward of divine favor which a 
course of entire faithfulness to God would 
surely have brought in due time. The course 
which Solomon chose and followed brought 
the temporal advantage which was very unsatisfactory; 
but it surely did not entitle 
him to a place among the ancient worthies, 
some of whom Paul enumerates in Heb. 11, 
who are to have an honorable position in 
the earthly phase of the kingdom of God. 
(See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chapter 
xiv.) Then those who faithfully suffered 
for righteousness' sake will be exalted as 
princes in all the earth (Psa. 45:16), while 
such as Solomon will have a much lower 
station. 

R1533 :page 159 

The Golden Text— Be not slothful in business, 
but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord 
—is the counsel of the Apostle Paul to such 
as have consecrated themselves to the Lord. 
These, devoted to the special work of the 
Lord, he would have remember not to be 
slothful or indifferent to the duties and responsibilities 
incumbent upon them and pertaining 
to the present life— such as providing 
for their families, etc. They should not be 
slothful in these things, but active, and at the 
same time fervent in spirit in serving the Lord. 

The golden text is very suggestive of the 
different standpoints of the Apostle Paul 
and King Solomon. The latter, living before 
the Gospel age and its high calling began, 
counseled an easy course of moderation: 
saying, Why should one become overmuch 
interested in anything? Why not take 



life easy? But the Apostle saw a prize that 

inspired his zeal to the point of fervency; 

and he advises all who are running for the 

same prize to be fervent in spirit, in the 

service of God now open to them;— an opportunity 

not open to Solomon, and not then 

even revealed.— Eph. 3:5; 1 Pet. 1:12. 

R1533 :page 159 

THE CREATOR REMEMBERED. 



II. QUAR., LESSON XL, JUNE 11, 
ECCL. 12:1-7,13,14. 

Golden Text— "Remember now thy Creator in the 
days of thy youth."— Eccl. 12:1. 

VERSES 1-5 present a vivid pen picture 
of old age— "the evil days" of physical 
decline and infirmity, "when thou shalt say, 
I have no pleasure in them." The world 
offers its pleasures to the young, who snatch 
at the delusions; but age has proved them 
all empty bubbles. The world has nothing 
substantial to offer, and therefore, unless the 
mind has found its satisfaction in God, there 
is indeed no pleasure in old age. 

VERSE 2 refers to the dimness of vision, 
both mental and physical, and to the fact 
that clouds of trouble of one kind or another 
quickly succeed each other after every refreshing 
rain which brings hope of succeeding 
sunshine of prosperity. 

VERSE 3. "The keepers of the house [the 
arms and hands] tremble; and the strong 
men [the lower limbs] bow themselves [unable 
to support the weight of the body], 
and the grinders [the teeth] cease [to perform 
their office], because they are few; and 
those [various mental faculties] that look 
out of the windows [the eyes] be darkened 
[or dimmed]." 

VERSE 4. "And the doors shall be shut 
in the streets, when the sound of the grinding 
is low."— When the work of life is done 
there is little in common with the rising 
generation, and therefore less and less communication. 
"He shall rise up at the voice 
of the bird [—early, being unable to sleep 
well], and all the daughters of music shall be 
brought low [the failing powers cease to 
catch the strains of earthly enchantments]." 
But if he have the ear of faith, he catches 



the sweeter strains of heaven's melodies, of 
which Solomon in all his glory never knew. 

VERSE 5 represents the great burden, labor 
and sorrow of extreme old age with all 
its infirmities, until all earthly desires fail 
and he goes to his long home— the grave- 
there to await the morning of the resurrection. 
"Weeping may endure for the night, 
but joy cometh in the morning."— Psa. 30:5. 

VERSES 6,7 represent death— the silver 
cord of life being loosed, the golden bowl 
(the body which contained the precious life-blood), 
broken; the pitcher (the lungs which 
drew in life from the fountain, the surrounding 
atmosphere), broken at the fountain; or 
the wheel (the heart), broken at the cistern. 
Then, when the body can no longer perform 
its offices, the dust of which it is composed 
returns "to the earth as it was [mere inanimate 
dust] and the spirit [ruach, breath, 
wind] shall return unto God who gave it," 
going back into his great reservoir of wind, 
breath— the surrounding atmosphere; and 
the being, the soul, is no more, save as it is 
engraven indelibly upon the tablet of God's 
memory to be reproduced again in the resurrection 
at the last day— now so near. 

VERSES 13,14. This conclusion of the 
whole matter of a life's experience is that 
to which all men come sooner or later. 
"Vanity of vanities; all is vanity" is, after a 
wasted life, the poor world's dying refrain, 
when they see it would have been better to 
have feared God and kept his commandments. 
And that they may effectually prove 
this conclusion is God's object in letting 
them have the present experience under the 
dominion of Sin, which even Solomon in 
all his glory called "sore travail:" that they 
may be ready for the duty of submission to 
God, which will be enforced in the coming 
Millennial age of the world's probation. 
This object is distinctly stated by Solomon 
in Chapter 1:13 and 3:10.— "I have seen the 
travail which God hath given to the sons of 
men to be exercised [by experience] in it." 



R1533 :page 160 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



California. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL (for by that 
endearing name I feel permitted to call 
you):— I received your esteemed reply to 
mine of recent date, also the TOWER containing 
article on "The Holy Spirit," for 
which I desire to thank you fervently. For 
me it is "Confirmation strong, as proofs of 
Holy Writ." God grant that the truth may 
spread yet more widely. 

I desire to express, through you, my heartfelt 
thanks to the young colporteur from 
whom I bought the DAWNS some six months 
ago. I saw him only for a few moments, 
and have not seen him since. He was trying 
to sell DAWNS at the house at which I 
had to call to collect a bill. I saw a package 
of books on the stoop, and I picked one 
up. The title was enough to attract me. I 
told him I had been, and was still, deeply 
interested in the subject, being a believer in 
the dear Lord's immediate coming, and my 
daily prayer being, "Thy kingdom come." 
He told me that, if I read the DAWNS, I 
would get the light I sought on the subject. 
May the dear Lord bless the young man 
wherever he now is. He was the direct 
means of bringing much light and knowledge 
and consequent joy and peace to my life. 

I am not rich in this world's goods, but I 
have bread and to spare; and I think the 
benefit I have derived from the perusal of 
your article on "The Holy Spirit" demands 
a thank-offering: so I enclose $1.00 for that 
purpose. 

Yours, stronger in the faith, and still 
hungering for the truth as it is in Jesus, 
G. H. SAGAR. 



Georgia. 
MY DEAR FRIENDS:- After much delay 
(which is not the result of carelessness) I 
acknowledge the receipt of the sample lot 
of Booklets, and also three copies of ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER which came in due succession, 
beginning with March 1st, and for 
which I tender my hearty thanks. You will 
remember that I expressed my intention to 
try the business of selling the Booklets; and 
on receipt of samples I spent an afternoon 
canvassing and secured orders for about 
two dozen. Meanwhile I loaned some of 
the Booklets, and they were circulated from 
house to house. Some of the people seemed 
so awe-stricken at the strange doctrine of a 



future probation, and others so unwilling to 

support any theory that questioned the doctrine 

of "eternal torment," that I decided 

to prepare myself, if possible, to give explanations 

and to meet their arguments. 

So I applied myself diligently to the study 

of The Plan of the Ages, which has been 

to me a source of great delight. Notwithstanding 

the doctrine is entirely new to me, 

and quite contrary, in many respects, to 

what I thought was my fixed opinion, it 

R1534 : page 160 

appears, from an increase of knowledge 
through the study of The Plan of the Ages, 
that the subject is worthy of serious 
consideration. 

If the plan of salvation is broad and liberal 
enough to grant a full opportunity beyond 
the grave, to come to a knowledge of the 
truth and be saved, to all who could not or 
did not have such knowledge and opportunity 
in this life, why should any one find 
fault? And if it is found that those— 
"Tempests of angry fire, that roll 

To blast the rebel worm 
And beat upon the naked soul 
In one eternal storm," 
are, after all, only imaginary, why should 
not all the living rejoice that so many billions 
of our race are delivered from a fate 
worse than death, and that God is truly a 
God of love? [Why indeed?] 

I enclose twenty-five cents to pay for Vol. I., 
and I desire the succeeding volumes, as I 
am a humble seeker after the truth, and 
never expect to get too wise to be taught. 
I want not only your books, but your prayers 
—that I may understand them, and be enlightened 
and blessed by their teachings. 

Yours in sincerity, D. M. STANSELL. 



Massachusetts. 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-It is impossible 
to express my gratitude for the pleasure 
and happiness your explanation of God's 
Holy Book has given me. I believe every 
word of it. It fills a vacancy I have always 
felt, since first I tried to serve God, and it 
draws me nearer to him. 

I recently loaned Vol. I to a retired Congregational 
minister. He returned it in a 
few days, saying that he believed every 



word of it. I asked him why the ministers 
do not acknowledge the errors they are 
preaching. He replied that they are tied up. 

I read my Bible more than ever, and I 
love it more, because I understand it better. 
Please remember me in your prayers. 

Gratefully, yours in the Lord, 
A. M. BRUYN. 



page 162 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1534:page 162 

FURTHER JEWISH EXPULSION. 



ACCORDING to a cablegram to the New 
York Times of May 7, a fresh edict, by the 
Russian Emperor, will expel nearly a million 
Jews from Poland. We quote as follows:— 

"Nothing that can occur in Europe, not 
even a war of great magnitude, possesses a 
deeper interest for Jews and Christians alike, 
than the prospect of a large exodus of Jews 
from Russia. 

"As a consequence of the Passover edicts of 
1891 more than 400,000 Jews were driven from 
Russia. More than 1 10,000 of the exiles landed 
in New York, and many thousands found their 
way to Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore and 



Chicago. 

"The interest of the people of New York in 
that vast body of immigrants was greatly intensified 
by the presence among some of them of 
typhus and cholera; but on other grounds the immigrants 
aroused the most widespread concern. 

"The labor unions of New York and other 
cities made energetic protests against the admission 
of the Russian Jews into the labor 
markets of the New World. There were objections 
to the wholesale entrance of the refugees 
on social grounds. 

"The movement of the Jews in Russia, 
which is now under way, according to Mr. 
Frederic, is four times as great as that following 
the Passover edict of 1891, and it will 
affect every Jew in Poland. This is the first 
time that the Polish Jews have had their liberties 
abridged. There are in Poland about 
1,500,000 Jews. 

"The immigration laws of the United States 
have been recently made much more rigorous 
by Congress, owing to the last Russian exodus 
and to the public fear of typhus and cholera. 
The immigrants are to be catechised in order 
to get statistics as to their social, moral, physical, 
and financial condition. Immigrant-carrying 
vessels are to be limited, and in several 
directions the restrictions are drawn tighter 
around the passengers of the steerage. 

"Through liberal contributions of Baron de 
Hirsch and other rich Jews in Paris, London, 
Berlin and Vienna there were established two 
funds for the exclusive relief of Russian and 
Roumanian Jews. 

"One of these funds amounted to $10,000,000, 
and was put at the disposal of a committee 
of London Jews, with that city as the headquarters 
of the fund. 

"The other fund was sent by Baron de Hirsch 
to New York, and is managed by seven trustees. 
The fund amounted, when established, to $2,500,000, 
and the money was invested in New 
York bonds and mortgages drawing interest. 

"A Trustee of the Baron de Hirsch Fund 
said, "We were anticipating something of the 
kind before long. We have $30,000 a year 
available for direct relief to the refugees, and 
this sum can readily be increased to $50,000. 
There will be no lack of funds to take care of 
all the needy Jews who come. We do not encourage 
them to come, nor have we ever. 

"The partial failure of the colonization 
schemes in South America has rendered it 
probable that other parts of America and the 
world will be considered by the managers of 



the London Baron de Hirsch Fund, in future 
schemes of this kind. Australia offers an inviting 
field, and it is probable that colonies 
will be started there. Mexico, likewise, seems 
to be a favorable country. We can ourselves 
take care of 50,000 Jews this Summer, and we 
do not think that the number who come will 
reach that figure. 

"A good many of the Jewish refugees from 
Russia are fleeing into Palestine and settling 
there. The Jews have not nearly as much disinclination 
to agricultural pursuits as is popularly 
supposed." 



R1534 : page 163 

VOL. XIV. JUNE 1, 1893. NO. 11. 

THE RELATIVE CLAIMS OF LOVE AND JUSTICE. 



THERE is nothing more necessary to the peace 

and prosperity of the Church of God than 

that its members should have a clear understanding 

and appreciation of moral principles, with 

a full determination to be controlled by them. 

Even among Christians there are often differences 

of opinion, with reference to principles 

of action, which greatly interfere with spiritual 

growth and prosperity. Such difficulties most 

frequently arise through a failure to rightly 

distinguish between the relative claims of love 

and justice. Therefore we deem it profitable 

to briefly consider these principles and their 

operation among the children of God. 

Justice is sometimes represented by a pair of 
evenly poised balances, and sometimes by the 
square and compass, both of which are fitting 
emblems of its character. Justice knows no 
compromise and no deviation from its fixed 
rule of action. It is mathematically precise. 
It gives nothing over for "good weight" or 
"good measure:" there is no grace in it, no 
heart, no love, no sympathy, no favor of any 
kind. It is the cold, calculating, exact measure 
of truth and righteousness. When justice is 
done, there is no thanks due to the one who 
metes it out: such a one has only done a duty, 
the neglect of which would have been culpable, 
and the doing of which merits no favor or 
praise. And yet, cold, firm and relentless as 
this principle is, it is declared to be the very 
foundation of God's throne. It is the principle 



which underlies all his dealings with all his 
creatures: it is his unchangeable business principle. 
And how firmly he adheres to it is manifest 
to every one acquainted with the plan of 
salvation, the first step of which was to satisfy 
the claims of justice against our race. Though 
it cost the life of his only begotten and well 
beloved Son to do this, so important was this 
principle that he freely gave him up for us all— 
to satisfy its legal claims against us. 

The principle of love, unlike that of justice, 
overflows with tenderness and longs to bless. 
It is full of grace, and delights in the bestowment 
of favor. It is manifest, however, that 
no action can be regarded as a favor or a manifestation 
of love, which has not underneath it 
the substantial foundation of justice. Thus, 
for instance, if one comes to you with a gift, 
and at the same time disregards a just debt to 
you, the gift falls far short of appreciation as 
an expression of love; and you say, We should 
be just before we attempt to be generous. 

And this is right: if justice is the foundation 
principle in all of God's dealings, it should be 
in ours also; and none the less so among 
brethren in Christ than among those of the 
world. As brethren in Christ, we have no right 
to presume upon the favor of one another. All 
that we have a right to claim from one another 
is simple justice— justice in the payment of our 
honest debts to each other, justice in our judgment 
one of another (which must make due 
allowance for frailties, etc., because we realize 

R1535 : page 163 

in ourselves some measure of similar imperfection), 
and justice in fair and friendly treatment 
one of another. This is all we have any right 

R1535 : page 164 

to claim; and we must also bear in mind that 
while we have a right to claim this for ourselves 
from others, we are just as fully obligated to 
render the same to them. 

But while we may claim justice— though there 
is no obligation to demand it for ourselves, and 
we may if we choose even suffer injustice uncomplainingly 
—we must, if we are Christ's, 
render it. In other words, we are not responsible 
for the actions of others in these respects, 
but we are responsible for our own. And therefore 
we must see to it that all our actions are 
squared by the exact rule of justice, before we 
ever present a single act as an expression of love. 



The principle of love is not an exact principle 
to be measured and weighed like that of 
justice. It is three-fold in its character, being 
pitiful, sympathetic or reverential, according 
to the object upon which it is centered. The 
love of pity is the lowest form of love: it takes 
cognizance of even the vile and degraded, and 
is active in measures of relief. The love of 
sympathy rises higher, and proffers fellowship. 
But the love of reverence rises above all these, 
and delights in the contemplation of the good, 
the pure and the beautiful. In this latter sense 
we may indeed love God supremely, as the personification 
of all that is truly worthy of admiration 
and reverence, and our fellow men in 
proportion as they bear his likeness. 

Although we owe to every man the duty of 
love in some one of these senses, we may not 
demand it one of another, as we may the principle 
of justice; for love is the overflow of justice. 
Justice fills the measure full, but love 
shakes it, presses it down, heaps it up and overflows 
justice. It is therefore something not to 
be demanded, nor its lack to be complained of, 
but to be gratefully appreciated as a favor and 
to be generously reciprocated. Every one who 
craves it at all should crave it in its highest 
sense— the sense of admiration and reverence. 
But this sort of love is the most costly, and the 
only way to secure it is to manifest that nobility 
of character which calls it forth from others 
who are truly noble. 

The love of sympathy and fellowship is also 
very precious; but, if it come merely in response 
to a demand, it comes robbed of its choicest 
aroma: therefore never demand it, but rather 
by manifestation of it toward others court its 
reciprocation. 

The love of pity is not called out by the 
nobility of the subject, but rather by the nobility 
of the bestower, who is so full of the principle 
of love that it overflows in its generous 
impulses toward even the unworthy. All of 
the objects of pity are not, however, unworthy 
of love in the higher senses; and some such 
often draw upon our love in all the senses. 

To demand love's overflow of blessing— 
which is beyond the claims of justice— is only 
an exhibition of covetousness. We may act 
on this principle of love ourselves, but we may 
not claim it from others. The reverse of this 
exhibits a manifest lack of love and a considerable 
measure of selfishness. 

Thus, for instance, two of the Lord's children 
were once rooming together and, through a 
failure to rightly consider the relative claim 



of love and justice, one presumed upon the 
brotherly love of the other to the extent of expecting 
him to pay the entire rent; and when 
the other urged the claims of justice, he pushed 
the claim of brotherly love, and the former 
reluctantly yielded to it, not knowing how to 
refute the claim, yet feeling that somehow some 
Christians had less principle than many worldly 
people. How strange that any of God's children 
should take so narrow and one-sided a 
view. Cannot all see that love and justice 
should work both ways and that it is the business 
of each not to oversee others in these respects, 
but to look well to his own course, and 
if he would teach others, let it be rather by example 
than by precept. 

Let us beware of a disposition to covetousness, 
and let each remember that he is steward 
over his own goods, and not over his neighbor's, 
and that each is accountable to the 
Lord, and not to his brother, for the right use 
of that which the Master entrusted to him. 
There is nothing much more unlovely and unbecoming 
to the children of God than a disposition 
to petty criticism of the individual affairs 
of one another. It is a business too small for 
the saints, and manifests a sad lack of that 
brotherly love which should be specially manifest 

R1535 : page 165 

in broad and generous consideration, which 
would rather cover a multitude of sins than 
magnify one. 

May love and justice find their proper and 
relative places in the hearts of all of God's 
people, that so the enemy may have no occasion 
to glory. The Psalmist says, "Oh, how 
love I thy law [the law of love, whose foundation 
is justice]: it is my meditation all the 
day." (Psa. 119:97.) Surely, if it were the 
constant meditation of all, there would be fewer 
and less glaring mistakes than we often see. 
Let us watch and be sober, that the enemy may 
not gain an advantage over us. 



R1535 :page 165 
THE LORD'S SHEEP. 



THE Lord, in calling his people his sheep, 
chose a very significant emblem of the 



character he would have manifested in them. 

The most noticeable characteristics of the sheep 

are meekness, docility and obedience to the 

shepherd to whose care they fully entrust themselves. 

They are very true to the shepherd: 

they study his voice, watch for the indications 

of his will, and trustfully obey him. When 

they hear his voice, quickly, and without the 

slightest hesitation or faltering, they run to 

obey it. But the voice of a stranger they will 

not follow, for they know not the voice of 

strangers. 

What a lesson is here for the Lord's "little 
flock," over whom he is the good Shepherd. 
The weakest lamb in the flock knows his voice 
and hears him say, "This is the way: walk 
ye in it." And while there are thousands of 
voices calling, now in this direction and now 
in that, the Lord's sheep, acquainted with his 
Spirit and his Word, turn away from all save 
the well known voice of the Shepherd. In 
various ways our Shepherd speaks to his flock 
of sheep and lambs. His written words treasured 
up in the heart mark the way of truth continually; 
his special providences further shape 
the peculiar course of each individual; and 
the abiding presence of his holy Spirit makes 
manifest every intrusion of any other spirit 
which seeks to beguile and to lead astray. 
The true sheep will carefully listen for the 
faintest accents of the voice of the Shepherd— 
i.e., he will treasure up his words in his heart; 
he will study his providences; and he will cultivate 
that communion and personal fellowship 
with the Lord which are his privilege. Those 
who thus abide in him can never go astray. 
"They can never, never lose their way." 

They may not have much learning, and, humanly 
speaking, would not be able to grapple 
with all the sophistries of error. But, being 
so well acquainted with the Master's voice, 
they quickly perceive that such voices are the 
voices of strangers, and they will not follow 
them; for they are loyal and obedient to the 
Shepherd only. 

In such an attitude of mind and heart is our 
only safety in the midst of all the difficulties 
and confusion of this evil day. And all such 
may confidently sing with the Psalmist— 

"The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. 
He maketh me to lie down [to rest— the rest 
of faith] in green pastures [with abundance of 
satisfying food]; he leadeth me beside the still 
waters [deep, refreshing truths]. He restoreth 
my soul [reclaims it from death]; he leadeth 
me in the paths of righteousness for his name's 



sake [because I am his child and bear his honored 
name]. Yea, though I walk through the 
valley of the shadow of death [The entire 
journey of life since the fall has been through 
a vale of tears, upon which rests the shadow of 
death.], I will fear no evil; for thou art with 
me; thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me." 
Thy word and providences discipline and guide 
me in the way. Our Shepherd's providence 
not only disciplines the true sheep, but protects 
them from the "wolves" and other foes. 

With the Prophet, we also can say, "Thou 
preparest a table before me in the presence of 
mine enemies [for even while beset by Satan 
and Sin, we are sustained by the Lord's abundant 
provision for every necessity]; thou 
anointest my head with [the] oil [of joy], my 
cup [pleasure] runneth over [even while, as a 

R1535 : page 166 

pilgrim, I am beset with life's difficulties]." And, 

in view of the Lord's present and past leading, 

all, who continue to be truly his sheep, can certainly 

trust that— "Surely goodness and mercy 

shall follow me, all the days of my life; and I 

will dwell in the house of the Lord [will be recognized 

as a member of his household, as his 

child] forever." 

Let us seek to cultivate more and more the 
meek, docile and loyal character of the sheep, 
that so we may be abundantly blessed by the 
care of the good Shepherd. Such a disposition 
does not commend itself to the world— the 
wayward goat, the bold lion, or the stealthy 
bear, the subtle serpent and vicious vampires 
are more fitting emblems of their ideals, and 
are usually the emblems selected for their escutcheons. 
But let the world love its own, 
while we remember that we are not of the world, 
but are sent forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves, and that our safety and spiritual prosperity 
depend, not upon our own wisdom and 
sagacity, but depend entirely upon our diligent 
hearkening to, and patient following of, the 
voice of the good Shepherd, who will very 
soon highly exalt his little flock and crown 
them with an exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory. 



R1535 :page 166 

BE YE WISE AS SERPENTS-HARMLESS AS DOVES. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I appeal to you 
for some assistance. I have had within the 
last four months quite an experience; and, being 
only a "babe" in the truth, I need help. My 
query is respecting MILLENNIAL DAWN. The 
Lord has used it graciously in bringing me 
into his family,— and into great joy and peace. 
I was not until lately a Christian; because nothing 
in Christianity drew me; but, rather, the 
contradictory doctrines of the various denominations 
repelled me, and caused me to doubt 
the Book (the Bible) from which so many conflicting 
views could be drawn. About a year 
ago I became a "Salvationist," but now I am 
simply a Christian. 

But when I had read the DAWN series (and 
I shall always feel grateful to the dear friend 
and Brother, who brought it to my attention), 
I found what my soul had long unwittingly 
hungered and thirsted after;— I found 
the divine plan of the ages;— I found harmony 
in God's Word;— I found the plan of God 
therein revealed in fullest accord with my 
highest and noblest reasoning faculties and 
sympathies; I found it full of love, full of justice 
and full of wisdom. 

Joyfully I exclaimed,— These DAWN volumes 
are the Bible keys which God himself has sent 
to his people; that now, at last, after centuries 
of darkness and perplexity, we may "see light 
in his light," and praise and glorify his name, 
and get fully free from the bondage of error, 
and enjoy the true liberty of the sons of God! 

As you know, I entered the colporteur work; 
—I gave myself zealously to that work (selling 
over a thousand DAWNS in eleven weeks), because 
I believed that thus I was preaching the 
gospel more successfully and more acceptably 
to God than in any other way. But now I 
have stopped; because doubts have been aroused 
in my mind (and these by a brother colporteur) 
as to whether or not the DAWNS are what 
I hoped,— God-given "Bible Keys." 

The cause of my loss of confidence lay in the 
fact that the brother-colporteur referred to, 
while quite earnest in the sale of DAWN, gave 
me to understand that he differed with its 
teachings on several points, and in some meetings, 
which we attended, he seemed to ignore 
the DAWN entirely. When one older than I in 
"this way" manifested such lack of confidence 
in the DAWNS, it shook my confidence, 
and I said to him, "Were not the DAWNS and 
WATCH TOWER the channels through which 



God brought the knowledge of his plan of the 
ages to your attention? And, if so, why are 
you ashamed to confess the agency which God 
thus honored and used to bless you? And if 
you know more truth than the DAWN and the 
TOWER present, and in conflict with their 
teachings, why do you circulate them?" The 
answer was that I would make of you a pope; 
and that even some parts of the Bible are errors. 
But I was honest and in earnest, and concluded 
to sell no more DAWNS until I felt sure 
that they present the truth;— more of it than 
any other book I could circulate, and more 
than I myself could teach in any other manner. 
It was about this time that the Adversary 
brought me in contact with the so-called 
Spirit of the Word which for a few days 
threatened to ensnare me. But I soon discovered 
that not the spirit of God's Word but 
the spirit of error forwarded its teachings. It 

R1535 : page 167 

is altogether off the foundation,— the ransom. 
It teaches, too, that God is the only real sinner, 
and man his innocent dupe. Its hope is that, 
after 6000 years of mischief and sin and trouble 
making, God will, during the Millennial age, 
change; and in his efforts to undo the wrongs 
of the past and present he will save everybody 
everlastingly,— even the devil. I learned that 
Mr. Adams had first gotten the truth from you 
(and I could see traces of the plan of the ages 
throughout his writings), and that he had as he 
supposed improved upon your writings: but to 
me his improvements had spoiled everything 
they mixed with. 

I turned again to the DAWNS and TOWERS, 
and again the peace and joy and confidence 
began to come. Brother Adamson's article in 
the March 15th TOWER helped me, and then 
the May 1st TOWER on "The Twelve Apostles," 
seemed just the food my soul needed. 

R1536 : page 167 

It, with the second chapter of DAWN, Vol. I., 

refreshed my confidence in the Bible as indeed 

the Word of God— specially given and specially 

presented for our comfort and strength in 

this day of doubts and skepticism and many 

"uncertain sounds." And this gave me increased 

confidence in the DAWNS and TOWERS; 

and I said to myself: The same God who sent 

by his spirit his message by the prophets and 

his expositions by the apostles surely had something 



to do with the preparation of the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and WATCH TOWER teachings; for 
they, and they alone of all the books of earth, 
fully harmonize the teachings of the Bible 
and make clear "the mystery" which God declared 
he would make clear in the close of the 
Gospel age. (Rev. 10:7) As evidence that there 
is an intelligent Creator, I am reminded of the 
old proof, sometimes given to Atheists, viz., the 
finding of a watch. The perfect adaptation of 
its wheels to each other and to the hands and 
dial proves that the watch had a designer, just 
as the perfect adaptation of Nature's various 
parts proves that there is an intelligent Creator. 
This same illustration, it seems to me, fits 
the DAWN: the fact that no other view harmonizes 
the entire Bible and rejects none of it, 
and the fact that the DAWN does this, would 
seem to my mind to prove that the DAWN had, 
either directly or indirectly, God's direction 
and providential leading in its preparation. 

I note, Brother Russell, how carefully and 
modestly you disclaim any special revelations, 
any special inspirations, etc., in connection 
with these writings: how, on the contrary, you 
claim that all such revelations, etc., ended with 
the twelve apostles, and that all subsequent 
light comes through their writings; and that the 
fact that the much fuller light now shining 
upon the divine plan is simply because God's 
due time has come for solving "the mystery;" 
that some channel must be used; and that if 
you had not been faithful to the opportunity 
some one else would have been used to hand 
forth the "meat in due season" to the household 
of faith. 

Now, excuse the question, please,— Does the 
Brother I mention know more about the plan 
of God than you do? Or do you know anything 
wrong with the DAWNS, that you could 
correct if writing them to-day? As I said at 
first, I am but a "babe" in Christ and in the 
truth, but I desire the truth— the clearest truth 
to be obtained, and want to spend myself entirely 
in its service. Help me, I pray, to get 
settled again on a sure, firm foundation; for I 
have no desire to deceive myself or others. 

Your brother in love, fellowship and His 
service, . 

IN REPLY. 



[This dear Brother has since gotten quite 
rid of his perplexities, and is again hard at work 



in the harvest-field selling DAWN. We publish 
the above, and our answer, for the sake of 
others; advising all the dear reapers to be cautious 
lest the "babes" be even unintentionally 
choked.-EDITOR.] 

DEAR BROTHER :-I am much pleased 

with your earnest spirit; and I fully agree with 
your sentiment that, in consecrating our time, 
influence and all to the Lord and his truth, it 
is our duty to use every reasonable means to 
know just what is Truth. You did perfectly 
right in stopping your sale of DAWN when in 
doubt about its truthful representation of God's 
great plan. Honesty toward God and toward 
fellow men demanded this of you, as of all in 
this harvest work, or in any work in which the 
laborer becomes ostensibly God's instrument. 
For this reason we seek to have, among the 
DAWN and TOWER colporteurs, only such as 
are in the work for the Truth's sake only. 

But, dear Brother, God would have you learn 
that, while the sympathy and companionship 
of fellow-servants are pleasant and desirable, it 
is needful for each of his servants to have on a 
personal armor that he may be able always to 
give an answer concerning his own hope (regardless 
of the hopes and doubts of others) with 
meekness. (1 Pet. 3:15.) Being only a "babe" 
in the truth and in the Lord, it is not surprising 
that you lacked the full vigor and full 
armor of a "man in Christ," well instructed 
unto every good work, and fully able to rightly 
divide the Word of truth. Indeed, this may 
yet be quite a lesson for you to learn,— that 

R1536 :page 168 

you do not know much; that you are not yet a 
graduate, but merely a pupil in the school of 
Christ. Even the Apostle confessed that now 
we see as through an obscured glass,— now we 
know only in part. (1 Cor. 13:12.) And the 
more we all grow in the grace of the Lord, 
the humbler and more teachable we surely will 
become. It will be less and less a question of 
what channel the Lord may use, so long as we 
are sure that what we receive is his message 
from his Word. 

But you are quite right in looking for more 
refreshment through the former channel of 
blessings;— until you are convinced either 
that the entire matter was a delusion and a deception, 
blessings and all, or else that the 
channel has become corrupted at a certain 
point, beyond which it is unfit for refreshment. 
And in the latter case it would be your duty to 



point out the corrupting error of life or doctrine 
—to the teacher, first; and then, if still seen to 
be error, you should boldly but lovingly declare, 
with your proofs, what you find to all whom 
you may esteem to be in danger. But if great 
humility is essential to acceptance with the 
Lord as teacher, remember that it will require 
the same spirit of meekness and humility to be 
properly and acceptably a teacher of teachers. 
Such a course is indicated in our Lord's Word, 
and is sure to bring good results to all the 
meek sheep concerned. 

Now, dear Brother, begin again; and, taking 
your BIBLE and the DAWNS, study the Plan 
of the Ages in the light of God's Word, and 
become rooted and grounded and built up in 
the present truth. (Col. 2:7.) When thus convinced 
of God's Word, the doubts and fears 
of others, on subjects thus proved and fully 
tested for yourself by the only standard, will 
not affect your faith, but strengthen you. But 
let not your strength rest in yourself,— in your 
own wisdom and knowledge which would merely 
puff you up and speedily make you unfit for 
present usefulness, as well as unworthy of the 
future Kingdom glories, promised to the faithful 
meek. Neither must you lean upon the DAWN 
and the TOWER as infallible teachers. If it was 
proper for the early Christians to prove what 
they received from the apostles, who were and 
who claimed to be inspired, how much more 
important it is that you fully satisfy yourself 
that these teachings keep closely within their 
outline instructions and those of our Lord;— 
since their author claims no inspiration, but 
merely the guidance of the Lord, as one used 
of him in feeding his flock. 

I trust, dear Brother, that, as you examine 
these publications, that may seem to you to be 
true of the author which the Apostle Paul said 
of himself: "We preach not ourselves, but 
Christ,— the power of God and the wisdom of 
God. Whether successful or not, others must 
judge, and especially the Lord; but I ever seek 
to hold forth the Word of Life. (Phil. 2: 16.) 
True, it has been held forth in my hands 
(powers), but never as my Word. Hence in 
no sense have I, as a pope, taken the place of 
Christ before his Church. 

Indeed, time and again I have seen that the 
teachings of those who make utterances of their 
own, but in the name of Christ, by claimed inspiration, 
or special revelations, or boasted 
wisdom (which is the real spirit of popery), and 
without proof from the Scripture, are received 
by many. And I am confident that the DAWN 



and TOWER would have many more friends 
and believers if they followed this (popery's) 
course;— for as some one has said, "People 
prefer to be humbugged." But such a course 
I dare not follow; I must be true to the Lord 
and declare his Word, and let him take charge 
of the consequences. 

The world will be deceived, and merely so-called 
Christians also; because error will come 
in the way that will appeal to their expectations 
—boastfully: but God is now seeking a 
special "little flock" which always hearkens 
to the voice of the Chief Shepherd, and flees 
from all undershepherds who do not echo his 
words and have his spirit of meekness and 
simplicity. -Phil. 3:16-18. 

And now about brother-colporteurs: I know 
from your previous letters that you owe very 
much to some of them for kindly Christian assistance 
in the truth and in colporteur methods. I 
feel sure that to some extent you have misapprehended 
their no doubt well-meant remarks; but 
I regret that any of them should be so unwise 
in their utterances, even though their hearts 
were entirely right in the matter. I have too 
much confidence in them all to suppose that any 
would remain in this harvest work if he had 
lost confidence in the tools with which the 
work is being prosecuted;— the DAWN and 
TOWER through which they learned of "the 
harvest" and found an entrance into it. When 
you become better acquainted with them, you 
will, I believe, fully concur with me that they 
are a very noble, self-sacrificing and humble 
band of the Lord's disciples; and will love 
them every one, as I do. 

The only explanation I can offer of the language 
you quote is that possibly he thought 
you were in danger of loving the servant who 
showed you the truth more than the Lord who 
gave it to you through the servant. And let 
us hope it was zeal for the Lord that led him 
to the other extreme. 

R1536 : page 169 

The remark, that "all of the Bible is not 
true," may merely have meant that some very 
ancient manuscripts of the Bible, found within 
the last fifty years, show that a few verses here 
and there in our common English Bible are 
really no part of the Bible proper, as it came 
from the apostles, but were added by unknown 
parties somewhere between the fifth and 
tenth centuries. (Of these are Mark 16:9-20; 
John 21:25; Matt. 23:14; and parts of 1 John 5:7,8 



and of Rev. 20:5; besides a few of very 

R1537 :page 169 

minor importance, affecting the sense little or 
nothing.) Or he may have been drifting, as 
so many are in these days, into a general 
doubt of the Bible, and of all except their own 
so-called "higher criticism:" If so, we trust 
that the article on "The Twelve Apostles," 
may prove helpful. It was intended to meet 
just such doubts and questionings and has 
already been blessed to many of the "sheep." 
Or he may have meant that the translators 
might at times have used to advantage other 
words than those they did use. But, whichever 
was his thought, his expression was unwise; 
because his meaning was not made clear to you, 
and led you into doubts and fears and questionings, 
instead of establishing you in the Faith. 

The same would be my construction of the 
unwise expression you mention relative to DAWN 
and TOWER. Probably the meaning was that a 
few typographical errors had come to his attention; 
or that, if he were to set himself about it, 
he could clothe the thoughts in other language 
which he would think preferable. But as for 
his holding variant views on any doctrine of 
importance taught in the DAWN and TOWER, I 
think that very improbable; and hence that 
his wiser way would have been to have ignored 
motes and trifles unworthy to be mentioned 
with the blessed truths now shining upon and 
refreshing us all. (And I may here answer one 
of your questions by saying that, if I knew of 
errors in the DAWN, I assuredly would contradict 
and correct them.) 

Besides, let us remember that the colporteurs 
also are fallible, and often subjects of special 
temptations,— as are all public representatives 
of the truth. (Matt. 18:1; Luke 22:24; Num. 16:3-9.) 
If you engage again as a colporteur, 
dear Brother, you may have more temptation 
on this line than thus far, and will be able to 
sympathize more heartily with others and to 
help them. 

While, as you have possibly noticed, the 
DAWN gives only so much prominence to the 
name of the author as seemed necessary,— omitting 
it entirely from the usual places on the 
cover and title page— and while we have never 
offered objections to the many who have 
quoted at length from our writings without 
mentioning them (but on the contrary have rejoiced 
to have the truth proclaimed from any 
motive— Phil. 1:15-18), yet our observation, 



covering several years, is that those who love 
the truth, but are ashamed of the channel 
through which God sends it, never prosper in 
it, but finally lose it as well as its spirit. 
"He that humbleth himself shall be exalted, 
and he that exalteth himself shall be abased," 
is God's rule; and God's blessing will come 
to us along that line or not at all. 

Should the temptation ever come to you, to 
seek to show your wisdom by magnifying a 
minor difference between yourself and another 
of the Lord's servants, reject the thought as a 
temptation from the devil, and do the very reverse; 
—minimize differences, and endeavor to 
mind the same things and to be of one mind 
and one spirit with all who love the Lord.— 
ICor. 1:10. 

Let ambition of the flesh die in you, dear 
Brother, and take instead that "fervency of 
spirit, serving the Lord," which the Apostle 
enjoins;— an ambition to be and to do, simply 
and solely, to please and to serve our great 
Redeemer, and through him the Father. To 
do this, "Keep yourself in the love of God," 
and "let it dwell in you richly and abound." 

Your servant in the Lord and his truth, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1537 :page 169 

THE REMEDY CO-EXTENSIVE WITH THE CURSE. 

-ROM. 5:12-21.- 



IN READING this scripture, some who are unable 
to follow the Apostle's argument have become 
somewhat confused and therefore request 
assistance. 

The difficulty with such probably arises from 
the fact that they have failed to notice that 
verses 13-17 are parenthetic, and that the main 
line of the Apostle's argument passes from 
verse 12 to verse 18, irrespective of the parenthesis, 
which is merely incidental, being introduced to 
offset a misapprehension on the part of the Jews 
to the effect that their law covenant conflicted 
with the new covenant in Christ, of which 
Paul was a minister. It was difficult for the 

R1537 :page 170 

Jews to accept the fact that under the new 



covenant there was no difference made between 
Jew and Gentile, but that "the same 
Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon 
him. "--Rom. 10:12. 

In verses 12,18-21, the Apostle is showing 
that by one man sin entered into the world, 
and death as the penalty for sin; and that this 
sentence of death passed upon all men because 
all had sinned— not all individually, but as 
represented in Adam, in whose loins we all 
were. "Therefore," he adds, verse 18, "as by 
the offence of one [Adam] sentence came upon 
all men to condemnation; even so [by the same 
law of heredity] by the righteousness of one 
[of the one who gave his life a ransom] the 
free gift came upon all men unto justification 
of life; for as by one man's disobedience 
many were made sinners, so by the obedience 
of one shall many [all of the race who will 
accept it] be made righteous." In other 
words, Adam, the head or progenitor of the 
entire human race, could only bequeath to his 
posterity the remainder of the ever declining 
inheritance which he himself possessed— 
viz., a spark of life under condemnation to 
death; but our Lord Jesus, by the payment 
of the penalty upon Adam, thereby gained the 
legal right to restore him to life, and in so doing 
gained the right also to restore all his posterity. 
And when the "appointed time" for thus 
restoring life to all the race has come, he, instead 
of Adam, will be the father, life-giver, or 
head of the new race, as it is written, "He shall 
be called the everlasting Father." (Isa. 9:6.) 
And the birthright of the race under this head, 
Christ, unlike that under the first head, Adam, 
will be life instead of death. And that birthright 
can never be taken away unless forfeited 
by individual wilful transgression against the 
known righteous law of God with full ability 
to keep it. 

Thus we see that the gist of the Apostle's 
argument is to prove that by the law of legal 
heredity the race which, by the working of this 
law, inherited death from its first head, Adam, 
will, by the same law inherit life from its second 
head or re-generator, Christ, and that the 
remedy is co-extensive with the curse. This 
being the substance of his argument, it is, of 
course, presumable that his parenthetic remarks 
are not in opposition to, but in harmony with 
it. Thus we read- 
Verse 13— "For until [previous to] the law 
[of Moses and the law covenant with Israel] 
sin was in the world; but sin is not imputed 
when there is no law." Consequently there 



must have been a law, and a covenant based 
upon that law, previous to the law of Moses. 
What law was that? It was the law of God 
originally inscribed, not upon tables of stone, 
but upon the heart of the first perfect man, and 
which was gradually more or less effaced in his 
posterity, because they did not like to retain 
a knowledge of it. (Rom. 1:28.) That law, 
whether ignored or recognized, has always been 
in the world, and sin against that law has 
always been imputed to men. 

Verse 14. "Nevertheless [although the Mosaic 
law had not yet come, to revive in the 
Jews the knowledge of God], death reigned 
from Adam to Moses [just the same], even 
over them that had not sinned after the similitude 
of Adam's transgression [i.e., wilfully; 
for it reigned over infants as well as over those 
capable of personal sin], who is the figure 
[type] of him that was to come [of Christ, the 
second head of the race]." Thus it is manifest 
that all mankind were born under the original 
law, the authority of which was never disannulled, 
and under which all were condemned 
representatively in Adam, the first head of the 
race, but who, thank God, in this office of 
headship was a type of a second head, through 
which our deliverance should come. 

Verse 15. "But not as the offence, so also 
is the free gift. [The results of the offence and 
the free gift are entirely different.] For if 
through the offence of one [Adam, the] many 
be dead [under the condemnation to death], 
much more the grace [favor] of God, and the 
gift [of life] by grace [by the divine favor], 
hath abounded unto many." From the one 
head we inherit death: from the other, the re-generator, 
we shall inherit life. 

Verse 16. "And not as it was by one that 
sinned, so is the gift: for the sentence was by 
one [offence] to condemnation, but the free 

R1537 :page 171 

gift is [the forgiveness] of many offences unto 
justification." Note the contrast of the one and 
the many here, the object of which is to increase 
our estimation of the value of the free gift. 

Verse 17. "For if by one man's offence death 
reigned by [that] one [Adam], much more 
they which receive abundance of grace [of divine 
favor] and of the gift of [imputed] righteousness 
[the righteousness of Christ imputed 
to us by faith] shall reign in life by one, Jesus 
Christ [who has not only purchased us and 
covered us with the robe of his own imputed 



righteousness, but who will also completely eliminate 
sin from our nature so that men shall have 
an actual righteousness of their own, entitling 
them to reign in life as kings of the earthly 
dominion which God at first gave to Adam]." 

Thus by these parenthetic remarks, which are 
seen to be in perfect harmony with the main 
argument, the Jews were shown that their law 
covenant did not in the least interfere with the 
original sentence to death of the entire race (all 
in Adam), nor with the consequent gracious 
provision of life for all mankind, through Christ, 
and not for the Jews alone. 

Verse 20. After clearly announcing that the 
remedy for sin was co-extensive with the penalty 
(verses 18,19), the apostle— reading the 
inquiry in the Jewish mind as to the object of 
the Mosaic law, if it were not intended to give 
life— further adds, "Moreover the law [the 
Mosaic law] entered that the offence might 
abound. [It brought with it a clearer knowledge 
of the will of God, and therefore an increased 
sense of sin, and an increased responsibility 
which made transgressions even more blameworthy. 
But what of it? Did God mean 
only to afflict Israel more heavily than the rest 
of the world? By no means.] But where sin 
abounded [where the clearer knowledge of the 
law of God was given, which enabled them also 
the more fully to see their short-comings and 
brought upon them the greater responsibility], 
grace did much more abound [Israel had many 
special favors, as well as chastisements, from 
God]: that as sin hath reigned unto death 
[both in Israel and in the world], even so [both 
in Israel and in the world] might grace reign 
through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 



FACE TO FACE WITH TROUBLE. 

You are face to face with trouble, 

And the skies are murk and gray; 
You hardly know which way to turn, 

You are almost dazed, you say. 
And at night you wake to wonder 

What the next day's news will bring; 
Your pillow is brushed by phantom care 

With a grim and ghastly wing. 

You are face to face with trouble; 

A child has gone astray; 
A ship is wrecked on the bitter sea; 

There's a note you cannot pay; 



Your brave right hand is feeble; 

Your sight is growing blind; 
Perhaps a friend is cold and stern, 

Who was ever warm and kind. 

You are face to face with trouble; 

No wonder you cannot sleep; 
But stay, and think of the promise, 

The Lord will safely keep, 
And lead you out of the thicket, 

And into the pasture land. 
You have only to walk straight onward, 

Holding the dear Lord's hand. 

You are face to face with trouble; 

And did you forget to look, 
As the good old father taught you, 

For help to the dear old Book? 
You have heard the tempter whisper, 

And you've had no heart to pray, 
And God has dropped from your scheme of life, 

Oh ! for many a weary day ! 

Then face to face with trouble: 

It is thus He calls you back 
From the land of dearth and famine 

To the land that has no lack. 
You would not hear in the sunshine; 

You hear in the midnight gloom. 
Behold, His tapers kindle 

Like stars in the quiet room. 

Oh! face to face with trouble, 

Friend, I have often stood; 
To learn that pain has sweetness, 

To know that God is good. 
Arise and meet the daylight; 

Be strong and do your best! 
With an honest heart, and a childlike faith 

That God will do the rest. —Selected. 



page 172 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF 

OUR READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1537 : page 172 
MESSIAH'S KINGDOM. 



II. QUAR., LESSON XII., JUNE 18, MAL. 3:1-12. 

Golden Text— "They shall be mine, saith the Lord 
of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels"— 
Mai. 3:17. 

This prophecy is addressed to Israel. It 
is a reproof for their wayward and evil 
course and a warning of the just retribution 
that must surely follow, if they do not 
repent and turn to God. Malachi was the 
last of the Hebrew prophets: his name signifies, 
The Messenger of Jehovah. He was 
the last messenger to Israel previous to John 
the baptist the immediate forerunner of 
Christ, the great Messenger of Jehovah's 
covenant (verse 1); and well would it have 
been for Israel had they heeded the warning 
and prepared their hearts to receive the 
Lord's Anointed. But this they, with the 
exception of a small remnant, failed to do. 
The promised messenger, John the baptist, 
came to prepare the way of the Lord, 
preaching repentance and remission of sins, 
and announcing the advent of the great 
"Messenger of the Covenant" made with 
Abraham, that in his seed should all the 
families of the earth be blessed.— Gen. 22:18. 

But when the Lord suddenly came to his 
temple (the Jewish temple), they were unprepared 
to receive him. They were unprepared 
to recognize the king in his beauty, 
or to stand the tests of character there applied 
to prove their worthiness of the blessings 
promised in the Abrahamic covenant. 
But a few, a small remnant, were found 
ready. In meekness and humility they inclined 
their hearts to the testimony of the 
prophets, of John the baptist, of the teachings 
and work of Jesus of Nazareth, and of 
the voice from heaven which declared, "This 
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased." Such became inheritors of the 
Abrahamic covenant; but the nation as a 
whole, to whom, as the seed of Abraham, 
pertained the promises, lost the blessing, 
and received instead the fiery baptism of 
trouble (Mai. 4:1), which in A.D. 70 utterly 
destroyed their national existence, overthrew 



their holy city, destroyed their temple, and 
scattered them as fugitives among the nations, 
where they have been hated and persecuted, 
even to this day. 

While it is clear that the prophecy thus 
addressed to Israel applied to them primarily, 
it is also manifest, as shown by the 
Lord and the apostles, that it had a much 
wider application; and that in a yet fuller 
sense it was addressed to spiritual Israel, 

R1538 :page 172 

of which fleshly Israel was a type; and that 
it applies to the second advent of the great 
"Messenger of the covenant," whose work 
will fully accomplish all these predictions. 

In the largest and fullest sense, therefore, 
we recognize this prophecy by Malachi 
as addressed to "both the houses of Israel;" 
—to all Israel after the flesh, toward the 
close of the Jewish dispensation, and subsequently 
to all of nominal spiritual Israel, toward 
the close of the Gospel dispensation. 
To the latter, as well as to the former, therefore, 
belong all the expostulations and warnings 
of this prophecy; and well would it be 
for them if they would heed the warnings. 
But, like their prototype, they will not do 
so. Only a remnant of nominal spiritual 
Israel heed the Word of the Lord, and to 
them, therefore, belong the blessings of his 
special favor.-Mal. 3:16,17; 4:2,3. 

CHAPTER 3:1. The messenger who was 
to prepare the way of the Lord at his second 
advent, the antitype of Elias and of 
John the baptist, was the Church militant, 
the Church on earth, whose mission has been 
to preach among all nations the gospel of the 
kingdom and the second coming of Christ, 
the King, in power and great glory. But this 
testimony of the Church, like that of John 
the baptist, has failed to bring peace and 
good will among men, and consequently the 
predicted curse (chap. 4:5,6)— the great 
"time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation" (Dan. 12:1)— is about to follow. 

This true Church in the flesh, in the spirit 
and power of Elias, has been the forerunner 
of Christ at his second advent. And 
even now we have the privilege of realizing 
that this glorious Messenger of the covenant, 
in whom we delight, has come to his temple 
—the elect Church. By the sure word of 
prophecy we recognize his presence. See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chaps, v., vi. 



R1538 :page 173 

VERSES 2-5. "But who may abide the 
day of his coming?" etc. His coming is to 
judgment; for he is now the Judge of all 
the earth; all judgment is committed unto 
him. Blessed, indeed, are all those whose 
hearts are fully consecrated to God and 
faithful, and who are therefore approved of 
him. Yet even these shall be tried as gold 
in the fire until all their dross is eliminated 
and the refiner can see reflected in them 
his own glorious image. Then, indeed, are 
the sacrifices of such "pleasant unto the 
Lord." 

VERSE 5 declares, "I will come near to you 
[to the great systems which compose nominal 
spiritual Israel— all Christendom, so-called] 
to judgment. [And who cannot see 
in the doctrinal conflicts and in the severe 
handling and criticism of the creeds of Christendom 
to-day that the judgment has already 
begun?] And I will be a swift witness 
against the sorcerers [against those who 
obey and teach doctrines of devils in the 
name of Christianity, and thereby plunge 
men deeper and deeper into sin and degradation]; 
and against the adulterers [those who, 
while claiming to be the virgin of Christ, 
are living in unholy alliance with the world, 
whether it be as individuals or as religious 
systems professedly Christians, yet joined to 
and dependent upon the civil powers]; and 
against false swearers [those who have made 
a covenant with the Lord of entire consecration 
to him, and yet have been unfaithful]; 
and against those that oppose the hireling 
in his wages," etc. The judgment will 
indeed be a close one; for every work is to 
be brought into judgment, with every secret 
thing. (Eccl. 12:14.) And it is even now 
begun: this is the significance of the present 
overturning and re-examination of every 
hoary dogma— civil and religious, and no 
power on earth can end the investigation 
until it has probed and exposed in all their 
details every evil thing. 

VERSE 6. Were it not for the enduring 
mercy of the Lord the workers of iniquity 
would surely be consumed. 

VERSE 7. Prompt repentance even at this 
critical juncture would save the "Christian 
world" (?), "Christendom," from the great 
impending scourge. But they do not realize 
their condition, and are not willing to 



admit that they have robbed God of that 
which is rightly his. They have robbed him 
of his honor by affirming the doctrine of eternal 
torment, thus ascribing to God a character 
blacker even than Satan's. And, while 
they claim to be the Lord's children and his 
representatives in the world, their vows are 
not paid unto the Lord. Their words are 
stout against him, and they count it a vain 
thing to serve him in truth and sincerity. 
But the few (among the masses of the 
unfaithful), who do reverence the Lord and 
walk in his ways, are his jewels, and shall 
be spared in the evil day that is coming upon 
the whole world. And not only will 
they be spared, but they will be the Lord's 
peculiar treasure— "They shall be mine, 
saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I 
make up my jewels." (Verse 17.) To this 
faithful class, now gathered out of the 
great masses of nominal spiritual Israel, as 
well as to a similar class gathered out of 
nominal fleshly Israel in the harvest of the 
Jewish age, belong the precious promises 
of this prophecy. The elect remnant of 
fleshly Israel, including the apostles and all 
the faithful of the early Church, and the 
elect remnant of nominal spiritual Israel, 
the consecrated and faithful, will together 
constitute the body of Christ, and, with their 
Head, will soon be kings and priests unto 
God— the seed of Abraham in whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed during 
the Millennial reign. "If ye be Christ's, 
then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according 
to the promise."— Gal. 3:29; 
Gen. 12:1-4. 

R1538 : page 173 

REVIEW. 



LESSON XIII. , JUNE 25. 

Golden Text— "In all thy ways acknowledge him, 
and he shall direct thy paths."— Prov. 3:6. 

The preceding verse should be a part of 
this golden text, as it forms part of the 
condition of the promised blessing. It reads, 
"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and 
lean not to thine own understanding." 

This is the blessed privilege of all the 
sons of God; and years of experience of many 



precious saints testify that the Lord is always 
faithful to those who put their trust 
in him, look for his leading and gratefully 
acknowledge his faithfulness. Let those 
who would prove his faithfulness trust him 
more and more, and cease to lean to their 
own understanding, and they will be brought 
to an increasing realization of their heavenly 
Father's love and care and providence, 
and into yet closer bonds of sympathy and 
fellowship with him. 



page 174 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 

I want to thank you for the opening article, 

"From Glory to Glory," in March 1st 

TOWER. I cannot see in myself such advancement 

in Christ-likeness as it seems 

there ought to be in one to whom he has 

entrusted a knowledge of the truth. I have, 

perhaps, thought too much of that knowledge, 

and been too satisfied with the wish 

to give it to others, and not had care enough 

in regard to gaining a personal likeness to 

Christ. But, God helping me, I will more 

earnestly strive in that direction. Pray for 

me, dear brother and sister, that I may 

more than ever fully submit myself to the 

moulding of God, and that "mallet and 

chisel and polishing sand" may be used upon 

me until every particle of the deformity 

of self has disappeared, and the image of 

our glorious King is perfectly reflected. 

Oh! nothing can be too much to suffer if 

that may be accomplished in me. 

I remain, your sister, desiring and striving 
to overcome and to be "like Him," 
MRS. M.R. PECK. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I enclose clippings 
from the Times that I think will interest 
you. If the Times is right, in stating 
that so large an additional number of Jews 
is to be driven out of Russia, it looks as if 
they would be compelled to go to Palestine 
in large numbers, as no other country will 
want to receive them while the cholera is 



threatening. 

I was much pleased with the last TOWER'S 
article on the twelve apostles. 

Yours, J. C. BELL, JR. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I pen you 

these lines in grateful remembrance that I 
was brought out into the light of God's 
Word, as it continues to shine unto the perfect 
day. I have given much time to the 
investigation of the DAWNS, comparing them 
with the Bible, and I find a beautiful harmony, 
leading me to consecrate all my ransomed 
powers to his blessed will. I have 
been running for the prize for a number of 
years, feeling my way as the Lord gave me 
light. I have been giving truth to the hungry 
ones with whom I have associated, but 
had to stay out of the church to which I 
once belonged. In all sects I met the same 
opposition, and finally saw clearly that I must 
come out of all organized bodies. I find 
one here and one there that welcomes the 
truth, and have had to go through trials and 
to suffer the loss of my friends; but I am 
praising the Lord. Jesus was never more 
precious than now; and I rejoice to be able, 
through God's blessing, to send you my 
subscription for the TOWER for '93. Hope 
to do more as the Lord prospers me. 
Your brother in Christian love and 
fellowship, S. A. STAPLES. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL: 

As you are interested to know how each 
one of the harvesters is using the sickle 
placed in his hand, I will report. I took 
orders for 90 volumes of DAWN in M 



a village of about six hundred inhabitants. 

I have taken orders in this village for 80 
volumes; and expect to canvass another village 
this week, and to deliver in both places 
next week. On account of nervous and 
other troubles, I am obliged to go slowly; 
and as I have been finding some "ripe 
wheat," who earnestly request me to converse 
with them, I occasionally embrace the 
opportunity to rest. 

Oh, how thankful I am that I did finally decide 
to enter the colporteur work; for I now 
feel that I cannot afford to give it up. As 
I told some interested ones to-day, if I were 



offered work that would pay three times as 
well, in dollars and cents, I would not be 
content to drop the Lord's work. 

Pray for me, that I may be able to overcome 
every obstacle and, if need be, to bear 
up patiently under affliction; that I, with 
you and all the Lord's dear ones, may stand 
the sifting; and, having done all, to stand. 

Your brother in the Lord, 

J. A. EDMONDS. 



R1538 :page 174 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER IN CHRIST: 

I have so enjoyed the good things in the 
last April number of TOWER, also the first 
number of this month, that I must write. 

"The Calling of the Twelve Apostles, their 
Office and Authority," have always been 
to me of more than ordinary importance. 
It is a subject I love to study, and you have 
presented it just as I have wished for it 
many time. I never had a desire to know 
just how the Savior broiled the fish upon 
the coals, or how much bread he had, or 
how long it took to eat that divinely prepared 

R1538 :page 175 

meal; but I have always wished to 

know, as nearly as possible, the work he gave 

the apostles to do, and how they did it. 

May "Daniel's God" reveal to you both 
things yet to come, and cause you to be 
abundant reapers in the "harvest time." 

Your sister in Christ, 

MARY L. JOHNSON. 



page 175 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose the 
name of one new subscriber to TOWER. 
I am now selling about 25 DAWNS daily. 

In haste and love, J. B. ADAMSON. 



DEAR BRETHREN: --Please find enclosed 
a money order for three dollars to cover the 
accompanying order. 

The DAWNS, TOWERS and TRACTS came 
duly to hand. Yesterday I feasted on the 
good tidings contained in the TOWER— on 
the letters from Brothers and Sisters scattered 



abroad, and especially on the articles 
"Have not I Chosen You Twelve" and 
"The Oneness of the Divine Family." 
How beautiful, simple and touching is the 
pure gospel— the gospel of love. The prayer 
of my heart is, "May we all with open 
face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the 
Lord, be changed into the same image from 
glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the 
Lord." Yours in Him, W. C. BROWN. 



DEAR FRIENDSr-Although we are having 
rainy weather, the Lord is enabling me 
to take some orders for DAWN. 

Yesterday, at a small village near by, I 
sold twelve sets and four single volumes, in 
paper covers, and to-day I found two that 
want the cloth sets. 

I hesitated long, before starting into the 
work, because I had no confidence in myself; 
but now I am glad to realize that the 
Lord is using me; and it affords me inexpressible 
fulness of joy to be accounted worthy 
of his service as well as of all the precious 
promises of the high calling. Oh! that I 
might overcome! I can, and I will— 
"through favor of our God." 

In our dear Redeemer, 

ISAAC A. LEHMAN. 



R1538 :page 175 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write to 
say that, through sickness and other causes, 
I have not been able for a long time to send 
any "Good Hopes" to the office; but I hope 
very soon to be able to contribute a mite 
for the spread of God's blessed truths. 

The first number of this month's TOWER 
came to me on Thursday evening; and if 
ever a thirsty pilgrim through the desert 
was refreshed with pure spring water, so 
was I comforted and refreshed with its 
strengthening truths on the subject of inspiration. 
It came to me just at the right 
time, making my heart glad, and my spirit 
rejoice, and my lips praise him who gave 
himself a ransom for all. 

The God of our fathers bless you and your 
dear companion, and all those associated 
with you in your work of faith and labor of 
love, with all them that love his appearing 



and kingdom, is my daily prayer. 
Pray for me. HAYDEN SAMSON. 



MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-It is with profound 
gratitude that I thus address you the 
joyful intelligence that I have withdrawn 
from the nominal church, and am now free. 
I praise the Lord for insight into his glorious 
plan of the ages, and I shall, by his grace, 
go on to be one of the overcoming class, 
which will be qualified to be partakers of 
the divine nature and made joint-heirs with 
our dear Lord and Savior. 

I would like you to send me some tracts, 
for, since my withdrawal, three sermons 
have been preached on the second coming 
of Christ; and the people seem to be stirred 
up by them, and also by my statement that 
Christ has made his second advent and they 
must not expect to see him with their natural 
eyes. 

R1539 : page 175 

Remember your far-away brother at the 
throne of grace. M. STRICKLER. 

[We rejoice with you in present freedom. 
Praise God, from whom all blessings flow! 

Have sent some tracts; but next time 
please suggest how many you think you can 
use judiciously. We do not wish to send 
too few— nor yet to waste the tracts by 
sending too many. 

While the knowledge of our Lord's presence 
is very precious to "them that believe," 
it is rather "strong meat" for "babes in 
Christ." Let me suggest that to whatever 
extent we may have opportunities for speaking 
his truth, in our Master's name, we will 
do well to remember his words— "Be ye 
wise as serpents and harmless as doves." 
"Milk is for babes," says the apostle; therefore 
give to such the sincere milk of the word, 
that they may grow thereby." (1 Pet. 2:2.) 
Begin with "a ransom for ALL;" proceed 
gradually "to be testified in due time;" 

R1539 :page 176 

then show the blessed object of Christ's 
second coming and Kingdom; next the manner; 
and, finally, to the few who have interestedly 
and intelligently followed you 
thus far, point out the fact of the Lord's 



presence, as foretold by the prophets, and as 
confirmed by the wonderful events of "the 
harvest" and "the day of the Lord," now 
in progress. The Lord bless and use you in 
his service!— EDITOR.] 



BRO. RUSSELL:-I wish to thank you, as 
the means in God's hands, for delivering 
me out of long ignorance and bondage. If 
it will not tire you, I would like to give you 
a little of my experience. 

In the first place, Food for Thinking 
Christians [now out of print] came into 
my hands, in answer to prayer for light. 
Then you sent me the TOWER, which I accepted 
as food for the hungry. I saw some 
light at that time, but it was all so new; 
and, though I came out of the Presbyterian 
church and was immersed, I soon succumbed 
to the opposition of my friends. They called 
me a fool, and said that if I did not let religion 
alone I would soon be in the insane 
asylum. I replied that true religion never 
made people crazy, though the lack of it 
often did. However, my health was poor, 
and I became tired of so much opposition. 
I stopped talking and thinking about the 
truth, and discontinued the TOWER. I 
thought that in this way I would have peace; 
but I was not happy. When I went to 
church, I was not satisfied; for there I received 
nothing to feed a hungry soul. Often something 
would say to me, 'Take the TOWER 
again;' but I would silence it by saying, I 
do not want to renew opposition.' 

I wonder now that the Lord did not let 
me go; but he did not; for, though I was 
drifting, not rowing as I ought, my faith 
stood fast. At last I awoke to a sense of my 
condition; but Satan stepped in, and suggested 
that I join the Baptist church, as that 
was nearly right, and that, if I went regularly 
to its meetings, I would be kept from again 
going to sleep. But I soon saw my mistake, 
renewed my subscription to the TOWER, 
and purchased the DAWNS. I felt uneasy 
and guilty, remaining in the church; could 
compare myself only to the children of Israel, 
when they said, "Give us the flesh pots of 
Egypt again;" but, thank God, I withdrew 
from it some time since, and am now free. 
I am free with the liberty wherewith Christ 
has made me free, and with his help, I will 
never again be entangled with the yoke of 



bondage. I can truly say that the Lord is 
long suffering and kind: I know he did not 
entirely cast me off; for, had he done so, 
I would not now be progressing in the 
Light. 

Brother Russell, I have obeyed the command 
in 1 John 4:1, and I find that you do 
teach the truth. It is plain and gloriously 
grand. It makes God a God with a purpose, 
not a haphazard being, outwitted by Satan. 

I have placed DAWN in the hands of quite 
a number; and I will copy a portion of a 
letter written to a friend by a young man 
who has read it. 

"Dear Brother:— I guess you think I have 
taken your book and appropriated it to myself. 
I have been reading it, and thanking 
God that you brought it to my notice. It 
is indeed a revelation, and has sent a glow 
of more intelligent faith into my life. I 
have purchased one, and so return yours 
with many thanks for your kindness. I shall 
read the book again and study it carefully; 
for I am convinced that it contains germs 
of truth which are almost unknown to the 
larger part of the world. It has wonderfully 
deepened my knowledge of God's great 
plan toward men." 

Now I wish to send him the TOWER for 
one year. I feel I must be like Andrew: I 
do not amount to much, still I may be the 
means, in God's hands, of calling a Peter 
to the Lord's work; so I will still try to 
scatter the truth, hoping to bring some to 
the light. I also enclose $5.00 to use as you 
see fit, knowing that you will use it to the 
best purpose for the Lord. 

With kind greetings to Sister Russell, 
and asking an interest in your prayers, I remain, 
Yours in the faith, 

MRS. C. CUNNINGHAM. 



page 176 



DEAR BRETHREN:--! send greeting to you 
all, and ask you to remember us, here, who 
are trying to proclaim the truth. We are 
persecuted on every hand, though I think 
we are gaining some ground. I am very 
thankful that my eyes have been opened to 
the light. The article, "The Twelve Chosen 
Apostles," in the last issue of TOWER gave 
me great comfort. I am glad to understand 
that they were set apart for a special purpose 



and that we may have full confidence in 
their writings. May the Lord bless you all. 
J. L. WALDRUP. 



page 178 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



In our issue of May 1st we defended the inspiration 
of the apostolic writings and teachings; 
in the S.S. Lesson of this issue we treat a supposed 
objection to Paul's course with Barnabas; 
and in our next we expect to show that 
the Apostle Paul's teachings relative to woman 
and her relationship to man, and to God's plan, 
are in perfect accord with sanctified reason,— 
and give no ground for objection to the Apostle's 
inspiration. 

R1539 :page 178 

THE GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM IN GREAT 



BRITAIN. 

Ever since our return from Europe we have 
had an earnest desire to see the truth scattered 
with liberal hand in Great Britain and Ireland. 
The people there seemed to us particularly 
ready for the truth; because, while freedom 
seemed to prevail, there it had not run into 
infidelity as so often appeared elsewhere. 

But although an agency for DAWN was established 
(in London), and although a number of 
friends there are very zealous in circulating the 
truth, the colporteur-work, the chief agency for 
preaching these Kingdom truths, never seemed 
to prosper. The fault we believe lies in the 
friends' not knowing how to do it; and we have 
arranged with Brother S.D. Rogers (who has 
been extremely successful here, both as a Colporteur 
and as an instructor of Colporteurs) to 
go to England, meet those who earnestly long 
to be in the work, if they can but make expenses, 
and give them practical lessons. 

And thus under the Lord's blessing we trust 
a great work will be started in England, Scotland 
and Ireland. And here we might remark 
that Brother Boehmer, who recently went to 
Germany, writes us that he is getting started 
and has hopes that he will be able to meet his 
expenses there; but that if not he will gladly 
join in the crusade in Great Britain. 

Now, we want to hear at once from all the 
Brethren and Sisters in Great Britain and Ireland, 
who are free from family encumbrances, 
and anxious to spend their lives in preaching 
the Gospel of the Kingdom, by the sale of 
DAWNS;— the way which the Lord seems to 
have specially prepared and to be specially 
blessing, in the present harvest work. We cannot 
promise earthly wealth as the reward of 
earnest toil in this service for the Lord; but 
we can, from experience here, assure the unencumbered 
the "things needful" and joy and 
peace and spiritual blessing in this present 
time; and to all the faithful and persevering, in 
every department of his service, the Lord promises 
"treasure in heaven"— glory, honor and 
immortality. 

After writing to us of your desire to enter the 
work, with particulars respecting your age, size, 
previous occupation, etc., begin to shape your 
affairs and your prayers to the proposed course. 
Brother Rogers may be expected in England 
in September; and those who write may expect 
to be fully notified of arrangements. 

page 178 



COLPORTEURS, TAKE NOTICE! 

Colporteurs need not hereafter send in to us 
all the addresses to which they deliver DAWNS, 
but merely keep note of those found to be specially 
interested, who do not subscribe for the 
TOWER. Send in such with each Semi-monthly 
Report— on separate card or letter sheet. 

The Semi-monthly Reports, for which blank 
have been furnished, are expected from all colporteurs, 
and are requested to be mailed on the 
1st and 16th of each month. These should be 
kept separate from orders for which other 
blanks are provided. 

Routes given to Colporteurs are expected to 
be followed strictly. This is necessary to the 
proper conduct of the work and to prevent confusion, 
as the number of "harvest" laborers 
is increasing. 

The Swedish and Dano-Norwegian translations 
of Millennial Dawn, Vol. I. are in the 
hands of the type-setters. We hope to have 
them ready about September next. 



R1539 :page 179 

VOL. XIV. JUNE 15, 1893. NO. 12. 

BAPTISM AND ITS IMPORT. 



THAT our Lord and his apostles practised 
and enjoined upon all their followers— 
"even to the end of the world" or present 
dispensation— an outward rite called baptism, 
in which water was used in some manner, cannot 
reasonably be questioned. This was not 
only the case during our Lord's ministry in 
the end of the Jewish age, but also under the 
Spirit dispensation after Pentecost, as is abundantly 
proved by the Scriptural record.— Acts 2:41; 
8:12,36,38; 9:18; 10:47,48; 16:15,33; 
18:8; 19:3-5; 22:16. 

Nor is it correct to assume, as some do, that 
baptism belonged among the ceremonies of the 
Jewish Law, and that it, with all other features 
of that Law, ended at the cross (when our 
Lord "made an end of the Law, nailing it to 
his cross"); for baptism was not a part of the 
Jewish Law. The washings enjoined in the 
Law, performed at the laver in the court of the 
tabernacle, were neither immersions nor sprinklings, 



but simply cleansings, and were not 

practised upon the people. The one tribe of 

Levi alone had access to the court of the tabernacle 

and to the laver which stood between the 

gate and the tabernacle.— Exod. 30:18-21. 

Nor will it do to say, with others, that the 
apostles, on coming out of Judaism, erred for a 
while; that they failed at first to discern that the 

R1540 : page 179 

real baptism was that of the holy Spirit at Pentecost, 
and improperly kept up the water baptism 
after the Jewish age, to which it belonged. 
In this, as in the matter of not eating with the 
uncircumcised, they claim Peter erred, and 
others of the apostles with him to some extent. 
They claim, too, that Paul confesses to an error 
when he says (1 Cor. 1:14-16), "I thank 
God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus 
and Gaius...and the household of Stephanas;" 
also when he says (Col. 2:20,21), "Why, 
as though living in the world, are ye subject to 
ordinances— touch not, taste not, handle not." 

Thus an apparently strong argument is built 
up, the fallacy of which many do not discern. 
This is the result of a too superficial examination 
of the subject, and a jumping at conclusions 
from certain texts whose connections have not 
been thoroughly studied nor understood. 

As already shown, baptism was not a feature 
of the Law Covenant; hence it was not at all a 
part of that which our Lord ended and cancelled 
at the cross. It is a great mistake to 
class baptism, which is a symbol of the New 
Covenant, with the "ordinances" of the Jewish 
Law Covenant mentioned by the Apostle. 
(Col. 2:20,23.) In verse 14 he shows that he 
refers to ordinances that were against the Jews, 
i.e., which restricted their liberties. Can any 
one say this of baptism? In what sense is it 
against any one? 

What the Apostle does refer to as the Law 
"ordinances," contrary to or against the Jew, 
were ceremonies and fastings, celebrations of 
the new moons and sabbaths, (verse 16), and 
particularities about the eating of clean and 
unclean animals, the wearing of clothing made 
of linen and wool mixed, etc. These ordinances 
included not only those originally introduced 

R1540 : page 180 

by Moses, but also others subsequently 
added by the Scribes and Pharisees who sat 
"in Moses' seat." (Matt. 23:2.) These forms 



and ceremonies had become so complex and 
bewildering a mass that those who attempted a 
strict observance of them found them extremely 
burdensome— a yoke of bondage. Our Lord 
referred to the same bondage and weariness 
(Matt. 23:4); and, again (Matt. 11:28-30), 
to the same class he held out grace instead of 
the Law, as the only way of life, saying, "Come 
unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden 
[with the Law's unprofitable and multitudinous 
ordinances— which, because of your weak, fallen 
condition cannot profit, but only annoy and 
weary you, and are therefore 'against' you], 
and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon 
you, and learn of me; for I am meek and 
lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your 
souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden 
is light." 

It is furthermore evident that baptism is not 
one of the ordinances referred to in Col. 2: 14, 
when we read to the contrary in verse 12, that 
we who are buried with Christ in baptism are 
therefore (even if Jews formerly under the Law 
Covenant) not liable or subject to the ordinances 
of verse 14. Thus baptism is placed in 
contrast with the ceremonies of the Law. 

The idea that baptism does not belong to 
the Gospel age, but ended at the cross, is again 
proved erroneous by the fact that it was after 
his resurrection, during the forty days before 
his ascension, that our Lord, while giving 
special instruction concerning the new dispensation, 
or Gospel age, specially mentioned baptism 
as the outward symbol by which believers 
were to confess him— "even to the consummation 
of the age" then just begun.— 
Matt. 28:18-20. 

And those who claim that proper baptism is 
that of the holy Spirit only, and that water 
baptism is therefore wrong, should be effectually 
silenced and converted from their error 
by the Master's commission to his Church to 
preach and baptize to the end of the age. For 
how could the disciples baptize any one with 
the holy spirit? Surely that is God's part. 
On the other hand, the Lord's words could not 
have meant that his followers should teach all 
nations, and that those who believe would be 
baptized with the holy spirit by God, for then 
why would he give particular directions to the 
disciples as to how it should be done— "In the 
name [or by the authority] of the Father, and 
of the Son, and of the holy Spirit"—? It is 
evident that our Lord's directions refer to the 
symbol, to water baptism only; because we can 
do no more for others than to teach and symbolically 



to baptize them: we cannot believe 

for them, nor make them believe; neither can 

we consecrate for them, nor make them consecrate. 

But we can teach them, and, when 

they believe for themselves and consecrate for 

themselves, we can baptize them in water. 

And by this act they confess their faith in 

Christ's death and resurrection, and their own 

consecration to be dead to the world and alive 

toward God, that in due time they may share 

in Christ's resurrection. 

Furthermore, God specially recognized water 
baptism under the Spirit dispensation by in 
some cases withholding certain "gifts" (miraculous 
manifestations conferred upon believers 
in the beginning of this age, for the purpose 
of manifesting God's approval of the teachings 
of the gospel) until the water baptism had 
been properly performed (Acts 19:3-6); as in 
another case the gifts were bestowed first, to 
teach Peter that water baptism and every other 
feature of the gospel favor were open to the 
Gentiles. --Acts 10:44-48. 

When the Apostle Paul thanked God that 
of the Corinthian Church he had baptized only 
afew(l Cor. 1:11-17), he was not assuming 
that he had since become wiser than to do 
so again— wiser than the Master who commanded 
his disciples to teach and to baptize 
unto the close of the age— but for totally different 
reasons: reasons which only those who 
read the entire epistle to the Corinthians connectedly 
can recognize. He had heard that the 
church at Corinth was split into factions, divisions 
(literally, sects), some calling themselves 
Paulites, others Apollosites, others Peterites and 
others Christians. He was sure he had in no 
way aided such sectarianism, and was glad he 
could say, I never authorized you to call yourselves 

R1540 :page 181 

by my name. Were you baptized into 
the name of Paul, or into the name of Christ? 
Since the majority were Paulites, and since 
Paul had founded the church at Corinth, it 
might appear to some that he had been seeking 
to make converts to himself— Paulites instead 
of Christians; and, as it resulted thus, he was 
glad to have it to say, that very few of those 
calling themselves Paulites had been baptized 
by him, as he said— "Lest any should say, I 
baptized in mine own name." 

The great Apostle has been ignominiously 
styled "The blear-eyed Jew," and there is 
little room for doubt that, after he was struck 



down in the way to Damascus (Acts 9:4,8), he 
never fully recovered his sight. This "thorn" 
(figurative) he besought the Lord thrice to remove, 
but it was left as a reminder of previous 
error, and hence served to keep Paul humble 
in the service of that Master whom he had 
once persecuted. (2 Cor. 12:7.) It was probably 
because of this difficulty that, when on 
trial, he did not recognize the High-priest, 
whom he would otherwise have known by his 
peculiar garb (Acts 23:5); and for the same 
reason that all of his epistles were written by an 
amanuensis— except one, and that one of the 
shortest of them, closing with a statement which 
indicated that he could write only with difficulty 
and that his readers could appreciate this, 
knowing his disadvantages. He says: "Ye 
see how large [with what large characters- 
indicating that he could not see to write a fine 
hand] a letter I have written unto you with 
mine own hand." (Gal. 6:11.) Again, when 
wishing to mention their love for him, and 
their willingness to do for him the most useful 
service, he says to them (Gal. 4:15), "I bear 
you record that, if possible, ye would have 
plucked out your own eyes, and have given 
them to me." And it was evidently for this 
same reason that Paul never baptized any of 
his converts when he could avoid it— when 
others were present who could see to the service 
better than he. 

Even had Paul's sight been good, the facts 
that he was a more able preacher than others, 
and that many could baptize as well as he, 
would have been sufficient reasons for his 
course; for it was thus with the Master, as we 
read (John 4:1,2), "Jesus made and baptized 
more disciples than John; though Jesus himself 
baptized not, but his disciples." Judging 
from his unfitness for performing baptism, and 
his talent for teaching, Paul concluded that 
preaching, and not baptizing, was his special 
mission (1 Cor. 1:17), though his own record 
shows that, when occasion required and no 
one else was convenient to render the service, 
he did not allow even his own unfitness to hinder 
or prevent this obedience to the Master's 
precept and example. 

WHO ARE TO BE BAPTIZED? 



Our Lord authorized first the teaching of the 
gospel, and then the baptism of such as believed 
in him as the Redeemer, and accepted the gospel 



call to become his followers. The apostles 
followed this rule, and we have no testimony 
anywhere that they baptized others— neither 
unbelievers, nor infants, nor idiots. True, it 
is recorded that several "households" were 
baptized, and from this it is argued that probably 
there were infants in some of those families, 
and that therefore it is probable that 
infants were baptized, though none are mentioned. 
But, we answer, some families contain 
idiots, and some families number one or more 
unbelievers; shall we therefore conclude without 

R1541 :page 181 

other evidence that the apostles disregarded 

our Lord's command, and baptized unbelievers? 

Nay, verily! It is far more reasonable to conclude 

that in the few cases where households 

are mentioned they consisted of only adult believers; 

or that, since the custom or general 

usage would prevent misunderstanding, it was 

proper enough to say "household," even if 

there were in them children too young to be 

"believers," and who therefore would be understood 

as not included among those baptized. 

THE FORM OF BAPTISM. 



The Greek language is remarkable for its 
clear and definite expression of thought, and it 
was therefore well fitted to give expression to 
divine truth. Its flexibility is well illustrated 
in the following words, each expressing a different 

R1541 :page 182 

shade of thought, yet all having a similar 
significance. Thus cheo signifies to pour; raino, 
to sprinkle; louo, to wash or bathe; nipto, to 
wash a part of the person; bathizo (from bathos, 
the bottom), to immerse or plunge deep; rantizo 
(from raino), to sprinkle or shed forth; 
bapto, to dip or dye; baptizo, to dip, immerse 
or cover. 

This last word, baptizo (rendered baptize in 
the common version Bible), is used by our Lord 
and his apostles when referring to an ordinance 
which they practised, as well as enjoined upon 
all followers of the Lamb. From this word, 
selected from among so many others of various 
shades of meaning, it is clear that a sprinkling 
or even a washing of a part of the person was 
not the thought, but an immersion or covering 



of the whole person— whatever it implies. Immersed 

is the correct translation; for baptized, 

as rendered in our common English Bibles, is 

not a translation at all, but a mere transfer of 

the Greek word into the English. Immersed 

is the English word which corresponds in 

meaning to the Greek word baptize 

Not only does the Greek word signify to 
bury, immerse or cover, but the connected 
Scripture narrative of itself, without the particular 
strictness of the Greek word used, would 
imply that the baptism was one of immersion 
and not of sprinkling. The English, as well 
as the Greek, shows that our Lord went down 
into the water and came up out of the water. 
And the Apostle Paul frequently speaks of baptism 
as a burial, which would be a very inappropriate 
figure with any other form than that 
of immersion. 

It has been suggested by some that in the 
case of the jailor who believed and was straightway 
baptized (Acts 16:33) the baptism could 
not have been by immersion, because he and 
the others could not have left the jail for the 
purpose; but, on the contrary, it is now known 
that at that time the jails were provided with 
bathing reservoirs, most suitable for the immersions. 
And, furthermore, it is to be remembered 
that of John the Baptizer it is 
written, "John was baptizing at AEnon near to 
Salim, because there was much water there." 
(John 3:23.) No one can for a moment suppose 
that if John sprinkled his converts, the 
largeness of the water supply would have been 
a consideration. It was probably at a pool in 
the river Jordan. 

It is generally admitted by scholars that immersion 
was the common practice of the early 
Church; but with the beginning of the third 
century came great confusion on this as on 
other subjects. On the one hand some placed all 
the value upon the form, some even insisting 
on three immersions, because our Lord had said 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and 
of the holy Spirit, not seeing that in the name 
of simply signifies in recognition of; others 
claimed that as our Lord's head bowed forward 
in dying on the cross so they should be immersed, 
not as in a burial, but face downward; 
others insisted that the baptized must be nearly 
naked, as our Lord was when he died; and 
still others went to an opposite extreme, and, 
while holding that a form was all important, 
claimed that the exact form was unimportant, 
and for convenience substituted sprinkling. 

This latter finally became the standard mode 



in the church of Rome, from which it reached 
Protestants. Immersion, however, is still the 
recognized form in the oriental churches. As 
we shall show presently, all these errors as to 
form, resulted from losing sight of the real 
significance of baptism. A claim frequently 
made, but not generally appreciated by those 
who make it, is that the Greek word baptizo, 
though it generally is used in referring to some 
thing or process (as the dying of cloth) which 
requires dipping, has been found in classical 
Greek writings used in places where the evident 
thought was that of washing without dipping. 
To this we answer that the word baptizo 
is not limited to a certain form of action, but 
rather carries the broad idea, to cover. And, 
so far as the word goes, the entire person is 
baptized if the entire person is wet, or covered 
with water in any manner.* But if the entire 



*An illustration of this use of the word is found in 
1 Cor. 10:1,2. The Apostle declares that all Israel were 
baptized (immersed) into Moses, and gives as the form, 
that they were covered with water (though not wet); the 
walls of the sea being on either hand and the clouds of 
water over head. 

R1541 :page 183 

person to be baptized should be wet, or covered 
with water, who will claim that dipping 
was not the original as well as the easiest 
method of doing this? 

WHO MAY IMMERSE? 



No limitations are mentioned in the Scriptures 
as to who shall perform this ceremony 
of baptizing believers in water, though only 
the Church was ever commissioned, either to 
teach or to baptize. Although knowledge on 
the part of the one performing the ceremony is 
not required, it is, of course, desirable; but 
both faith and knowledge are necessary on the 
part of the one immersed. Sometimes the one 
performing the ceremony may be far inferior 
in every way to the one for whom it is performed 
(Matt. 3:14); and he might even, if necessary, 
be a believer not of the Kingdom or Church 
class. (Matt. 11:11.) Certainly all who are 
authorized to teach, are equally authorized to 
baptize; and that includes every true follower 



of Christ— "even to the end of the age," according 
to the general call to the ministry, 
commission and ordination of Matt. 28:19,20 
and John 17:14-23. And this commission 
evidently does not exclude from this service 
the females of the "body of Christ" (Gal. 3:28), 
only that modesty, convenience, etc., indicate 
that they should avoid such public services 
except in rare cases of necessity. 

THE SIGNIFICATION OF IMMERSION. 



In considering the signification of immersion, 
the change from the Jewish to the Gospel dispensation 
must be recognized. The Jews, by 
their covenant, the Law, occupied a relationship 
toward God very different from that of the 
Gentiles (who were without God or hope— 
Eph. 2:12); for, by God's arrangement, they 
were recognized and treated, under the provisions 
of the typical sacrifices, as though they 
were justified from Adamic guilt and penalty, 
and were, as a nation, consecrated to God, and 
treated as though they were to be made the 
Bride of Christ. The provision, too, was that 
when the true Lamb of God should come those 
truly consecrated among them, "Israelites indeed," 
might, by accepting the true Lamb and 
true sin-sacrifice and atonement, enter upon 
actual justification, and carry with them their 
former consecration. In other words, an Israelite, 
consecrated indeed, living at the close 
of the Jewish age, when the real sacrifice for 
sins was made by our Lord, would be treated 
as though he had always had the reality, whereas 
really he had up to that time only a typical 
justification. 

Therefore, in the opening of the Gospel age, 
Jews were not preached to in the same manner 
as Gentiles. The latter were told:— Ye who 
were once aliens and strangers have been 
brought nigh, and may now have access to God 
and may enter into covenant relations with him. 
Therefore, come to God by Christ who has 
abolished distinctions between Jews and Gentiles, 
not by taking favors from the Jews, but 
by ushering believers, whether Jews or Gentiles, 
into the blessings and favors of the New 
Covenant, which the Law Covenant merely 
typified. (Eph. 2:13-19.) The Jews were told 
the opposite: "Ye are the children of the 
prophets, and of the covenant which God made 
with our fathers.... Unto you first, God, 
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to 



bless you, in turning away each of you from his 
iniquities." "Repent, and be baptized, each 
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the 
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift 
of the holy Spirit; for the promise is unto you 
[belongs to you], and to your children."— Acts 3:25,26; 
2:38-41. 

The point to be noticed is that Israelites 
were already consecrated, and heirs according 
to the Law Covenant; and the only reason 
they, as a nation, had not been merged at once 
out of the Jewish typical state into the Gospel 
realities, as the apostles and other individuals 
had been, was that they had not been living up 
to their covenant relationship. Hence they 
were told to repent or turn back into the true 
covenant relationship with God, and to enjoy 
their privileges as children of the covenant. 
They had sinned in not living up to what they 
could of their covenant, and they were to show 
that they renounced their previous state of sin 
by immersion— washing away their transgressions 

R1541 :page 184 

in symbol, after praying in the name of 

Christ. (Acts 22:16.) In like manner baptism 

by John, and by Christ's disciples when confined 

to the Israelites, signified repentance for 

covenant violations, and a return to covenant 

relationship, and was intended as a preparatory 

work; for those who fully received John's testimony, 

and reformed, and became Israelites 

indeed, did receive Christ, and did pass into 

the higher favors of the Gospel age.— John 5:45-47; 

Matt. 21:31,32. 

To these, already children of the covenant 
and already heirs of the promised blessings, 
water baptism meant a renouncing of sins of unfaithfulness, 

R1542 : page 184 

and more: it meant their renunciation 

of the national sin of crucifying Christ— 

for the rulers representing that nation had said, 

"His blood be upon us and upon our children." 

Hence Peter exhorted, saying, "Let all the 

house of Israel know that this Jesus whom you 

crucified, God hath made both Lord and Messiah." 

And when, in view of this national 

sin which each shared, they inquired, "Brethren! 

What shall we do?" Peter answered, 

"Reform and be immersed, each one of you, 

in the name of Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness 

of your sins [and specially for your share 

in this national sin of crucifying Messiah], and 



ye shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit." 

(Acts 2:36-39.) To those who accepted, it 

meant not only a renunciation of their national 

error of crucifying Christ, but a stepping out 

from the dispensation and control of Moses into 

that of Christ. Because in acknowledging 

Jesus to be the true Messiah, they were acknowledging 

him to be the long promised 

Savior, Lawgiver and Teacher greater than 

Moses and typified by him. 

But baptism could not mean repentance in 
either of these senses to the Gentiles who had 
never been under the Jewish Covenant, and 
who had no direct responsibility for the death 
of Christ. Hence (after the "elect remnant" 
of Israel had been received, and the Gospel 
message went to the Gentiles, to select out of 
them the number necessary to complete the 
body of Christ) in the epistles to the Gentile 
churches we hear no further exhortation to be 
baptized as a sign of repentance, or as a symbol 
of washing away of sins. And since we by 
nature are not Jews, but are of the Gentiles 
whose fathers were aliens and foreigners so far 
as God's covenants and promises were concerned, 
therefore, we should not apply to ourselves 
that idea of baptism which was applicable 
only to the Jews, but that idea which the 
Apostle unfolds in Rom. 6:3-5; Col. 2:12. 

The full import of baptism, the reality, of 
which immersion in water commanded by our 
Lord is the symbol, is clearly shown by the 
Apostle in the above cited passages. "Know 
ye not that as many of us as were immersed 
into Christ were immersed into HIS DEATH? 
Those who know this fully, and they alone, 
truly appreciate the water immersion commanded, 
and its weighty and appropriate 
significance. 

"IMMERSED INTO CHRIST." 



They who see the "high calling" of this 
Gospel age— to joint-heirship with Christ Jesus 
our Lord, as members in particular of the 
"body of Christ," of which the Redeemer is 
Head and Lord— know that our attainment of 
that high honor depends upon our acceptableness 
as members in that body of Christ. (Rom. 12:1; 
8:17,18.) They also know that no one 
is "called" or invited into this "body of 
Christ"— "the Church of the firstborn"— except 
those who already are believers, who own 
Christ as their Redeemer or Justifier, and who 



are therefore justified freely from all things by 

faith in his blood. Such, and not sinners, are 

invited to become join t-sacrificers and joint-heirs 

with Christ. Under the Law, the blemished 

of the flock were not acceptable on the 

Lord's altar, typifying God's rejection during 

this age of all imperfect offerings. Our Lord 

was the actually spotless, unblemished, perfect 

Lamb of God, sacrificed for our sins; and in 

inviting some to join him in sacrifice, and 

afterward in glory and honor, the Father accepts 

only such as are first made "whiter than 

snow," and who, because of faith in and acceptance 

of the redemption which is in Christ 

Jesus, are reckoned perfect, and hence are acceptable 

to God as join t-sacrificers. 

R1542:page 185 

"WERE IMMERSED INTO HIS DEATH." 



This is given as the true significance of water 
immersion. The real baptism, therefore, is 
this immersion into a sacrificial death with 
Christ; and the water immersion, though a 
beautiful figure which graphically illustrates the 
real baptism, is only its figure or symbol. 

But how much is meant by the expression, "immersed 
into his death?" In what way was our 
Lord's death different from that of other men? 

His death was different from that of other 
men in that theirs is a penalty for sin, while his 
was a sacrifice for the sins of others, to release 
others from their penalty— death. We, with 
all others of Adam's family, involuntarily share 
Adam's death— the wages of sin. And we, with 
all the Adamic family, were redeemed by 
Christ's death, and granted a right to a probation 
for a restoration to all the human rights 
and privileges which Adam lost for us. We who 
believe this good news accept those redeemed 
rights and privileges even now, and begin (by 
faith) to enjoy them, believing that what 
Christ died to secure, and has promised to give, 
is as sure as though already possessed. We 
have joy and peace in believing these "good 
tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all 
people;" and by faith we already reckon ourselves 
as in possession of those good things 
which, at the second coming of our Lord Jesus, 
are to be brought unto all who hate sin and 
love righteousness. 

It is when we are in this justified condition, 
repossessed of the human rights lost through 



Adam, but redeemed by Christ, that the call 

or invitation is extended to us to become something 

far higher and far grander than perfect 

men fully restored to the likeness of God in the 

flesh (though that is so grand that only few appreciate 

it): we are invited to become joined 

with the Redeemer in the glories and dignities 

of the divine nature (2 Pet. 1:4), and co-workers 

with him in the great work of the 

Millennial age— the work of restoring the obedient 

of the race of Adam to perfection and 

to all "that which was lost" in the fall. 

But the invitation to share this great dignity, 
far above angels (Heb. 1:4; Eph. 1:21; 1 Cor. 6:3), 
is accompanied by certain conditions and 
limitations. This prize is not given because of 
works, for no works which could be conceived 
could purchase or earn so high an exaltation 
as that offered. The offer is a favor, unmerited 
by anything which we have done, or can do; 
and yet the conditions may be said to be the price, 
or cost to us, of the prize offered. It is not, 
however, an equivalent or corresponding price. 
The price to us is a mere pittance in comparison 
to the value received, and "not worthy 
to be compared with the glory which shall be 
revealed in us." And when we consider that 
we had nothing to give, until first purchased by 
the precious blood of Christ, it will be clearly 
seen that the high honors to which we are called 
are not of works of our own, but of grace, 
through Christ. For even our pittance was 
forfeited by sin, and had first to be redeemed, 
before it could be accepted. 

The requirements or conditions, attached to 
the invitation to share with Christ the coming 
glories and dignities, are plainly stated:— Each 
one accepting it must share his death, be immersed 
or buried into his death, if he would 
be of that "little flock" of joint-heirs, the 
"body of Christ,"— otherwise called "the 
Bride, the Lamb's wife." To be sharers in 
his death means that as our Redeemer spent 
his life, not in (even lawful) self-gratification, 
but consumed it in the interest of truth and 
righteousness, in opposing sin and in doing 
the work and executing the plan of the 
Father, so we must use our time, talents, energies, 
rights and privileges. Redeemed by him 
and given to us, we not only consecrate all these 
to the Father's service, but we must use them 
faithfully even unto death— as he hath set us the 
example— walking in his footsteps as nearly as 
possible. If thus we be dead with him, we shall 
in due time live with him (Rom. 6:8); if thus 
we suffer with him, and in the present life endure 



afflictions even unto death (whether the 
death of the cross or some other form) for 
righteousness' sake, we are counted as sharers of 
his death; and all who share "his death" will 
also share "his resurrection."— See Phil. 3:8-11. 

As "his death" differs from the Adamic 
death, so "his resurrection" differs from the 

R1542:page 186 

restoration resurrection which he has secured 

and will make possible to all men. His resurrection 

is in Scripture pointed out as different 

from that of the world redeemed by him. It is 

emphasized in the Greek— "the resurrection," 

and also designated the "first [chief] resurrection." 

His resurrection was to the divine or 

immortal nature, a spiritual body. And so many 

of us as are immersed into Christ— immersed 

into his death— shall also obtain a share 

in "his resurrection"— "the resurrection"— 

as described in 1 Cor. 15:42-53. We, who 

have borne the image of the earthly father, 

Adam, who also lost it for us, have again received 

it by faith in Christ's sacrifice, and have 

now surrendered it, as joint-sacrificers with 

him of human nature. Thus we become partakers 

of a new nature, and shall, in the resurrection, 

bear the image of that new, divine 

nature.- 1 Cor. 15:49. 

Note how pointedly the same writer mentions 
this in the passage under consideration. 
"Therefore we are buried with him by baptism 
into death: that like as Christ was raised up 
from the dead by the glory of the Father, even 
so we also should walk in a new life. [Our new 
natures are reckoned as begun now, and are to 
be perfected at our resurrection in the Lord's 
likeness.] For if we have been planted together 
in the likeness of his death, [then] we 
shall be also [sharers] in the likeness of his 
resurrection."— Rom. 6:4,5. 

It is evident, then, that baptism in water is 
the symbol of a complete and, to those who 
would be joint-heirs with Christ, an indispensable 
self-sacrifice; an immersion with our Lord into 
his death; an immersion which began and is 
counted from the moment the justified believer 
consecrated himself and surrendered his will to 
God, though to secure the prize promised it 
must continue until the close of the earthly life. 
It was from this standpoint that our Lord spoke, 
when he said, "I have a baptism to be baptized 
with, and how am I straitened till it be accomplished. 
(Luke 12:50.) He had already 



R1543 : page 186 

performed the symbol at Jordan, but he was 
now referring to the consummation of his baptism 
into death. His will, surrendered to the 
Father's will and plan, was already buried; but 
as the dark hour of Gethsemane and Calvary 
drew near he longed to finish his sacrifice. It 
was from this same standpoint that he spoke of 
baptism to the two disciples who asked to sit, 
the one at his right hand and the other at his 
left, in the kingdom. "He answered and said 
unto them, Ye know not what ye ask— Are ye 
able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, 
and to be baptized with the baptism that I am 
baptized with?" (Matt. 20:22.) He referred 
here to the baptism into death, and showed 
that none need expect to share the kingdom 
except those who share this baptism of death. 
Thus the Apostle's explanation of the symbol 
exactly concurs with that of our Lord. 

These are not two baptisms— one into water 
and the other into Christ's death— but one. 
The immersion into water is the symbol or 
shadow of the immersion into death. If there 
is a shadow, there must be a substance; and a 
clear, strong light falling upon a substance 
produces a shadow of it. It is for the instructed 
child of God to distinguish between 
the substance and the shadow, and by recognizing 
their relationship to see in the two parts 
"one baptism." Since the two parts were recognized 
as one baptism by the Apostle, it is 
doubtful if any one fully appreciates the ONE, 
TRUE BAPTISM without seeing both the substance 
and the shadow. 

Recognizing the true import of baptism, we 
see that, next to faith in Christ, it is the one 
important and essential step by which the 
Church glorified shall be entered; for only 
such as are conformed to, and have fellowship 
in, our Lord's death will, as "members of his 
body," share the first or chief resurrection, to 
be with and like the Head. It is not surprising 
that some have mistaken the shadow or 
symbol for the real, and made it a test of membership 
in the church upon earth: this is but 
a natural mistake. All who see the real immersion, 
as well as the symbol, and yet ignore the 
latter, should carefully examine themselves to 
see that their wills in this matter are really 
dead and buried in the will of Christ. And 
if they refuse obedience to the Lord's word 
and example in this, they should make unquestionably 
sure to themselves the strength and 
validity of any arguments to the contrary, by 



which they set these aside. 

But some inquire, Is it necessary for me to 
be immersed in water, if I am confident that 
I am fully consecrated— immersed into Christ? 
Would the Lord reject me for so small a matter 
as a failure to go through a form? 

Do not forget that the present age is not one 
of commands and compulsions. God does not 
command and compel the obedience of his 
Church. This is a time in which, as a great 
favor, believers are privileged to offer their wills 
and their all in self-sacrifice to God. It is 
'the acceptable year of the Lord"— the time 
in which God is pleased to accept our sacrifices 
(through Christ) and to give us certain exceeding 
great rewards promised to those who 
surrender their little all, and who thus become 
followers in the footsteps of the High Priest of 
our order.— Heb. 3:1. 

R1543 : page 187 

Those who see this clearly know that the 
Body of Christ has not been given a law of 
commandments, nor been dealt with as were 
the Jews; for "Ye are not under law, but under 
favor." Theirs was the house of servants, and 
it is proper to command servants; but, if we 
are new creatures in Christ, we belong to the 
"house of sons" (Heb. 3:5,6); and God 
deals with us as a true Father with true sons. 
True sons, and the only ones whom he will acknowledge, 
possess the spirit of adoption, 
the spirit of obedience, the spirit of sons, and 
need not to be commanded and threatened; for 
such, both by word and deed, and in matters 
both small and great, declare, "I delight to do 
thy will, O my God." For such, no self-denial 
is too great, and no act of respect and obedience 
too small; and, ignoring pride and all 
human philosophies and expediencies as unworthy 
to be weighed at all in opposition to 
the Father's wisdom, these learn that to obey 
is the best of sacrifice.— 1 Sam. 15:22. 

No, God will not compel you to be immersed, 
either really or symbolically. These 
opportunities to sacrifice convenience, worldly 
opinion, etc., are privileges which we should 
highly esteem and covet, because by these we 
are able to show the Lord the depth and sincerity 
of our love and the reality of our consecration. 
It is on the basis of this and hundreds 
of other little things that we are now being 
tried— to see if we are as earnest as we have 
professed to be. If we are ashamed to confess 
Christ before men by the very simple way 



which he arranged, we may well expect that he 

would be ashamed to call us overcomers and 

joint-heirs, and to confess us as faithful followers. 

He could not do so honestly and truthfully, 

and hence we may be sure he will not do 

so. And if, after we see how much our Lord 

has done for us— first, in our redemption, and, 

secondly, in the great offer of the crown and 

divine nature— we allow a trifling sacrifice of 

contemptible pride to hinder us from a small 

act of obedience which our Redeemer and benefactor 

requested, our own self-contempt and 

shame should prevent our taking crowns and 

places (even if offered them) with the little 

band of faithful overcomers who valiantly sacrificed 

much, and thus proved that they loved 

much. 

While therefore we do not say that none will be 
of the "little flock" except those who have been 
immersed into water, as well as into the death 
of Christ, which it so beautifully symbolizes, 
we do say, that we do not expect to find in that 
"little flock" a single one who has seen water 
immersion to be the will of God, and who has 
refused to obey. Let us remember that obedience 
in a small matter may be a closer test 
than in a large one. Had Satan attempted to 
get Eve into the sin of blaspheming the Creator, 
he would have failed; had he attempted to induce 
her to murder Adam he would have failed; 
hence the test of obedience in a very small 
matter was a much more crucial test. So now 
God tests our professions of love and devotion 
and obedience most thoroughly by some of the 
smallest matters, of which the symbolic immersion 
is one. God's decision is, He that is 
faithful in that which is least will be faithful 
also in that which is greater. 

Though "Baptists" do not generally grasp 
the full import of immersion, but look at the 
water rather than the death which it symbolizes, 
yet the holding of the symbol has been 
valuable, and shows the Lord's wisdom in 
choosing the symbol; for even the truth with 
reference to the symbol has been unpopular, 
ever since its rejection by Antichrist centuries 
ago, and in very many cases has it required 
the true consecration, the true burial of the will 
into Christ's will, before the believer was willing 
to brave the scorn of the world by obedience 
to an unpopular ceremony. 

Even those who practice sprinkling, and 
that upon unintelligent (and hence unbelieving) 
babes, hold that baptism is the door into 
the Church of Christ, and none of the nominal 
churches receive into membership others than 



those who have gone through some ceremony 
called "baptism." They thus receive infants 
into their churches, on the ground that only 
church members will be saved from everlasting 
torment. True, this like other doctrines is 
little taught in our day, and is fast losing its 
influence over the people, yet millions of parents 
to-day believe that their children would 
be consigned to everlasting torment if they 
should die without being sprinkled with water 
in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. 
Especially do Romanists, Episcopalians and 
Lutherans fear an omission of this sort, and 
some Presbyterians and Methodists no less so. 
An illustration of this, and one which shows 
the power these errors put into the hands of 
the priestly or clerical class, came under our 
observation in this city about nine years ago. 
The parents of the infant were Lutherans, but 
had a disagreement with the pastor of the congregation 
about non-payment of church dues 
and non-attendance at meetings. The child 
grew seriously ill, and the father and mother 
by turn went many times to implore the cold 
hearted, error teaching, hireling shepherd to 
come and sprinkle their babe and save it from 
the eternal damnation he had taught them 
would otherwise be its portion. But he refused 

R1543 : page 188 

to come, telling them that they deserved the 
punishment. After further effort they secured 
another priest "just in time" to allay their 
groundless fears. 

Thus it is evident that no matter how careless 
they may be as to the exact form, all the 
principal sects view baptism as the door into 
the church, the door of salvation, the door into 
the body of Christ, as truly as do Baptists. 
We, on the contrary, hold that neither the 
sprinkling with water nor the immersion in 
water is the door into the "body of Christ," 
now being elected or chosen out of the world; 
but that the immersion into Christ's death, 
which begins in full consecration, is the door 
by which justified men become members of the 
Body of Christ which is the Church. We insist 
that all who thus become members of "THE 
CHURCH whose names are written in heaven," 
should, as soon as the precept and example of the 
Lord and the apostles, and the appropriateness 
of the symbol, are seen, make haste to show 
their obedience and consecration before men. 

BAPTISM AND THE TABERNACLE. 



The true baptism is illustrated in the Jewish 
Tabernacle, but not by the Laver which stood 
in the Court full of water, at which the priests 
washed their hands and feet. No, that is a 
symbol of the cleansing effect of the truth 
upon the outward conduct of believers in general. 
It symbolizes the putting aside of filthy 
practices— lying, stealing, etc., and the putting 
away of filthy communications out of our 
mouths,— slanders, envy, strife, backbiting, 

R1544 : page 188 

etc.,— a cleansing as proper for the natural man 
as for the consecrated saints. 

The vail at the door of the Tabernacle represented 
the same thought as baptism— namely, 
death. When the priest passed the first vail, it 
represented him as passing out of sight, buried 
from the outward things; and his shut-in condition, 
was enlightened only by the lamp and 
supplied by the shewbread— representing the 
spiritual nourishment and enlightenment granted 
all who are immersed into Christ. 

The second vail represented the end of the 
reckoned death in actual death; and the Most 
Holy represented the full fruition of all the exceeding 
great and precious promises made to 
those who become new creatures in Christ 
Jesus by sharing his death and also his resurrection. 
In the Most Holy comes the full realization 
of what the Holy gave but a foretaste. 
Thus we see that a complete immersion or 
burial from sight was necessary to reach the 
Most Holy. And as the Tabernacle had but 
the one entrance, it clearly teaches that none 
can attain that state or condition which it typified 
(the divine nature) without first passing 
through the first vail, representing consecration 
or death to the world, which baptism in water 
also beautifully illustrates. 

For a full explanation of the significance of 
the entire Tabernacle service, see Tabernacle 
Shadows of the Better Sacrifices. 

WHO MAY BE IMMERSED. 



In John's baptism of the Jews into reformation, 
he demanded of some that they should 
first show by their lives that they had reformed 
before they went through the symbol of reformation. 



In the use of baptism after Pentecost 

however, the only condition imposed was faith 

in Christ. It seems to have been taken for 

granted that none but true, sincere persons 

would thus profess faith in and allegiance to so 

unpopular a leader as the crucified Christ. 

But the water immersion, though it was a public 

profession of Christ by the one immersed 

was not necessarily an endorsement of such by 

the apostles and the Church. The Church could 

not and did not decide whether the one symbolically 

immersed had been really immersed 

into Christ. The symbol indicated this; and 

they explained the symbol, and urged all that 

had consecrated in symbol to see that they 

were really dead to the world and its plans and 

aims, and alive toward God and his plan. 

This is evident from some instances, as that 
of Ananias and Sapphira and Simon the sorcerer. 
(Acts 5:1-10; 8:13,20-23.) To the 
latter, though he had been baptized, the Apostle 
declared, "Thou art in the gall of bitterness, 
and in the bond of iniquity." So, now 
we do not need to decide for others who may 
wish thus to confess Christ (except it be very 
evident that they do it as an intended mockery). 
It is their act alone, and represents their conscience 
toward God; and the knowledge of ignorance 
of the one performing the symbol cannot 
affect the matter either favorably or unfavorably. 
The real baptism is that which cannot be 
seen, except in its influence upon the conduct; 
and the real church which is joined is the Church 
whose names are written in heaven, whose members 
cannot be positively known until the close 
of this age, when they shall be glorified with the 
Head. 

THE MANNER OF THE SYMBOL. 



The immersion, since it symbolizes a burial 
should be backwards, in water sufficient for the 
purpose, and convenient as circumstances will 
permit. It should not be done with secrecy 

R1544 : page 189 

it is intended as a public confession of faith, and the 
only form of such public confession, used by 
the early Church, of which we have any record. 
Yet its publicity should be to fellow-believers 
rather than to the world. Hence, while it 
should in no way be kept secret from the world, 
it is unnecessary to give public notice except 



to the fellow-believers of the Church. In fact, 
so solemn is the occasion to the Church, who 
realize its deep significance, that the presence 
of the worldly, unless they be seekers after God 
and therefore more than mere curiosity seekers, 
is not desirable. Such public notice, we gather 
from the record, was the custom in the early 
Church. 

Some think that because John the Immerser 
and the Lord's disciples baptized publicly in 
the river Jordan, therefore all should be immersed 
in public view in a river. But let it be 
remembered that the whole Jewish nation was 
the Church according to their Law Covenant; 
therefore public view was public to the professed 
Church of that time. As for the river Jordan, 
John and the disciples evidently used it as the 
most convenient place at their service. If the 
river was an important factor, why not the same 
river— Jordan? 

It should be noted that when the eunuch believed 
and was immersed, only Philip was present; 
when the jailer believed and was immersed 
(Acts 16:33), it was not in a river, but in a 
bath or some other convenient arrangement 
in the prison. And we know that the ruins 
of the church buildings of the first two centuries 
show that they had special, annexed 
buildings prepared for the convenience of 
immersions. 

The form of words used by the apostles and 
the early Church is not given, which shows that 
the form of words used is much less important 
than the act, and the meaning which it expresses. 
We may gather, however, from Acts 2:38; 
8:16; Rom. 6:3; Gal. 3:27 and 1 Cor. 1:13, 
that baptism "into Christ," into the name 
of the Lord Jesus, was the thought; and that it 
was expressed in words. We may also presume 
that our Lord's words, "Baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
holy Spirit, were not disregarded, but somehow 
expressed on such occasions. The thought is, 
that believers, by immersion into Christ's death, 
are joined to Christ as members of the little 
flock "which is his body;" and that their right 
or privilege to be thus accepted in the Beloved 
is in the name or by the authority of the Father, 
through the merit of the Son and by the impartation 
to such of the holy Spirit of truth. 
We now give the form of words which it is our 
custom to use on such occasions, and our general 
procedure, for the convenience and satisfaction 
of those who may have occasion to use 
the suggestion. 

We first have, privately, some assurance on 



the part of all who are about to be immersed, 

that they recognize the death of Christ as their 

ransom price, and that they are already consecrated 

wholly to his service, and desire to 

now confess all this in the symbol which Christ 

enjoined. Then, the announcement having been 

publicly made before the congregation, we meet 

at an appointed time and place for the service; 

and there, after briefly explaining the real immersion 

and its water symbol, offering thanks 

to God for the privilege of thus following 

in our Lord's footsteps, and expressing our 

trust in his promises to give grace and strength 

sufficient to enable those who have consecrated 

all to his service to be dead indeed to the world 

and its aims and ambitions, and alive only to 

God's service and the study and carrying out 

of his plans; and after specially requesting a 

blessing upon those about to symbolize their 

covenant, we receive the candidates in the 

water. Then (in the usual manner, with one 

hand in front, at the throat, and the other at 

the back of the neck) we say, if the name of 

the candidate be John,— "John, in the name 

of the Father and of the Son and of the holy 

Spirit— by this authority— I baptize thee into 

the name of Christ." We then let him down, 

backward (as a corpse), until immersed, covered 

completely; then raise him to his feet. 

After again changing our clothing in the provided 

rooms, we meet in the presence of the 

congregation (who, meantime, worship God in 

prayer, songs of praise, etc.), and with convenient 

words we extend to the newly immersed 

ones the right-hand of fellowship in the name 

of the great Head of the Church, and on behalf 

of the entire church whose names are written 

in heaven; exhorting that they walk worthy 

of the name of Christ which they have confessed 

and taken; and that they run earnestly in the 

race for the prize of the high calling which they 

have publicly entered. 

THE FAMILY NAME. 



It is evident that all through the Gospel age 
baptism into Christ has symbolized union with 
him and membership in the one body— the 
bride. But now in the harvest or lapping of 
the Gospel and Millennial ages, a new question 
arises, viz., While it is still appropriate for all 
of this class who have not done so, to confess 
Christ by this symbol, what about others, of 
the restitution class, who shall now confess 



R1544 : page 190 

Christ and desire to consecrate themselves— 
to relinquish their wills and have the will of 
Christ only? Seeing that such will sooner or 
later apply for baptism as a symbol, and that 
it would be a proper symbol of consecration 
for others as well as for the body of Christ, and 
that it is not incumbent upon us to decide to 
which class those belong who apply to us for 
immersion— the question arises, Would the same 
form of words be appropriate for both? 

We answer, Yes; for though the class referred 
to will not be of the bride of Christ, they will 
be of the Christ family— children of the Christ; 
and it is proper for children to bear their father's 
name. Christ is to be the "Everlasting 
Father" or life-giver to the restored human 
race; and hence it will not be improper for 
them also to take his name. Therefore, as we 
now view it, it will be proper to baptize such 
into the name of Christ; and we doubt not that 
all of the world who shall come into harmony 
and receive the gift of life from the Life-giver 
in the next age, will also be known as Christians. 
As before pointed out, however, the 
words of the immerser cannot affect favorably 

R1545 : page 190 

or unfavorably the interests of the immersed: 
the importance rests in the obedience of the 
act and what it signifies of consecration to the 
one immersed. 

BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT AND OF FIRE. 



We need not examine this subject at length 
here; it was discussed in our issue of June '92. 
We merely remark that the immersion in holy 
Spirit which began at Pentecost, is not symbolized 
by water baptism: it follows, but is totally 
different from an immersion into Christ's death, 
which the water immersion symbolizes so 
perfectly. 

BAPTIZED FOR THE DEAD. 



"Else what shall they do which are baptized 
for the dead, if the dead are not to be raised 
at all? [If there is no resurrection baptism is 



a symbol of nothing further than the death of 
our mortal bodies.] Why then are they baptized 
on behalf of them?-- 1 Cor. 15:29. 

This has been considered a very obscure passage, 
because the real meaning of immersion 
(as symbolic of death) has been generally lost 
sight of. Some have been led to the absurd 
conclusion that early Christians were immersed 
for or instead of their dead, unbelieving friends 
and relatives— supposing that Paul here referred 
to and commended so senseless a thing. On 
the contrary, the Apostle here refers to the 
fact, then well understood, that each one of 
those who had been immersed had symbolized 
his own death— had cast his lot among those 
dead with Christ, to share his sacrificial death 
(giving his life in the service of the truth— with 
Christ— Col. 1 :24), in prospect of a glorious 
resurrection to share with the Redeemer the 
work of blessing and restoring the world. 

Paul is combating and disproving the theories 
of some who were teaching that there would be no 
resurrection. He appeals to various arguments 
to prove the falsity of such teaching. He proves 
that the dead can be raised by divine power by 
the fact of Christ's resurrection (1 Cor. 15:12-18); 
and then, in the verse under consideration, 
he shows how absurd it is for those 
who by immersion have symbolized their consecration 
to death to disbelieve in a future life. 
He asks such doubters of a resurrection, Why, 
then, were you baptized for the dead, if you 
hope for nothing? Wiser and better far it 
would be, if there is to be no resurrection of 
the dead, that we should make the most of the 
present life, enjoying all its pleasures, instead 
of consecrating ourselves to death in baptism 
and then living a life of self-sacrifice, which is 
a daily dying. 

But, in this as in all things, the beauty and 
harmony only appears from the true standpoint. 
Those who regard sprinkling as baptism can 
see no meaning in the passage; neither can 
those who deny water baptism interpret it without 
giving the inference that this great, inspired 
Apostle was foolish. Neither can those who 
see the symbolic water immersion, only, appreciate 
the passage. Its beauty and force can 
only be discernible from the standpoint herein 
set forth, viz., a recognition of the death 
with Christ to self-will, to the world and to all 
worldly interests, and also of the water immersion 
as its proper, appropriate and provided 
symbol. In conclusion we quote the inspired 
record. 

Peter said: "Can any man forbid water?" 



(Acts 10:47.) Paul said: "So many of you 

as were immersed into Jesus Christ, were immersed 

into his death. ...For if we have 

been planted together in the likeness of his 

death, we shall be also in the likeness of his 

resurrection." (Rom. 6:3-5.) "Then they that 

gladly received his word were immersed,... 

and they continued steadfastly in the apostles' 

doctrine and fellowship."— Acts 2:41,42. 



page 191 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF 

OUR READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1545 :page 191 

PAUL CALLED TO EUROPE. 



III. QUAR., LESSON I., JULY 2, ACTS 16:6-15. 

Golden Text:— "Go ye, and teach all nations, baptizing 
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of 
the holy Spirit. "-Matt. 28:19. 

In considering the narrative of this lesson, 
the main points to be observed are the influence 
of the holy Spirit in directing the 
course of the gospel, and the evident watchfulness 
of the Apostle for such direction. 
While neither Paul nor the other apostles 
sat in idleness waiting for extraordinary or 
miraculous leadings of the Spirit of God, 
they were mindful of such indications when 
the Lord's will was so expressed. But, ordinarily, 
they expected to make use of their 
own judgment enlightened by their knowledge 
of the truth and of the objects to be 
accomplished by its promulgation. And if, 
in the use of their own best judgment, they 
made a mistake, and the Lord, by some 
special providence or vision or impressive 
dream, indicated otherwise, they carefully 



followed such leadings. 

Thus, for instance, Paul, using his judgment 
as a steward of the Lord (1 Cor. 4: 1), 
went, accompanied by Silas, through Syria, 
Silicia, Phrygia and Galatia, confirming the 
churches previously established there (Acts 15:36,40,41; 
16:1-6); and the Lord evidently 
approved their course so far, since he 
interposed no providential indication to the 
contrary, but blessed their efforts to the 
furtherance of the gospel. But, having gone 
thus far without any providential interference, 
and, in further use of his own best 
judgment, having planned to carry the gospel 
into Asia, the holy Spirit in some manner 
indicated that such was not the divine will 
at that time (verse 6); so the Apostle turned 
his course in a westerly direction, thinking 
to stop in Bithynia, a province of Asia Minor: 
but again God's power or spirit manifestly 
hindered; so he continued his journey 
to Troas, where, in a vision, the open door for 
him in Macedonia (Greece) was indicated. 

Thus, by divine direction, the course of 
the gospel was turned westward into Europe, 
instead of continuing in Asia as the 
Apostle had thought to do. And westward 
has been the general course of the Gospel 
since. Just why it was to be so, is nowhere 
stated; but in the light of the present day 
the reason is apparent. 

To the eastward lay India and China, whose 
people, bound by customs and superstitions, 
were, so to speak, confirmed in ancient error; 
while the conditions in Europe were 
quite the reverse. That was the formative 
period in Europe. The peoples of Europe 
were not old, established nations; and the 
unrest and change incident to those times, 
the rival ambitions which brought about 
great invasions and revolutions and changes 
of government, and the intermingling of the 
various peoples, produced mental activity 
and acuteness favorable to the consideration 
and appreciation of the gospel on the 
part of those who desired righteousness and 
truth. Mental lethargy, undue conservatism 
and superstition are obstacles to progress, 
and must be rudely handled before the truth 
can be received and appreciated. It is also 
noticeable that a very similar preparation 
was given to Israel, to fit them to receive 
the instructions of the Law and the prophets. 

It should be noticed, too, that God thus 
providentially sent the gospel message, not 
to the most debased and ignorant people of 



the world, but to the most civilized and best 
educated; for at that time Greece was the 
very center of learning, as Rome was the 
center of the political world. The gospel 
which God was sending, and which the 
Apostle bore, was "good tidings of great 
joy for all people;" it was a reasonable gospel, 
which would stand the light and criticism 
of the keenest philosophy, and did not 
need to seek out the degraded and superstitious 
classes or races of the world. 

While, as expressed in the golden text, it 
was a part of the divine will that ultimately 
this gospel should go to all peoples, yet it 
is clearly marked by God's providence that 
it is his will that it shall go to the less degraded 
first, and to the more degraded later. 

And the reasonableness of this is evident 
when we remember that God's plan is to 
select the Church, the Christ (Head and 
body), first, and then to use that Church as 
his agency for blessing all nations in the 
Millennial age. Hence, while our efforts 
should be to "do good unto all men as we 

R1545 : page 192 

have opportunity," it should be "especially 
to the household of faith" and to people best 
able, mentally, to appreciate the message. 

It is presumed by some, from the disagreement 
between Paul and Barnabas, recorded 
in the preceding chapter (verses 37-40), with 
reference to taking John Mark with them 
on this missionary tour, and which resulted 
in their separation, that both brethren were 
at fault, and that neither one manifested the 

R1546 : page 192 

spirit of Christ toward the other. This is 
probably based on the statement that the 
contention was sharp between them. But 
the expression does not imply that either 
one was abusive or unkind to the other; but 
rather, that both were positive in their mental 
decisions on the subject, and so expressed 
themselves and so acted. 

The difficulty, however, was on the part 
of Barnabas. Paul was the "Apostle to the 
Gentiles," the "chosen vessel" of the Lord 
to bear his name to the Gentiles; while 
Barnabas was honored in being his associate 
and helper in the work. Paul's course 
was the one that was being specially directed, 
guided and supervised by the Lord 



(notice specially chapter 16:9), and Barnabas 

should have recognized the apostleship of 

Paul, and, so far as his judgment would permit, 

he should have deferred to Paul's judgment. 

But, instead, he placed himself as the 

superior and director, and "determined to take 

with them John, whose surname was Mark." 

But Paul, remembering John's former unfaithfulness 

in forsaking them in the midst 

of the work, wisely deemed it inexpedient 

to trust him on this occasion, and objected. 

Instead of continuing in company and cooperation 

with this "chosen vessel of the 

Lord," and humbly deferring to his judgment 

in a matter where conscience was not at 

stake, or of trusting the Lord to correct the 

Apostle's mistakes, if he made them, Barnabas 

preferred to leave this favored position 

of service and to go out himself with John. 

The whole appearance favors the opinion 
of some that Barnabas let a little pride take 
root in his heart; that it was first manifested 
when he "determined" to take John with 
them, whether Paul approved the arrangement 
or not; and that it speedily grew until 
it separated him from the special privileges 
of service which he had hitherto enjoyed in 
company and co-operation with the Apostle. 
Another brother stepped into his place, and 
it is quite significant that we never hear of 
Barnabas again. He lost his opportunity, 
which, seemingly, he failed to appreciate because 
pride raised up a little root of bitterness. 

Having been joined by Timothy and Luke, 
the Apostle and Silas took ship for Macedonia, 
no longer in doubt as to the will of 
the Lord; and there they went to one of the 
chief cities— Philippi. Their first success in 
reaching hearing ears was on the Sabbath 
day, when they sought and found a company 
of worshipers at the river-side, to whom 
they preached the gospel (verses 12,13), 
some of whom, at least, received it gladly. 
And one of the specially interested ones is 
particularly mentioned as manifesting her 
love for the Lord and the truth by her works. 

There is in this account that which is indicative 
of a very proper and beautiful 
spirit on the part of both Lydia and these 
ministers of the gospel, in both the offer and 
acceptance of hospitality. Lydia evidently 
considered that it would be a great favor to 
entertain these representatives of the Lord 
—not because they wore fine clothing or 
bore titled names— but because they had 
borne to her a message from the Lord. 



Therefore she said, "If ye have judged me 
to be faithful to the Lord [and so worthy 
to entertain his ministers], come into my 
house and abide there." She wanted to 
show her love to the Lord by her works. 
It is manifest also on the part of these 
brethren, that they did not intrude, and were 
not in haste even to accept the proffered 
hospitality. They questioned the convenience 
and ability of the sister to thus entertain 
them; for it was not until she constrained or 
urged them that they accepted her invitation. 

From this lesson we learn: (1) To be careful 
observers of God's providential leadings 
while actively pressing on to do his service. 
(2) As the Apostle was left to use his judgment, 
and was only miraculously directed 
when he had no other means of judging the 
Lord's will, so we should expect with all 
God's people. And since now the Word 
of the Lord's testimony is complete, and 
helps for its study are multiplied, we should 
all the less expect miraculous interventions, 
visions and revelations from the Lord. Nevertheless, 
if we should have a striking dream 
seeming to admonish us of some neglected 
duty or opportunity, or reminding us of some 
Scripture teaching, let us profit by it thus— 
never, however, relying for counsel or faith 
upon anything but what can be proved by 
the Word of God. (3) The Lord himself exercises 
a supervision of his own work. 



page 194 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



HARVEST WORK BEFORE THE STORM. 



As the Lord is pleased to use the members of 
his body who are yet in the flesh to be his "reapers" 
and "messengers," it would seem that each 
one should be inspired with zeal, tempered with 
wisdom, to see that his part in this great work 
is faithfully done. All who are awake are beginning 
to recognize the harvest time— the 
"end of the age"— and to rejoice in the privilege 
of harvest work now under way. But all 
such have heard also "a consumption, even determined 
in the midst of the whole land." (Isa. 28:22.) 
Louder peals the thunder and darker 
grow the clouds. A great storm is near at hand. 
Though one may not know exactly when it 
will break forth, it seems reasonable to suppose 
that it cannot be more than twelve or fourteen 



years yet future. As the harvesters in the natural 
field often find it necessary to withdraw, as 
the clouds get very dark and the winds blow, 
so the reapers in this harvest may by and by be 
compelled to cease their active service. 

Some may be inclined to think that the harvest 
work is largely done; but probably the larger 
portion of this work is to be done in the coming 
six or eight years. "Pray the Lord of the 
harvest to send forth more laborers into his 
vineyard," and seek earnestly to be among them. 
True, a great work is being done. The books, 
the papers and the tracts sent out from the 
WATCH TOWER office are doing their part; but 
they need "living epistles" everywhere to introduce 
them to the people. Quite a number 
of colporteurs are now in the field, and others 
of the "wise" are working in various ways; but 
still as the fields ripen more laborers are needed. 

Another thought: Every practical tiller of 
the soil knows that just before a storm is an excellent 
time to sow certain kinds of seed, such 
as clover and timothy, which the storm will 
serve to wash down into the soil. Likewise, 
the precious seeds of truth, which may now be 
sown "broadcast" over the land, will, no 
doubt, by the storm that is coming, be settled 
down into the hearts of many; and after the 
storm is over will yield an abundant crop. 

Those experienced in the various ways of 
spreading the Truth will agree that the house to 
house canvass with MILLENNIAL DAWN is, in the 
present time, by far the most effective way of 
preaching the Truth. There are several reasons 
for this conclusion: (1) Babylon has preached 
the world "to death" with false doctrine. (2) 
Some of the people do not want to go outside 
of the churches, for fear they might hear more 
of the same kind of doctrine they are used to 
hearing inside. (3) Some do not know much 
about the truth, and are afraid. And some of the 
sincere and honest are inclined to think (rightfully) 
that there is not much Gospel preached 
by public speaking now-a-days. (4) Earnest 
truth-seekers are nearly always earnest readers, 
and though they may not have much confidence 
in ordinary books, they will keep on reading, 
hoping to find the Truth (God's plan) which 
will "satisfy their longings as nothing else can 
do." (5) A good colporteur can put into the 
hands of the people from five to six thousand 
volumes of DAWN in a year; and they will keep 
on preaching after he has gone to other fields. 
One with even a little talent for the work ought 
to dispose of three thousand volumes a year. 

In view of all these things may we not reasonably 



hope that inside of three years there 

will be at least ten times as many of the brethren 

and sisters out as actual colporteurs as there now 

are? Then let every one that is fully consecrated 

to the Lord see what he can do. Some 

can go themselves, and some can help others to 

go. But let all who can, by any reasonable 

sacrifice, seek to enter this harvest work. 

What if we do encounter some hardships! 
However, let no one think that it is a continual 
burden to be out in this work. The Master said, 
"My yoke is easy, and my burden is light: and 
this is true in whatever capacity we serve him. 

Dear brethren and sisters, let us all remember 
the words of the wise: "In the morning 
sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not 
thy hand; for thou knowest not which shall 
prosper, this or that, or whether they both shall 
be alike good." (Eccl. 11:6.) Thus we may each 
have the blessed assurance that we have done 
what we could to advance the interests of our 
Redeemer's Kingdom. S. D. ROGERS. 



R1546 : page 195 

VOL. XIV. JULY 1 & 15, 1893--DOUBLE NUMBER. NO. 13 & 14. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



"Take counsel together, and it shall come to 
naught; speak the word, and it shall not stand: 
for God is with us."— Isa. 8:10-16. 

IT is becoming more and more evident to the 
religious leaders of Christendom, that the 
various sectarian creeds will not much longer 
serve to hold together the membership of their 
several organizations. Hence new schemes 
are being formed to take the places long held 
by doctrines true and false, to unite the 
people, behind denominational fences, on other 
than doctrinal lines. The opening of the 
eyes of men's understandings is progressing 
at a marvelous pace, and the unreasonableness, 
and deformity and absurdity of the various 
creeds are becoming apparent to the most obtuse. 
What once passed for truth without a 
question, because promulgated by clerics or 
councils is now boldly challenged for reasonable 
and Scriptural authority. A prominent 
Presbyterian clergyman, Rev. T. DeWitt Talmage, 
is reported to have said:— 



"I would that this unfortunate controversy 
about the confession of faith had not been 
forced upon the church; but now, since it is 
on, I say, Away with it, and let us have a new 
creed." 

Another, Rev. Sawin, of Troy, N. Y., said 
recently:— 

"I do not like the idea of Calvinism: Calvin 
was a murderer and a scoundrel. He said 
many good things and those I accept, but the 
Church should be an exponent of the gospel, 
and not of Calvinism." 

Indeed one cannot read the daily press without 
realizing that the great nominal church, of 
all denominations, is being shaken from center 
to circumference. The strife of tongues among 
both the clergy and the laity is sending consternation 
throughout all Christendom. 

In this extremity of Ecclesiasticism a happy 
thought struck some one, and it has found an 
echo throughout the length and breadth of 
Christendom. It was to send the Macedonian 
cry around the world, to all its heathen priests 
and apostles, to "Come over and help us." 
And the heathen have heard and heeded the 
cry; and Christian ministers are looking forward 
with high hopes to this grand ecumenical 
council of all the religions of the world, 
to be held in Chicago next September, confessedly 
for suggestions as to how they may 
get up a new religion that will be acceptable, 
if possible, to the whole world. 

A prominent New England Congregational 
minister, Rev. J. G. Johnson, is reported to 
have said with reference to it:— 

"For seventeen days these various religions 
will have the opportunity to assert themselves, 
learn something ourselves. In every religion 
there is some trace of God; and what are the 
false religions but the broken and distorted 
echoes of the voice of Jehovah?" 

The Rev. Mr. Barrows, of Chicago, spoke 
enthusiastically of the friendly relations manifested 
among Protestant ministers, Catholic 
priests, Jewish rabbis, and, in fact, the thinking 
heads of all religions extant, by the correspondence 
in reference to the great Chicago 
parliament. He says:— 

R1546 : page 196 

"The old idea that the religion to which I 
belong is the only true one, is out of date. 
There is something to be learned from all religions, 
and no man is worthy of the religion 
he represents unless he is willing to grasp any 



man by the hand as his brother. Some one 
has said that the time is now ripe for the best 
religion to come to the front. The time for a 
man to put on any airs of superiority about his 
particular religion is past. Here will meet the 
wise man, the scholar and the prince of the 
East in friendly relation with the archbishop, 
the rabbi, the missionary, the preacher and the 
priest. They will sit together in congress for 
the first time. This, it is hoped, will help to 
break down the barriers of creed. All religions 
are but the imperfect rays shining from 
our Father." 

The Rev. T. Chalmers, of the Disciples 
Church, says:— 

"This first Parliament of Religions seems to 
be the harbinger of a still larger religious fraternity 
—a fraternity that will combine into one 
world religion what is best, not in one alone, 
but in all of the great historic faiths. It may 
be that, under the guidance of this larger hope, 
we shall need to revise our phraseology and 
speak more of religious unity, than of Christian 
unity. I rejoice that all the great cults are 
to be brought into touch with each other, and 
that Jesus will take his place in the companionship 
of Gautama, Confucius and Zoroaster." 

The New York Sun, in an editorial on this 
subject, recently said:— 

"We cannot make out exactly what the 
Parliament proposes to accomplish.... 
It is possible, however, that the Chicago scheme 
is to get up some sort of a new and compound 

R1547 : page 196 

religion, which shall include and satisfy every 

variety of religious and irreligious opinion [we 

would add— of note or influence]. It is a big 

job to get up a new and eclectic religion satisfactory 

all around; but Chicago is confident 

that it can finish up the business on the 27th 

of next September." 

The various religions of Earth will set forth 
their claims as to points of superiority until 
Sept. 26th, when as per announcement a conclusion 
will be sought, the theme for that day 
being, "The religious union of the whole human 
family." On the next and last day, the 
Parliament will consider "The elements of perfect 
religion as recognized and set forth in the 
different faiths," with a view to determining 
"the characteristics of the ultimate religion," 
and "the center of the coming religious unity of 
mankind." Is it possible that thus, by their 
own confession, Christian (?) ministers are 



unable, at this late day, to determine what 
should be the center of religious unity, or the 
characteristics of perfect religion? Are they 
indeed so anxious for a "world religion" that 
they are willing to sacrifice any or all the principles 
of true Christianity, and even the name 
"Christian," if necessary, to obtain it? Even 
so, they confess. "Out of thine own mouth 
will I judge thee, thou wicked and slothful 
servant," saith the Lord. The preceding days 
of the conference will be devoted to the setting 
forth of the various religions by their 
respective representatives. 

The scheme is a bold and hazardous one, 
but it should open the eyes of every true child 
of God to several facts that are manifest. (1) 
That the nominal Christian church has reached 
its last extremity of hope in its ability to stand, 
under the searching judgments of this day 
when "the Lord hath a controversy with his 
[professed] people"— nominal spiritual Israel. 
(Micah 6:1,2.) (2) That instead of repenting of 
their back-slidings and lack of faith and zeal 
and godliness, and thus seeking a return of divine 
favor, they are endeavoring, by a certain 
kind of union and co-operation, to support one 
another, and to call in the aid of the heathen 
world to help them to withstand the judgments 
of the Lord in exposing the errors of their human 
creeds and their misrepresentations of his 
worthy character. (3) This willingness to compromise 
Christ and his gospel, for the sake of 
gaining the friendship of the world and its 
emoluments of power and influence, should be 
evident to every thinking person. (4) Their 
blindness is such that they are unable to distinguish 
truth from error, or the spirit of the 
truth from the spirit of the world, and they have 
already lost sight of the doctrines of Christ. 

Doubtless temporary aid will come from the 
source whence it is so enthusiastically sought; 
but it will be only a preparatory step which 
will involve the whole world in the impending 
doom of Babylon, causing the kings and merchants 
and traders of the whole earth to mourn 
and lament for this great city.— Rev. 18:9,1 1,17. 

R1547 : page 197 

THE NEXT RELIGIOUS CONFERENCE AT 
JERUSALEM. 

Another movement, having the same general 
end in view, has already been proposed, and 
doubtless took practical shape, at the celebration 
of the Fourth of July in the city of Philadelphia. 



The proposition, as clipped from the 
Philadelphia Inquirer, is as follows:— 

THE PROPOSED UNION OF SECTS. 

"Independence Hall on the day of the celebration 
will be the scene of a meeting of representatives 
of the different sects in this city, 
at which resolutions will be adopted setting 
forth the scope of the proposed celebration of 
the advent of the twentieth century of Christianity 
by an international gathering at Jerusalem 
six years hence. The preliminary steps 
were taken yesterday in historic Carpenter's 
Hall. The idea, it is said, seems to take all 
over the United States. All seem to think that 
it is appropriate, and that it comes appropriately 
from America. It is proposed to send 
the resolutions to the World's Fair Commission 
and have them notify the representatives 
of all nations, governments and provinces there 
assembled of this glorious conception. 

"Dr. McCook spoke of the difficulties in the 
way. 'The differences,' he said, 'were sentimental 
and conscientious. If Israelites, Mohammedans 
and all others can thus meet, it 
will be an auspicious opening for the twentieth 
century. They say, We want to get the Anglicans, 
Russians, Germans, Roman Catholics, 
Greek Orientals, Nestorians, and all others. 
There is no objection in regard to sect or denomination 
in such a meeting. It simply brings 
the human family together.' 

"A committee which shall have power to 
enlarge its numbers was appointed to push the 
movement. The idea is to have the proposed 
resolutions prepared by the different sects and 
read at the meeting in Independence Hall on 
July 4 before they are sent to Chicago." 

This movement will doubtless supplement 
and further confirm the results of the great 
Chicago Parliament, the design of which is the 
"religious unity of the race," no matter what 
the character of the religion may be; for, as 
some of the projectors affirm, they think the 
present is no time for Christians to put on any 
airs of superiority about their particular kind 
of religion. This is the day of compromises 
demanded by "the exigencies of these times" 
of Babylon's judgment. And the compromises, 
they realize, must be made, or the whole 
structure of "Christendom"— i.e., "Babylon," 
must hopelessly perish. 

We cannot afford, say the various denominations 
of Protestantism, to ignore and disfellowship 
that great branch of Christendom, the 



Church of Rome ["Babylon the great, the 
mother of harlots"]. All are now in haste to 
erase from their creeds those articles referring 
to Papacy as the Antichrist; and they say, We 
must secure Roman Catholic co-operation and 
assistance at any cost, while the Papacy only 
holds back for the privilege of dictating the 
terms of co-operation— which will be hers or 
none at all. The same compromising spirit is 
also manifest in the desire and effort to unite 
the various sects of Protestantism. In the 
more honest moods of former times Christians 
drifted apart because of their honest conceptions 
or misconceptions of divine truth; but 
now, too ignoble to confess their errors, yet 
anxious for union, they are ready to compromise 
their views of truth and their consciences 
for the sake of unity. 

This was very noticeable in the late Presbyterian 
Assembly at Washington, D.C., in their 
consideration of the overtures of the Protestant 
Episcopal church for unity and co-operation. 
When one gentleman, Dr. Hollifield, ventured 
to remind the assembly of its duty of honest 
consistency and fidelity to conscientious convictions, 
he was speedily silenced, and his unpopular 
utterances were frowned upon and denounced 
as uncharitable and unchristian, because 
against the present clerical policy of 
union and compromise. 

Dr. Hollifield said he thought the committee 
on church unity made a mistake when it proposed 
to shift the discussion from the differences 
between the two great ecclesiastical bodies 
named, to those in which they were in harmony. 
He was aware that the propositions were made 
with the best intentions in view; but he did 
not believe the unity hoped for could be secured 
by the means proposed. It was these 
differences, and not those points on which they 
were in accord, that had produced their alienation. 
The causes of the alienation should first 
be removed. The differences were not of minor 

R1547 : page 198 

importance: they were of a serious character. 
One obstacle was the Romish doctrines and 
practices of many (and a constantly increasing 
number) of the Protestant Episcopal churches. 
Many of them were so high— or, he would say, 
so low— that a stranger visiting one of them 
might mistake it for a Roman Catholic church. 
The Episcopal high church, he said, was nothing 
more nor less than a back door to Rome. This 
state of affairs was a barrier to Christian unity 



in its full sense, for they could not afford to 
enter into relations with a church whose trend 
was Romeward, if they were to be true to a pure 
gospel. This fidelity to a sacred trust, he said, 
is all the more imperative at the present, when 
Rome is finding a firmer foothold on our shores. 
But this earnest exhortation found no response 
in the hearts of other members of the 
assembly, and even this gentleman, in remaining 
in the organization, must submit his conscience 
in the matter to its majority decision, 
and thus become a partaker of their sins. His 
only proper course under these convictions 
would be to step out.— Rev. 18:4,5. 

"RELIGIOUS RIOTS ARE ABROAD." 

There is something very significant in the 
reported advice of Mr. Talmage to his congregation 
recently. He raised the question, What 
position shall we take with regard to the religious 
controversies now distracting the church? 
and then replied:— 

"Stay out of it. While these religious riots 
are abroad, stay at home and attend to business. 
Why, how do you expect a man only 
five or six feet high to wade through an ocean 
a thousand feet deep? I have not given two 
minutes in thirty years to studying the controversial 
points of religion; and if I live thirty 
years more I shall not give one-thirtieth of a 
second to them. The world is now being creeded 
to death. The young men now entering the 
ministry are being launched into the thickest fog 
that ever beset a coast." 

What confession! and what advice from a 
professed minister of the gospel of Christ! He 
sees the churches floundering about in a dense 
fog of ignorance and superstition, with dangerous 
rocks upon which their barks may be dashed 
at any moment; yet, by his own confession, 
he has not spent two minutes in thirty years in 
"earnestly contending for the faith once delivered 
to the saints," nor in studying to show 
himself "a workman approved unto God, rightly 
dividing the word of truth;" but has contented 

R1548 : page 198 

himself with delivering eloquent addresses to 
please the itching ears of an admiring public, 
instead of using his talents as a wise and faithful 
steward of his Master's goods. Such the 
Lord seems to denominate "wicked and slothful 
servants." 
But it is becoming more and more impossible 



to stay out of these controversies as he advises, 
and to remain neutral in the midst of the 
judgments of this Day of the Lord. The fire 
of this day will try every man's work, of what 
sort it is (1 Cor. 3:13); and if his faith is built 
with the stubble of error it will surely perish. 

The only safe way for any child of God to 
do is to ignore the advice of all such time-serving 
shepherds, and to see to it that his 
faith is securely founded upon the Rock, Christ 
Jesus, our Redeemer and Lord; and that its 
superstructure is built only with the gold and 
silver of inspired truth. But to do this, he 
would best take the advice of the Lord and the 
apostles in preference to that of Mr. Talmage 
or others.— "Search the Scriptures," and believe 
their testimony, rejecting all that is contrary 
to them. "To the law and to the testimony: 
if they speak not according to this 
word, it is because there is no light in them." 
-Isa. 8:20. 

What, indeed, may we expect to be the character 
of the "new," "electic" "world religion" 
which is to be evolved out of the present disorder 
and confusion— out of the present "thick 
fogs," "religious riots," and "ecclesiastical 
hysterics," as the present unrest is variously 
designated by prominent clergymen; when the 
leaders of Christendom have lost their landmarks 
and see nothing in Christianity whereof 
to boast over the superstitions of heathenism? 
Consistency would call in their missionaries. 

The church of Rome is determined that the 
character of the coming "world religion" shall 
be Papal, and is making every possible effort 
to that end. It is reported that within the 
last year Pope Leo XIII. , in negotiations with 
the Greek Catholic church, has practically 
brought within view the reunion of the long 

R1548 : page 199 

separated Greek and Roman Catholic churches. 
And every intelligent observer of the times 
knows of his policy and its progress here. 

The spectacle of Christendom to-day is indeed 
unique. On the one hand the power of 
the disintegrating elements is strikingly conspicuous, 
while on the other, the tendency to 
unity is very pronounced. The spirit of liberty 
and independence of thought and action, 
the increase of knowledge and general intelligence, 
and the awakening faculties and sensibilities 
of all classes, is rapidly tending to disintegration 
of the old creeds and of the great 
systems built upon them. The daily press reports 



a recent split, even in the Roman Catholic 
church in France, which is significant of 
the disintegrating work, even in the strongest 
holds of superstition. Thus men are being 
shaken apart and made to stand alone upon 
their own convictions. 

Such is the natural tendency of the present 
times in accordance with the Lord's design. 
The tendency to unity is, on the contrary, an 
artificial one and the efforts in that direction are 
made for policy's sake by those whose financial 
and social interests are bound up with the 
old tottering systems. The clergy are making 
use of their office to withstand the inevitable 
current of the present natural tendency; and 
they will doubtless succeed for a time, but only 
to make the final outcome more appalling. 

The one thing most desired by the clergy, 
whose craft and reputation and honors are in 
danger, and which they, as a class, are most 
earnestly striving for, is Union at any cost; 
because in union there is strength. But thus 
saith the Lord of hosts by the mouth of the 
Prophet Isaiah (Isa. 8:9,10), "Associate yourselves, 
O ye people, and ye shall be broken in 
pieces; and give ear, all ye [heathen] of far 
countries; gird yourselves and ye shall be 
broken in pieces. Take counsel together and 
it shall come to naught; speak the word and 
it shall not stand." 

"SHE SHALL NOT BE MOVED." 

But, while assuring us that the nominal 
church will be utterly broken to pieces in this 
her judgment day, after, by her own strife of 
tongues, she has confessed her own blindness 
to truth and reason, her own nakedness, so far 
as the robe of Christ's righteousness, and her 
own unfaithfulness to her espoused Lord, God 
assures us it shall not be so with his true 
Church. Hidden for centuries in the great 
mass of tares of the nominal systems, the true 
Church as represented by its living members 
will now be manifested; although the world 
which knew not her Lord and Head will not 
recognize her worth or beauty. But the Lord 
knoweth them that are his, and will be gathering 
his elect ones out of the various divisions 
of Babylon, and will bless and feed them, 
while Babylon is falling. Hence now the cry, 
"Come out of her [Babylon] my people, that 
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 
not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) The 
peaceful keeping of his true Zion, by the Lord, 
throughout this stormy day, of judgments upon 



civil, religious, social and financial systems, is 
shown in prophetic symbology in Psalm 46. 



R1559 :page 199 
REST IN THE LORD. 

Just to let thy Father do 

What he will; 
Just to know that he is true, 

And be still. 

Just to follow, hour by hour, 

As he leadeth; 
Just to draw the moment's power 

As it needeth. 

Just to trust him: this is all! 

Then the day will surely be 
Peaceful, whatsoe'er befall, 

Bright and blessed, calm and free. 

Just to recognize its light, 

All-enfolding; 
Just to claim its present might, 

All-upholding. 

Just to know it as thine own, 
That no power can take away: 

Is not this enough alone 

For the gladness of the day? 

Just to let him take the care 

Sorely pressing, 
Finding all we let him bear 

Changed to blessing. 

This is all! and yet the way 

Marked by him who loves the best: 
Secret of a happy day, 

Secret of his promised rest. —Selected. 



R1548 : page 200 

MAN AND WOMAN IN GOD'S ORDER. 



[We devote considerable space in this issue to the 
consideration of woman's sphere, as viewed from the Bible 
standpoint; especially in the light of the Apostle Paul's 
teachings. A very general misunderstanding of the Apostle's 



words has fostered a spirit of doubt as to his divine 
inspiration, and thus proved a steppingstone to Infidelity. 
Such doubts having once gotten control of the mind are apt 
to lead to the very extreme of so-called Woman's Rights 
—forcing some to an extreme on that side of the question 
as others have gone to an extreme on the opposite side: 
making women mere slaves, drudges or entertainers for 
men— erroneously supposing that the apostles so taught. 
These articles may therefore be considered as supplemental 
to our defense of the apostolic authority and inerrancy, 
presented in our issue of May 1st, and are called forth in 
response to many inquiries.] 

WHILE we recognize the fact that, as spiritual 
new creatures in Christ Jesus, we 
are not esteemed of God on account of pedigree, 
station or sex; that, in his estimation 
of worthiness for the heirship of the coming 
Kingdom, "there is neither Jew nor Greek, 
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither 
male nor female, for we are all one in Christ 
Jesus" (Gal. 3:28), and are "all called in one 
hope of our calling" (Eph. 4:4), it is nevertheless 
true that we are still in the flesh and 
that we have to do with earthly conditions; 
and, further, that upon our proper attitude in 
the various relationships of life, and our faithful 
observance of the teachings of the Scriptures 
with reference to them, our worthiness or 
unworthiness of divine favor is judged. While 
every question of moral rights and obligations 
is pushed to the front in this "day of preparation" 
(Nahum 2:3), this subject is coming 
forward for consideration and ventilation, as 
many Infidels and even Christians are claiming 
that the Bible teaches domestic slavery. 

It will therefore be our endeavor to present 
as briefly as possible what we believe to be the 
Scriptural view of this subject, assured that, 
whatever may be the human prejudices of various 
individuals, God's Word is the only safe 
guide to the truth. His Word is by no means 
silent with reference to it; and an examination 
of all its testimony on the subject will, we believe, 
entirely silence in the estimation of all 
fair minded Christians the above mentioned 
charge against the Bible. 

The first testimony of the Bible on this subject, 
aside from the statement that the man 
was made first and the woman subsequently as 
his capable helper and suitable companion, is 
found in God's statement to the woman after 
the eating of the forbidden fruit— "Thy desire 
shall be unto thy husband, and he shall rule 
over thee." While authority to rule is naturally 
implied in the headship of the man (1 Cor. 11; 



1 Tim. 2:13), yet, it is not difficult to see that 
the Lord referred to something more than this; 
for its mention is in connection with the penalty 
put upon woman, because of her share in 
the original sin. The implication is that her 
husband's rule would be tyrannical, and that 
she would suffer injustice under it, which she 
would not have suffered otherwise. And such 
has been the case: the rule or headship of the 
husband, which in perfection would have been 
a rule for the protection and in the interest of 
all the members of his family— a rule of love, 
a guidance rather— has in a majority of cases 
become, through the fall, a rule of selfishness, 
and fear, and general imposition. Indeed some 
men will use this very Scripture as a justification 
of their course of selfish tyranny. 

But while facts fully corroborate the Lord's 
testimony on this subject, it is a great mistake 
to suppose that God's will is done by those 
who thus misuse their natural headship. On 
the contrary, we should see in the expression 
God's prophecy of the evil that would come 
upon womankind by reason of the fall of man 
from his original likeness of God. And, be it 
noted, the more degraded the man the more 
unfeeling will be his treatment of the one whom 
he should love and cherish as his own body. 

Man's sphere in the world is pretty clearly 
defined as the head or chief of the creation, 
while the woman's sphere as a help, meet for 
him, is a much more debatable one. The 
question is, "To what extent may she help 
him?" While we believe that, according to 
the Bible teaching, she may help him to the 
extent of her ability and opportunity— in the 
home, the church and the world— we hear 

R1549 : page 201 

many dissenting voices in favor of very considerably 

circumscribing her influence, if not 

in the home, at least in the church and in the 

world. Let us hear, therefore, first, What 

saith the Scripture concerning— 

WOMAN'S PLACE IN THE CHURCH. 



Peter, addressing the whole Church, without 
respect to sex, says, "Ye are a chosen generation, 
a royal priesthood, a holy nation,... 
that ye [all— male and female] should show 
forth the praises of him who hath called you 
out of darkness into his marvelous light." 



(1 Pet. 2:9.) And again we read (Isa. 61:1), 

"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because 

he hath anointed me to preach," etc. 

See also Luke 4:18-20, where our Lord quotes 

and applies only a part of this prophecy to 

himself, leaving another portion of the commission 

which was not due in his day for the 

body of Christ— male and female— to declare. 

The word "because" shows that the anointing 

is for the very purpose of fitting those so anointed 

—whether male or female— to preach the 

good tidings. Therefore all of the anointed, 

male or female, Jew or Greek, bond or free, 

are anointed to preach. 

In Heb. 5:12 Paul upbraids the Church, 
making no distinction of sex, for inability to 
teach on account of neglect of opportunities to 
fit themselves for the work, saying, "For when 
for the time [spent] ye ought to be teachers, 
ye have need that one teach you again which 
be the first principles of the oracles of God; 
and are become such as have need of milk and 
not of strong meat." Again we read (1 Pet. 4: 10), 
"As each one [male or female] has received 
a free gift, so minister the same one to 
another as good stewards of the manifold grace 
of God." "Moreover," says Paul (1 Cor. 4:2), 
"it is required in stewards that they be found 
faithful." There is no distinction of sex here: 
each one, male or female, who possesses a talent 
or gift, becomes a steward of the same; and in 
the reckoning day the Lord will require each 
steward to give an account of his stewardship. 
Faithfulness is required of all in the use of 
all talents possessed. -Matt. 25:14-30. 

In harmony with the teaching of these scriptures, 
that women, as well as men, are accountable 
to God for the use of their talents in the 
Church, be they many or few, and also with 
the teaching of Paul, that the activity of every 
member of the body of Christ is necessary to 
the general health of the whole body, we have 
numerous precedents established in the Scriptures. 
Thus (1) the women who were the first 
at the sepulcher on the morning of the resurrection 
were sent by the Lord to bear the first 
message of his resurrection to the apostles. 
(2) The woman of Samaria with whom the 
Lord conversed, and to whom he was pleased 
to reveal himself as the Messiah, was not forbidden 
to go into the city and declare the 
news to many— which she did at once, leaving 
her water-pots and going in haste. And the 
result was that many believed through her testimony, 
however she may have declared it.— 
John 4:28-30,39. 



We find, too, that women, as well as men, 
shared the gift of prophecy, which the Apostle 
Paul (1 Cor. 14:3,4) defines to be "speaking 
to edification, exhortation and comfort"— i.e., 
teaching or exhorting according to the measure 
of the gift of God. (See also 1 Cor. 12:31.) 
And in 1 Cor. 11, Paul admits the propriety 
of women publicly praying and prophesying, 
provided they do so with becoming 
modesty, of which the covering of the head 
was in those times a special mark, particularly 
among the Greeks, here addressed. To ignore 
such a custom, as some seemed inclined to do 
when they began to realize the liberty of the 
gospel, would have brought reproach upon the 
cause of Christ, and also upon "the angels," 
messengers or ministers of the Christian faith 
—the apostles and others. 

We have some examples of prophesying, by 
women,— for instance, Anna (Luke 2:36-38); 
Philip's four daughters (Acts 21:8,9); Miriam 
(Micah 6:1-4); Huldah (2 Chron. 34:21-28) 
and Deborah (Judges 4:4-24). And, further, 
we have the remarkable prophecy of Joel 2:28,29, 
of which Peter claimed there was at 
least a partial fulfilment on the day of Pentecost, 
when the holy Spirit descended in power 
upon all present. (Acts 2:17,18.) Paul also 
mentions with evident appreciation the activity 

R1549 : page 202 

of certain females in the early Church- 
notably Priscilla, Tryphena, Tryphosa, the 
mother of Rufus and Julia, the sister of Nereus. 
(Rom. 16; also Phil. 4:3.) And in every instance, 
except 1 Cor. 16:19, where Priscilla 
and her husband Aquila are mentioned, Priscilla 
is mentioned first, as if she were the more 
prominent and active of the two. (See Rom. 16:3; 
2 Tim. 4:19; Acts 18:18,26 R.V.) She 
and her husband also accompanied Paul on 
one of his journeys from Corinth to Ephesus, 
where they met Apollos and were both diligent 
in instructing him more perfectly in the truth. 
(Acts 18:18-26.) Although the Scriptures are 
not addressed to the world, they utter no voice 
and establish no precedent contrary to female 
activity in the various legitimate pursuits of 
life for which nature and education have 
fitted her. And though in times past female 
education was at a very low ebb, and women 
were seldom fitted for other than domestic 
pursuits, we have a worthy example of one efficient 
female Judge in Israel— Deborah, the 
wife of Lapidoth (Judges 4:4-24; 5:1-31) who 



was also a prophetess and evidently a woman 
of great ability and influence. Huldah, the 
wife of Shallum (2 Kings 22:14-20), was also 
a prophetess to whom the king of Israel sent. 

From all these indications we gather that 
God, who is no respecter of persons, requires 
faithfulness on the part of female as well as 
male stewards in the use of all their talents, 
with no other restrictions than that they do so 
with that modesty which is specially becoming 
to their sex; and that, if God gives to any female 
member of the body of Christ a talent 
or special ability for teaching or prophesying, 
as she has done in the past, it is her privilege, 
and not only so, but her duty, to earnestly cultivate 
and use that talent as a wise and faithful 
stewardess. This the Apostle Paul also clearly 
teaches in 1 Cor. 12:28-31, when, after 
naming teaching as one of the best gifts, he 
urges all, without distinction of sex, to "covet 
earnestly the best gifts." 

WOMAN'S RELATIONSHIP TO MAN. 



Let us next note what some consider a direct 
contradiction of the foregoing Scriptural 
findings in the words of the Apostle Paul (1 Tim. 2:12) 
—"I suffer not a woman to teach, 
nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be 
in silence" [hesuchia, quietness]. But the 
Apostle proceeds to give his reason for the restriction; 
and in doing so he refers us back to 
the original relationship of Adam and Eve in 
the garden of Eden, saying, "For Adam was 
first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not 
deceived, but the woman, being deceived, became 
a transgressor." Turning to Genesis (2:16-18) 
we see that, before Eve was created, 
"God commanded the man, saying, "Of every 
tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat: but 
of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil 
thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day that 
thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." 

It is plain, then, that the Lord did not communicate 
directly with Eve, but with Adam, 
and that Eve received this warning from 
God through Adam. Thus Adam, under God, 
was the teacher, and Eve the learner. And 
it was right and proper, in this instance at 
least, that the woman should "learn in silence 
with all subjection," as the Apostle counsels in 
1 Tim. 2:11. What right had she to object? 
God had taught her husband, and in giving her 
to him had imposed upon him the duties of a 



husband (a care-taker and provider for her), 
and in fulfilling this obligation Adam had 
communicated to Eve this knowledge which 
was necessary to her preservation and her harmony 
with God. Thus God taught the headship 
of man, which the Apostle would have the 
Corinthian Church distinctly understand.— 
ICor. 11:3. 

In addressing himself to Eve the Adversary 
tempted her to disregard the warning of God 
through her husband. This she did, and that 
without even consulting Adam as to the propriety 
of heeding this new and strange instructor, 
who was evidently out of harmony 
with God. In acting thus, independent both 
of God and of the natural protector which God 
had provided, the woman became a transgressor; 
and since she thus ignored God, she was 
left to her own judgment entirely, and was deceived; 
not, however, as to the unrighteousness 
of her course, but as to the result of that 

R1549 : page 203 

course, which she presumed would lead to 
greater blessing (knowledge), instead of to 
death. And not only did she thus ignore 
Adam and the instruction of God through 
Adam, and act entirely upon her own judgment, 
but she further assumed to lead or teach Adam 
her new doctrine, thus reversing the divine 
order of headship. And in following this reversed 
order of headship, Adam, though not 
deceived, also became a transgressor. 

It is for this reason, says the Apostle, that I 
suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority 
over the man. But how to harmonize 
this restriction with the seemingly contrary 
scriptures already referred to still remains a difficult 
question to many; one, however, to which 
there surely must be some solution. First, we 
would inquire, Does this order of headship inhere 
in mankind as a class, distinct from woman-kind? 
or does it apply merely in the relationship 
of husband and wife? That the former 
is true, is, we think, quite evident from 1 Cor. 11:3, 
which reads, "I would have you know 
that the head of every man is Christ; and the 
head of the woman is the man; and the head 
of Christ is God." 

What, then, we would inquire, is implied in 
this office of headship? The figure, we see, is 
drawn from that important member of the human 
body, the head, which is the chief member— the 
member in which inheres the right of leadership 
and authority. And this interpretation is borne 



out by the perfect illustration of headship in 

R1550 : page 203 

the relationship of Jehovah to Christ. In the 
one inheres the legislative, in the other a delegated 
executive power. In accordance with 
the illustration, therefore, the relationship of 
man to Christ and of woman to man should be 
that of subserviency; and if men and women 
were perfect the beautiful harmony of such a 
relationship would yield perfect satisfaction to 
both. Man would be in harmony with Christ, 
woman in harmony with man, and all in harmony 
with Jehovah. Thus the divine order of 
headship would unify all in the bonds of mutual 
love and peace. 

But the question arises, How is this idea of 
headship compatible with the idea of individual 
liberty— the glorious liberty of the sons of 
God? Is the illustration of head and body to 
be pressed to its utmost limit here? The human 
body in health never performs an act except 
by the authority and consent of the head; 
and the mystical body of Christ (the Church), 
in health always delights to know and to do 
the will of Christ; and Christ has ever sought 
to know and do the Father's will. And so 
likewise if the human family were unimpaired 
by sin woman would enjoy her station and 
man would not misuse his strength, mental or 
physical, tyrannically. Looking again at the 
perfect illustration of this relationship between 
Jehovah and Christ, we see that the order of 
headship, rightly exercised, is entirely compatible 
with the glorious liberty of sons of God. 
For although Jehovah is the head of Christ we 
see him delighting to honor his Son, making 
him in turn the head of all principality and 
power (Col. 2:10; 1:16; Eph. l:10-Diaglott), 
and calling upon all men to "honor the 
Son, even as they honor the Father" [for he is 
the Father's representative and the express image 
of his person]. We see him also committing 
all judgment unto the Son. He first 
proved him and found him worthy of confidence; 
and then, having made known his plans 
to him, he committed to him their execution. 
And so we read, "The Father judgeth no man, 
but hath committed all judgment unto the 
Son" (John 5:22), and, again, that "all power 
in heaven and in earth" is given unto him.— 
Matt. 28:18. 

Surely there is no semblance of bondage in 
this relationship of Christ to Jehovah; but under 
Jehovah's supreme headship there is the 



fullest liberty and the widest scope for the development 

and use of all Christ's noble powers. 

And Christ, on his part, as subject to Jehovah, 

his head, is in all his works subject to those 

principles of action and that plan of work 

which the wisdom and goodness of Jehovah 

have decreed. Within these metes and bounds 

of Jehovah's headship, then, is the glorious 

liberty of the only begotten Son of God. 

Thus should man also be subject to his head, 

which is Christ, whose supervision, like that of 

Jehovah, is also sufficiently generous to admit 

of the widest range and development of all his 

R1550 : page 204 

manly powers. And thus, also, should the 
headship of man be exercised toward woman— 
not to degrade and dwarf her powers under the 
bondage of tyranny, but to elevate and ennoble 
her; granting to her, under his leadership and 
encouragement, the fullest liberty for the legitimate 
use of all her powers. 

But to return to Paul's statement, "I suffer 
not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority 
over a man," we see that, in harmony with the 
reason given for the restriction, and also with 
the fact that they did teach on numerous occasions 
mentioned in the Scriptures, we must 
interpret the former clause of this statement in 
the light of the latter, viz., that the woman is 
not to usurp the natural position of the man as 
leader and teacher, and, disregarding his headship, 
to take that attitude herself— an attitude 
contrary to nature, incompatible with womanly 
grace, and unlovely in the eyes of all right-thinking 
people. With this interpretation of 
the Apostle's language here, his teaching elsewhere, 
for instance in 1 Cor. 11:5, is in entire 
harmony. 

The idea is not to debar woman from her 
privilege and duty of making good use of all 
her talents as a wise stewardess, and as one 
who must give an account of her stewardship, 
nor to prohibit her from teaching the truth to 
others, but rather to point out to her the excellent 
and most effective ways for the use of 
her influence in life. Nature would, doubtless, 
generally indicate to both men and women 
their proper spheres for usefulness; but alas! 
none can be found in a natural condition:— 
all are fallen, mentally, physically and morally; 
and some more than others and in different 
ways. No womanly woman takes as her ideal 
a noisy declaimer, an assertive debater, an obtrusive 
public speaker, nor an ambitious leader. 



And yet, on fitting occasions, where the interests 
of the truth require it, she may, in a 
womanly way and without the least assuming 
the manly prerogatives of headship, declare the 
good tidings of great joy to as many as will 
hear her, whether male or female; and on some 
occasions the interests of the truth may necessitate 
her debating a question, which can often 
be just as effectively done in a suggestive, as 
in an assertive, way; and generally much more 
so, as some men, as well as women, have 
learned. Those who understand human nature 
best, know that frequently more can be done 
in the way of disarming prejudice and establishing 
the truth by the latter, than by the 
former method. 

A woman may thus, in the full exercise of 
her liberty as a child of God, bring forth all 
her strong reasons before as many as desire to 
hear, and may clearly state her own convictions 
of the truth, but always with that moderation 
and candor which, acknowledging the 
natural headship of man, would avoid even the 
appearance of dictation or usurping of authority; 
and if there be a man present who can and 
will relieve her of the responsibility of so prominent 
a position, her natural modesty should 
decline the undertaking. The "silence" or 
quietness enjoined by the Apostle in the above 
text, is not to be understood in an absolute 
sense, but rather in that relative sense which 
would harmonize with his admission of woman's 
right to pray, or prophesy, or explain the 
truth, as they evidently did in the apostles' 
days, when they had ability and opportunity. 
In 1 Thes. 4:10,11 the Apostle similarly exhorts 
the brethren to quietness saying, "We beseech 
you, brethren,... that ye study to be 
quiet and to mind your own affairs, and to 
work with your hands as we commanded you." 
The same word is also used in 1 Tim. 2:2. 

The expression of the Apostle Paul in 1 Cor. 14:34,35, 
we need to remember, was addressed 
to a class of Greek converts to Christianity 
whose habits were altogether different from the 
civilization of to-day, as well as from those of 
the Hebrew and Roman civilizations of that 
day. While Greece was the center of learning 
in its day, the women of Greece were very degraded 
and ignorant, so that it was necessary 
to speak to some of them with a degree of 
force which the Apostle never used in speaking 
to either Hebrew or Roman Christian women. 
From this epistle, we see that the Church 
at Corinth was in a very disorderly condition, 
and that their assemblies were often confused 



and unprofitable. The Apostle, in this chapter, 
is laying down some very necessary rules and 

R1550 : page 205 

regulations, so that all things might be done 
"decently and in order" (verse 40); and the 
disorderly women as well as men (verses 28,30,33; 
chap. 11:17-22,31-34; 6:5-11; 5:1-13; 
3:1-3) came in for their share of the needed 
reproof. It was a shame for those women to 
speak in the Church, first, because any publicity 
of their women was so regarded there and 
then; and, secondly, because they were unfitted 
to do so intelligently, and so it was better 
that they should listen in silence at the 
meetings of the Church, and inquire further of 
their husbands [literally, men] at home. To 
force the application of this instruction upon 
the whole Church during the entire age, would 
do violence to the general tenor of Scripture 
teaching with reference to woman's sphere of 
action and responsibility of service as man's 
worthy and suitable help-mate, which the Lord 
pronounced her to be. As well might we bind 
upon the entire Church the obligations of literally 
washing one another's feet and greeting 
one another with a holy kiss, which are repeatedly 
enjoined (See Rom. 16:15,16; 1 Cor. 16:20; 
1 Thes. 5:26; 1 Pet. 5:14), but which 
we instinctively recognize in spirit, but not in 
letter; the courtesies and civilities of our times 
being somewhat different from the customs of 
that day, although equally hospitable. 

In order that all may see clearly the conditions 
which necessitated the Apostle's seemingly 
harsh language to the women of the 
Corinthian Church, we make a few brief quotations 
from noted authors, showing the state 
of society in Corinth, Ephesus and the principal 
cities of the Greek civilization of that time. 

In the Contemporary Review, Vol. 34, March 
1879, page 700, in an article on "The Position 
and Influence of Women in Ancient Athens," 
Prof. Donaldson of St. Andrews University, 
Scotland, says:— 

"In Athens we find two classes of women 
who were not slaves. There was one class who 
could scarcely move one step from their own 
rooms, and who were watched and restricted 
in every possible way. There was another class 
on whom no restrictions whatever were laid, 
who could move about and do whatever seemed 
good in their own eyes. The citizen women 
[the wives] had apartments assigned to them, 
generally in the upper story. They were forbidden 



to be present at any banquet. The men 

preferred to dine with themselves rather than 

expose their wives to their neighbor's gaze. 

Seemingly the education of girls was confined 

to the merest elements. It is scarcely possible 

to conceive that such a marvelous crop of remarkable 

men, renounced in literature and art, 

could have arisen if all the Athenian mothers 

were ordinary housewives. [But they were not: 

multitudes of the mothers were not wives, but 

were of the educated though dissolute class, 

above mentioned, who were granted every 

R1551 : page 205 

liberty.] But though there never was in the 
history of the world such a numerous race of 
great thinkers, poets, sculptors, painters and 
architects in one city at one time, as in Athens, 
not one virtuous Athenian woman ever attained 
the slightest distinction in any one department 
of literature, art or science. 

"We pass from the citizen women [the wives] 
of Athens to the other class of free women— 
the strangers or courtesans. These stranger 
women could not marry. They might do any 
thing else they liked. The citizen women were 
confined to the house and did not dine with 
the men; but the men refused to limit their associations 
with women to the house. Accordingly 
they selected these stranger women as 
their companions; and 'Hetairai,' or companions, 
was the name by which the whole class 
was designated. The citizen women had to 
be mothers and wives, nothing more. The 
stranger women had to discharge the duties 
of companions, but to remain outside the pale 
of the marriageable class. They were the only 
educated women in Athens. Almost every one 
of the great men in Athens had such a companion, 
and these women seemed to have 
sympathized with them in their high imaginations 
and profound meditations. 

"But the Athenian women, even the citizens, 
had no political standing. They were always 
minors. Such, however, was the force of character 
of these 'Hetairai,' or such their hold on 
powerful men, that not infrequently their sons 
were recognized (by special decree) as citizens. 
The names of virtuous wives are not to be found 
in history; but the influence of the 'Hetairai' 
comes more and more into play. They cultivated 
all the graces of life; they dressed with 
exquisite taste; they were witty. But it must 
not be forgotten that hundreds and thousands 
of these unprotected women were employed as 



the tools of the basest passions, seeking only, 
under the form of affection, to ruin men and 
send them in misery to an early grave." 

Every statement here quoted from Prof. Donaldson 
is amply supported by citations from 

R1551 : page 206 

Greek authors in the writings of Prof. Becker, 
of Germany, who is quoted by all recent writers 
as unquestioned authority upon ancient 
Greek and Roman life. In his "Charicles," 
page 463, he says:— 

"At this time, and in the very focus of civilization, 
the women were regarded as a lower 
order of beings; naturally prone to evil, and 
fitted only for propagating the species and 
gratifying the sensual appetites of man. There 
were no educational institutions for girls, nor 
any private teachers at home. They were excluded 
from intercourse, not only with strangers, 
but also with their own nearest relations, 
and they saw but little even of their fathers 
and husbands. The maidens, especially, lived 
in the greatest seclusion until their marriage, 
and, so to speak, regularly under lock and 
key." Page 287— "At Athens it was a thing 
unheard of for any free woman to make purchases 
in the market." 

In a work on "Old Greek Education," by 
Prof. J. P. Mahaffy, of Trinity College, Dublin 
—page 1 1 —he mentions the frequency with 
which children were exposed or left to die of 
starvation and neglect, and says:— 

"We cannot really doubt that the exposing 
of new-born infants was not only sanctioned 
by the public feeling, but actually practiced 
throughout Greece. Plato practiced infanticide 
under certain circumstances in his ideal 
state. Nowhere does the agony of the mother's 
heart reach us through their literature, 
save where Socrates compares the anger of his 
pupils when first confuted out of their opinions, 
to the fury of a young mother deprived 
of her first infant. There is something horrible 
in the allusion, as if, in after life, Attic 
mothers became hardened to this kind of treatment. 
The exposing of female infants was not 
uncommon." 

The bearing of this general condition of woman 
under the Greek civilization upon the language 
of the Apostle Paul to some of them, is 
still more clearly seen when we consider that 
Corinth was one of the worst of the Grecian 
cities. Prof. Becker says:— 

"Corinth seems to have surpassed all other 



cities in the number of its Hetairai, to whom 
the wealth and splendor of the place, as well 
as the crowd of wealthy merchants, held out 
the prospects of a rich harvest." 

From these observations it is clear that when 
Corinthian men became Christians, and, disregarding 
the prevailing public sentiment, 
brought their wives with them to meetings of 
the Church, the women were very ignorant and 
lacking in essential decorum and were inclined 
to disturb the meetings by asking unprofitable 
questions, which the Apostle instructed them 
to inquire of at home of their husbands, who 
could give them the simple instruction which 
they needed; for it was an improper thing for 
those women to speak in the Church and to 
disturb its proper, orderly worship, etc. We 
must remember, too, that Christianity then, as 
now, did not generally make its converts among 
the great men and philosophers, but among 
the poorer classes— the common people. 

This condition of the Corinthian women also 
makes very clear the necessity of the Apostle's 
instructions in 1 Cor. 11, about the covering 
of the head, which among that people 
specially was an indication of modesty. To 
have suddenly disregarded the custom, when 
they began to see the liberty of the gospel, 
would have been misunderstood, and would 
probably have cultivated in them, in their ignorance, 
a disposition to ignore the headship 
of man, and to become self-conscious and 
self-assertive. 

When we note the very different conditions 
of the Roman and Hebrew women, we can account 
for the absence of any such instruction 
in the epistles to the Roman and Hebrew 
Christians. 

Dr. Smith, in his Greek and Roman Antiquities, 
says:— 

"The position of a Roman woman after marriage 
was very different from that of a Greek 
woman. The Roman wife presided over the 
whole household, and shared the honor and 
respect shown to her husband." 

And Prof. Becker says:— 

"The Roman housewife always appears as 
the mistress of the whole household economy, 
instructress of the children, guardian of the 
honor of the house, and equally esteemed with 
her husband, both in and out of the house. 
The women frequented public theaters, as well 
as the men, and took their places with them 
at public banquets." 

The freedom of women in Hebrew society 
is so manifest from the Scriptures as to need 



no further proof. They freely conversed with 

the Lord and the apostles, and other male disciples, 

R1551 : page 207 

attended the meetings of the Church 

and Synagogues, and went about with entire 

freedom. Consequently, when Christianity took 

hold of them, it found them ready for Christian 

work without being hampered by the restraints 

of hereditary custom, which among 

other peoples must be measurably adhered to 

until a gradual reconstruction of public sentiment 

could be brought about, lest otherwise 

reproach be brought upon the cause of Christ. 

WOMAN A HELP, MEET FOR MAN. 



"And Jehovah said, It is not good that the man should 
be alone: I will make him a help suitable for him.... 
And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl 
of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam 
there was not found a help suitable for him. ...And 
the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made 
he a woman, and brought her unto the man. And Adam 
said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. 
She shall be called woman [ishah], because she was 
taken out of man [ish]."— Gen. 2:18,20,22,23. 

In pursuing our study of woman's appointed 
place in the divine economy of creation, we 
turn to the above brief account of her first introduction 
to the earth and to man; for the 
Apostle says, "the woman was created for the 
man." (1 Cor. 11:9.) As the account indicates, 
the object of woman's creation was that 
she might be a suitable help for man. That 
man needed just such a help is indicated, not 
only by the Lord's statement that it was "not 
good" for him to be "alone," but also by the 
statement that among all the animals there was 
none found to be "a suitable help." True, 
they were all in perfect subjection to him as 
their lord and master, and perfectly obedient 
in rendering all the service required. Many 
of them were strong to bear his burdens, some 
fleet to run his errands; some gratified his love 
of the beautiful in form and proportions, and 
some in plumage; some charmed his ear with 
strains of music; and all manifested more or 
less of intelligence and affection; yet in all 
there was a lack. The perfect man did not 
crave a burden-bearer, nor an errand-runner, 
nor a gay butterfly to please the sight, nor a 



charming musician: what he craved was an intelligent 
sympathetic companion; and this lack, 
the "suitable help," which God subsequently 
provided, exactly supplied. 

When God had created her and brought her 
to the man, Adam named her woman. That 
the word was not used to specially indicate the 
power of motherhood, is manifest from the fact 
that when God said that she should become a 
mother, Adam changed her name to Eve, because 
she was to be the mother of all living. 
(Gen. 3:20.) We also read (Gen. 5:2) that 

R1552 : page 207 

"God called their name Adam in the day 
when they were created." Thus both God and 
the man recognized this new creature as of the 
same nature as the man, and yet differing from 
him both physically and intellectually. She 
was not another man, but another human being, 
the counterpart of the man, and therefore 
a suitable helper for him. 

She was a help in that she was a companion 
for him. Before she came, Adam, though surrounded 
by a host of the lower animals, was 
"alone," and in need of the help of companionship 
which they could not supply. That 
the help needed was not merely in the work of 
propagating the species is clear, from the fact 
that she was recognized and accepted as the 
suitable and desired help from the very beginning, 
and before the propagating of the race 
was mentioned— which did not begin until after 
the fall. This was a merciful providence, in 
order that, as Paul shows, every member of the 
race might share the blessings of redemption 
through Christ. -Rom. 5:12; 11:32,33. 

We thus see that man found in the woman 
an intellectual companion, one capable of sharing 
and appreciating all his joys (he had 
no sorrows) and of participating with him in 
all his interests. Had she come short of such 
capacity she would not have been a suitable 
companion or help, and Adam would still have 
been to some extent alone. As the sons and 
daughters of men have multiplied, the same 
characteristics as in the beginning continue to 
distinguish the two sexes, with the exception 
that both have suffered from the fall; hence 
the two sexes still stand similarly related to 
each other— man the "head" of the earthly 
creation, and woman a "suitable help" for him. 
And this, as the Apostle shows (1 Cor. 11:3), is 
regardless of the marriage relation. Man, in 
the image and glory of God, was created the 



R1552 : page 208 

sovereign of the earth; and woman, "the 

glory of man" in all the natural relationships 

of life, but especially that of wifehood, is his 

worthy companion and joint heir, his queen. 

And in this sense, God gave to them both, originally, 

the earthly dominion— over the fish, 

fowl, beasts of the field, etc.— Gen. 1:27,28; 

Psa. 8:6-8. 

It is therefore fitting that this natural relationship 
of the sexes should always be observed; 
that woman should remember that she is not 
the head, the chief, the leader, in the world's 
affairs, though there is ample scope for the use 
of all her powers under a proper and generous 
exercise of the headship of man. And it is 
equally necessary and proper that man should 
fully recognize, appreciate and accept of the 
help which woman is capable of rendering in 
all the affairs of life where such capability is 
manifest. If God has given to her talents, they 
were given her for cultivation and use, in order 
that she might be a more efficient help for man; 
and it would not be right, nor can man afford, 
to refuse such help and seek to dwarf such 
talents. Let the "help" help as much as possible, 
even though in the present imperfect 
condition, as is sometimes the case, the help 
may outstrip the head in ability, either natural 
or acquired. So long as the woman's work is 
done in a modest, womanly way— with no disposition 
to lord it over the divinely appointed 
head or king of earth— let her do with her 
might what her hands find to do. 

As a general thing, however, woman's special 
helpfulness is in the sphere to which her special 
work of necessity usually confines her— as wife, 
mother, sister, friend— in the home, the schoolroom, 
and in the duties which naturally fall 
to her in religious and in social life, and occasionally 
in business life. Let woman bring into 
all these relationships her highest moral 
and intellectual attainments, the finest touches 
of art, and the most noble physique which nature 
and cultivation can give, and she will the 
most truly answer the ends of her existence as 
a worthy and suitable help to earth's intended 
king— man. True, man and woman have lost 
the dominion of the earth originally bestowed 
upon them as king and joint-heir; but still, 
though under the burden of the curse, woman 
can be a help, meet for man, in the struggle 
upward toward perfection; and no true man 
will despise such helpfulness when tendered in 



a spirit of sisterly interest. 
WOMAN AS A WIFE. 



Having seen that the natural attitude of women 
in general to men in general is that of 
suitable helps, and not of heads, let us now 
consider the Scriptural position respecting woman 
as a wife. In alas too many cases, this, the 
dearest relationship of earth, is degraded to a 
domestic slavery. And the slave-holding tyrants 
too often pervert or misinterpret the 
teachings of the apostles to the support of their 
course— some unwittingly. It is therefore our 
purpose to examine such scriptures as are frequently 
urged in the interest of domestic tyranny 
and in the dwarfing and degrading of 
woman in her noblest sphere on the natural 
plane,— as a true wife. 

We are free to assert in the outstart that the 
Scriptures, rightly interpreted, teach no such 
thing; and one of the best evidences that they 
do not, is seen in the fact that the Lord has 
chosen this relationship as a type of the relationship 
between himself and the glorified 
Church— a consummation so glorious, that it 
is held out as a prize to the faithful children of 
God all through the Gospel age; a prize worthy 
of the sacrifice of every temporal interest, even 
unto death. The type of such a relationship 
ought, indeed, in some sense, to manifest that 
coming glory. 

We have already seen that in the relationship 
of head and body, to which the Apostle 
compares husband and wife, and which is gloriously 
illustrated in the relationship of Jehovah 
to Christ Jesus, and between our Lord Jesus 
and the Church, there is nothing incompatible 
with "the glorious liberty of the sons of God," 
and hence that the other headship of man over 
woman, rightly exercised, is likewise compatible 
with a similarly glorious liberty. 

We have also seen that the headship of man 
is not designed to debar woman from the privilege 
and duty of making the fullest use of her 
talents as a wise stewardess in the service of the 

R1552 : page 209 

Lord; but rather to increase her usefulness by 
putting her powers and energies in co-operation 
with a still stronger power. 

As an illustration of the apostolic teaching 
presumed to imply a servile subjection of the 



wife to the husband, we are sometimes referred 
to Eph. 5:22-24— "Wives, submit yourselves 
unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord; for 
the husband is the head of the wife, even as 
Christ is the head of the Church; he is the 
preserver of the body. Therefore, as the Church 
is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be subject 
to their own husbands in every thing." 

If the office of the head inheres in men in 
general, and should be observed by women in 
general, the argument gathers force in the 
special relationship of husband and wife; for 
the reverence which woman naturally feels for 
the opposite sex, ought indeed to be intensified 
in the case of the man she has accepted as her 
husband. The manner in which the wife is 
counselled to submit herself to her husband is 
clearly set forth by the Apostle to be— "as the 
Church is subject unto Christ." It behooves us, 
therefore, to note just how the Church is subject 
unto Christ. We see that the subjection 
of the Church to Christ is a willing subjection, 
and that it is inspired by love, veneration, gratitude 
and implicit confidence and trust in the 
Lord's love and care for us, and in his superior 
wisdom to do better for us than we could 
do for ourselves. And so perfectly did the 
Apostle himself take this attitude toward Christ, 
that it was his effort, he said, to bring every 
thought into subjection to him. (2 Cor. 10:5.) 
That such an attitude on the part of the wife 
toward her earthly head is not always possible, 
he also admits, when he says to the husbands 
(Eph. 5:33), "Let each one of you, individually, 
so love his own wife as himself, in order 
that [hina, so rendered in Eph. 3:10, Diaglott] 
the wife may reverence her husband." 

Only true love and true nobility of character 
can command such reverence; otherwise it 
would be impossible for the wife to submit herself 
to her husband as the Church is subject 
unto Christ. Nor would it be right either to 
reverence or to submit to that which is ignoble 
and unholy. But both the reverence and the 
submission are possible, as well as natural, notwithstanding 
the fallibility of the earthly head, 
where there is that nobility of character on the 
part of the man which, humbly acknowledging 
its fallibility, is amenable to the voice of God 
in the Scriptures, and to reason. 

It will be noticed, further, in the apostolic 
counsel to husbands (verses 25-29), that the 
stated object of Christ's supervision of the 
Church, and of her submission to him, is not 
the clipping of her spiritual or intellectual 
opinions, nor the dwarfing or degrading of her 



powers, nor to attain any ignoble or selfish 

ends; but, on the contrary, it is for the more 

complete sanctification and cleansing of the 

Church with the washing of water by the Word, 

that she might be holy and without blemish, 

not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. 

And this disposition on the part of Christ toward 

the Church is made manifest to her by 

the self-sacrificing spirit of him who loved the 

Church and gave himself for it. And, says the 

Apostle, "So ought men to love their wives, as 

their own bodies," that thus they may command 

the reverence and loving submission of 

the wife, "in every thing"— not, of course, 

in every thing unholy, impure and selfish, but 

in every thing tending to holiness and purity 

and that true nobility of character whose principles 

are set forth in the Word of God. We 

have a very marked example of the Lord's displeasure 

against the improper submission of a 

wife to a husband, in the case of Sapphira, the 

wife of Ananias.— Acts 5:7-10. 

It would indeed be a blessed and happy condition 
of affairs if all the husbands and all the 
wives were students of the example of Christ 

R1553 : page 209 

and the Church; but the lamentable fact remains 
that but few apply their hearts unto the 
instruction here furnished; and many husbands, 
forgetting to observe Paul's instructions to 
follow the model, imagine they have a right to 
arbitrary and selfish authority, against which 
the wives feel a righteous indignation and an 
opposition which is far from submission; and, 
failing to understand the Scriptures on the subject, 
they claim and think that the Bible 
teaches domestic tyranny and slavery; and thus 
the way is paved to doubt and infidelity. 

R1553 : page 210 

But what shall I do? says the Christian wife 
whose husband is not guided by Christian 
principles, except to the extent of claiming his 
presumed right to rule in selfishness. Well 
that would depend on circumstances: it would 
have been better if in your youth you had remembered 
the Apostle's counsel to marry only 
in the Lord; and you must now pay some penalty 
for your error. But in the first place you 
should remember not to violate conscience in 
order to please any one; for Peter says, "We 
ought to obey God rather than men." (Acts 5:29; 
4: 19,20.) But where conscience does 



not interpose its dictum, the Apostle gives to 

such wives the same counsel that he gives to 

servants who have unreasonable masters. (1 Pet. 2:18-23; 

3:1,2.) To the servants he says, 

"Servants, be subject to your masters with all 

fear [i.e., with caution, lest you offend]; not 

only to the good and gentle, but also to the 

froward;" this because it is better to suffer 

wrongfully than to be contentious, even for 

our rights. "For this is well-pleasing, if a 

man for conscience toward God endure grief, 

suffering wrongfully; for what glory is it, if 

when ye be buffeted for your faults ye shall 

take it patiently? But if when ye do well and 

suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable 

with God." Then he points to the example 

of Christ in carrying out the same principle, 

saying (verse 21), "For even hereunto were 

ye called, because Christ also died for you, 

leaving you an example that ye should follow 

his steps;" and "the servant is not above his 

Lord." (Matt. 10:24.) Then he adds, "Likewise, 

ye wives [ye who have froward husbands], 

be in subjection to your own husbands, that if 

any obey not the Word, they may without the 

Word be won by the conduct of the wives, 

while they behold your chaste conduct coupled 

with fear [with carefulness to avoid giving 

offence]"— thus manifesting a spirit of loving 

forbearance, rather than of contention. 

And while the wife is here specially counselled 
to imitate Christ's humility, the husband 
is urged to imitate Christ's generosity— "Likewise, 
ye husbands, dwell with them [your wives] 
according to knowledge [wisely and generously], 
giving honor unto the wife [taking pleasure 
in her progress and in all her noble attainments 
and achievements], as unto the weaker 
vessel [using your strength for her support and 
encouragement, and not for her oppression], 
and as being heirs together of the grace [the 
favors and blessings] of life." 

The same spirit of submission, rather than 
of contention, is likewise enjoined upon the 
whole Church in its relationship to the civil 
ordinances of men. Thus Peter says, "Submit 
yourselves to every ordinance of man, for 
the Lord's sake"— i.e., so that his spirit or 
disposition may be manifest in you— "For so 
is the will of God, that with well-doing ye 
may put to silence the ignorance of foolish 
men." (1 Pet. 2:13-17.) And Paul says, "Let 
every soul be subject unto the higher powers," 
etc. (Rom. 13:1,5); and to Titus (3:1) he 
writes: "Put them in mind to be subject to 
principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, 



to be ready to every good work." 

This duty of submission (specially enjoined 
upon the wife in the domestic relation) is also 
enjoined upon the whole Church individually, 
in their relationship one to another. Thus the 
Apostle Peter says, "The elders which are among 
you I exhort:... Feed the flock of God. 
...Neither as being lords over God's heritage, 
but being ensamples to the flock [ensamples 
of humility, brotherly love, patience 
and faithfulness]. Likewise, ye younger, submit 
yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all of you 
be subject one to another, and be clothed with 
humility; for God resisteth the proud, and giveth 
grace to the humble. Humble yourselves, 
therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that 
he may exalt you in due time."— 1 Pet. 5:1-6; 
Eph. 5:21. 

Doubtless if there were one perfect man in 
the Church the counsel to the remainder of its 
membership would be to submit to his leading 
and instruction. But, instead of an infallible 
man in the Church, we have the infallible 
written Word, by which we are each and all 
counselled to prove all things. And, therefore, 
the first duty of submission is to the written 
Word, and afterward to each other in that 
secondary sense which first proves all things by 
the Word; and lastly in the sense that our 

R1553 : page 211 

manner and language should be tempered with 
moderation and brotherly and sisterly kindness 
and candor, that this spirit of submission or 
humility might always be manifest in all. 

In a similar, but in a stronger sense, the 
Apostle presents the duty of submission on the 
part of the wife in the domestic relation. It is 
a submission which savors of love, reverence, 
trust and humility; and which is also compatible 
with "the glorious liberty of the children 
of God" (Rom. 8:21), which always exists 
wherever the spirit of the Lord is (2 Cor. 3:17), 
and in which the Apostle Paul urges us to 
"stand fast."— Gal. 5:1. 

We are referred by Peter to Sarah, Abraham's 
wife, as a proper example of a wife's submission. 
But notice that, while she did reverence 
Abraham, as indicated by her calling him lord 
(Gen. 18:12), and while she, no doubt cheerfully, 
left her native land and friends and, in 
obedience to the command of God to her husband, 
accompanied him in his sojournings to 
the land of promise, with him walking by faith, 
we see that her submission was not a blind submission 



which refrained from expressing a 
thought which differed from Abraham's; nor 
was there anything in Abraham's conduct toward 
her which indicated such expectation on 
his part. She was evidently a thinking woman: 
she believed the promise of God that they should 
have a son through whom the blessing of the 
world should come; and when nature seemed 
to fail she suggested a way in which the promise 
might be fulfilled. And when Hagar became 
boastful and despised her mistress, she complained 
to Abraham and claimed that the fault 
was partly his. She wanted no division of his 
heart with her servant. Abraham's reply assured 
her that there was no such division, that her 
maid was still under her control. And her 
subsequent course with Hagar was a discipline 
to correct her boastfulness and improper attitude 
toward her mistress. And when Hagar 
fled from her, the angel of the Lord met her 
and told her to return and submit herself to 
her mistress, which she did, and was evidently 
received and restored by Sarah.— Gen. 16. 

On another occasion, after Isaac was born 
and the two boys were growing up together, 
the rivalry of Hagar again cropped out in Ishmael, 
who persecuted Isaac, Sarah's son. (Gen. 21:9; 
Gal. 4:29.) And again Sarah was grieved 
and appealed to Abraham to cast out the bond 
woman and her son; for she feared Abraham 
would make him heir with her son, which would 
not have been in accordance with the promise 
of God. (Gen. 21:10-12; 15:4; 17:17-19.) 
This, Abraham was not inclined to do, and as 
Sarah urged her claim, we read that "the thing 
was very grievous in Abraham's sight because 
of his son," Ishmael, until God indicated his 
will in the matter. 

This is further shown in this case to which 
Peter refers us for example, saying (to those who 
are similarly subject, to their husbands) "whose 
daughters ye are, doing good, and not fearing 
any terror"— any evil results. (1 Pet. 3:6.) 
The submission counselled by the apostles is a 
reasonable submission, compatible with a moderate, 
modest expression of the wife's sentiments 
and a proper consideration of the same by the 
husband, as in the case of faithful Abraham, 
who was by no means led about by the whims 
of a foolish wife, but who, in a reasonable consideration 
of his wife's sentiments and trials, 
waited to know the will of the Lord before 
granting her wishes. 

From the above considerations it is obvious 
that the human relationship of husband and 
wife, which the Lord points out as an illustration 



of the beautiful relationship of Himself and 

the Church, is by no means an occasion for the 

exhibition of either tyranny or servility on the 

part of either party. And wherever such conditions 

do exist, they are out of the divine order. 

The Lord set his seal of approval upon marriage 

when he instituted the relationship and 

blessed the union of the first pair in Eden; and 

when, as king and queen— head and help-mate— 

he made them joint-inheritors of the earthly dominion 

(Gen. 1:27,28); and later, when he 

commanded children to honor and obey both 

parents.— Exod. 20:12; Eph. 6:1,2. 

The curse of sin has rested heavily upon 
woman, as well as upon man; but the Christian 
man who would seek to bind the curse upon 
his wife, instead of endeavoring to lighten it 
and to help her bear it, sadly lacks the spirit of 

R1553 : page 212 

the heavenly Bridegroom. And so also the 
Christian wife: if she in selfishness demands of 
her husband an undue measure of the sweat of 
face entailed by the curse, instead of seeking to 
lighten his toil and share his cares, she sadly lacks 
that spirit which characterizes the true bride of 
Christ. It was sin that entailed the curse upon 
our race; but, as we strive against sin and aspire 
toward righteousness and God-likeness, we mitigate 
the evils of the curse for each other. And, 
thank God, the time is now fast approaching 
when "there shall be no more curse," and 
when, "the throne of God and of the Lamb" 
being established in the earth, the spirit of love, 

R1554: page 212 

so beautifully exemplified between Christ and 

the exalted Church, will be gloriously reproduced 

on the earthly plane also; when, the 

curse being entirely lifted, woman will find her 

natural and honored position at the side of her 

noble husband, as his worthy helper and companion 

—"the glory of the man," as Paul describes 

her, and an "heir together with him of 

the grace of life," as he also appoints her, and 

as beautifully foreshown in the typical restitution 

of Job (Job 42:15), when he gave his 

daughters inheritance among their brethren. 

In conclusion, then, the marriage relationship 
is an honorable and blessed one when viewed in 
the Scriptural light; yet it is one of the earthly 
blessings which the Apostle shows the saints 
are privileged to forego in many cases for the 
still higher privilege of serving the interests of 



the coming kingdom of God without distraction. 
(1 Cor. 7:32-35.) And when the sacrificing 
Church beholds the King in his beauty, and is 
recognized by him as his worthy bride and joint-heir, 
the blessedness of that companionship will 
have in it no savor of either tyranny or servility, 
but, instead, a blessed harmony of love and 
appreciation which will be ineffable bliss. 



R1554: page 212 

"BE NOT UNEQUALLY YOKED. 



TO the consecrated who are not yoked— who 

are unmarried— the Apostle Paul gives the 

advice that, for the full accomplishment of their 

consecration vow to the Lord, such have a position 

of very superior advantage. (2 Cor. 6:14; 

1 Cor. 7:25-40.) But the advice to remain unmarried, 

he would have us understand, is not 

imperative. (1 Cor. 7:35,36.) None are forbidden 

to marry; and false teachers who have 

since arisen, forbidding to marry, are condemned 

as seriously out of order. (1 Tim. 4:1-3.) This 

prohibition by Papacy upon its priesthood has 

brought upon it one of the foulest stains that 

have blackened its baneful history. Marriage 

is still honorable (Heb. 13:4) when the relationship 

is sustained in purity and holiness, as 

God designed; when two are equally yoked, 

and their hearts beat to the music of a single 

high and holy purpose; whether that purpose 

be on the natural plane to increase the race 

and to bring up posterity in the nurture and admonition 

of the Lord (Gen. 1:28; Eph. 6:4), 

or, on the spiritual plane, to toil together as true 

yoke-fellows for the spiritual family of God. 

Yet, with very rare exceptions, the consecrated 
can best fulfil their covenant by walking alone 
with God, having only his preferences to consult 
in every matter, and entirely untrammeled 
by domestic cares. Such was Paul's judgment; 
and such has been the testimony of thousands, 
who forgot to remember their Creator in the 
days of their youth, and to commit their way 
unto the Lord before they became entangled in 
multiplied cares and hampered by the outcome 
of their own misguided course.— Eccl. 12:1; 
Psa. 37:5; Prov. 3:5,6. 

The words of 1 Tim. 5:14 were not respecting 
the young sisters who were consecrated to 
the Lord, but in harmony with the context 



(verses 3-16) were spoken with reference to 
young widows of the Church in general who 
should not be made financial burdens to the 
Church. Any such, not of those consecrated 
as living sacrificers, but yet believers, of the 
household of faith, let them marry, etc. Thus 
seen, this scripture is in harmony with the 
general teaching of the New Testament. 

Of God's consecrated children, whom alone 
we address, only a small minority are yet in 
youth, and disentangled from the cares of this 
life. But to all such we have no other advice 
to commend than that of the inspired Apostle 

R1554: page 213 

cited above. We would only add, Be not unmindful 
of your privileges; make good use of 
your stewardship; run with patience the race 
set before you, looking unto Jesus, our glorious 
Bridegroom, for all needed grace and fellowship; 
and be faithful unto death and in due 
time ye shall reap a glorious reward, if ye faint 
not. "Forget also thine own people and thy 
father's house [earthly fellowships]: so shall the 
King greatly desire thy beauty [of character]; 
for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him."— 
Psa. 45:10,11. 

These remarks, however, do not apply to the 
world, nor are they imperative upon the saints. 
The recommendation is one of expediency— to 
facilitate both individual progress and the progress 
of the general work of the Lord, and is parallel 
to the Lord's teaching in Matt. 19:12. Let 
those of the world marry, and fill the honorable 
positions in the world of faithful, devoted husbands 
and wives and parents; and let the influence 
of prosperous and happy homes reach 
as far as possible toward ameliorating the unhappy 
conditions of the wretched and homeless. 
The special advice of the Apostle is only for 
those consecrated to be living sacrifices, wholly 
devoted to the Master's use, and awaiting his 
exceeding great reward. 

But to those of the consecrated who already 
are unequally yoked, and hampered by many 
cares, and vexed with many perplexing problems, 
we would say, Take courage! he who called you 
out of darkness into his marvelous light, and 
thus directed your steps into the narrow way 
that leads to glory, honor and immortality, 
knew how difficult that way would be to you 
under your present circumstances; and his call 
implies his willingness to accept you, as well 
as your ability to make your calling and election 
sure, through his abounding grace. Nevertheless, 



as the Apostle forewarned, such shall 
have trouble in the flesh.— 1 Cor. 7:28. 

Remembering the Apostle's teaching that the 
believing husband is not to put away his unbelieving 
wife, nor the believing wife to leave 
the unbelieving husband, but rather to seek 
to establish peace (1 Cor. 7:10-16; also Matt. 19:3-10. 
— Diaglott), we see with what carefulness 
the consecrated believer must walk before 
God and before the unequally yoked life-companion. 
What humility it will require, and 
what patient endurance of many trials. But 
yet, beloved ones, so tried, let patience have 
her perfect work, and in due time you shall 
come out of the furnace purified. Study to let 
the beauty of holiness be manifest; and if it 
does not convert the companion, it will at least 
be a testimony against him or her, and the 
sanctifying effect will not be lost on children 
and neighbors; and the praise will be to God. 

Let such a wife carefully perform the duties 
of a wife and respect the relationship of a husband, 
even if she is forced to lose a large 
measure of respect for her husband; and let 
such a husband carefully perform the duties of 
a husband, even if the treadmill of domestic 
life has become a painful one. It may be, O 
man, that thou mayst save thy wife; or, wife, 
that thou mayst save thy husband. "But if 
the unbelieving depart, let him [or her] depart. 
A brother or sister is not under bondage in such 
cases."— 1 Cor. 7:15. 

But one cause is mentioned in the Scriptures 
as a proper ground for the dissolution of the 
marriage bond. (Matt. 19:3-10.) And the 
disciples, hearing these our Master's words, 
were as much surprised as the Pharisees, and 
said that if the case stood thus— i.e., if the marriage 
covenant was so binding and indissoluble, 
it would be better not to marry— it would 
be too great a risk to run, (Verse 10.) But this 
is just the way the Lord would have us view 
the relationship. The marriage contract is one 
that should stand until death makes the separation, 
unless the one cause referred to releases the 
innocent from the guilty and faithless. The 
twain bound for life by mutual contract, are 
thereafter no longer twain, but one flesh; and 
all their future happiness and prosperity in the 
present life depend upon their loyalty, generosity, 
love and consideration one for the other. 

The marriage relation, both in its duration 
and in its character, was designed to be a type 
of the lasting, faithful and blessed union of 
Christ and the Church. He will never leave 
her nor forsake her; and she will never withdraw 



her allegiance and faithfulness to him. 

But as Christ permits those who choose, to forsake 

R1554: page 214 

him, so if the unbeliever depart from the 
believer, let him or her depart. The believing 
one if once deserted by the unbeliever would 
not be bound to receive the deserter back again 
to marriage fellowship— although upon evidence 
of proper reform it might be well to be reconciled 
—but he or she would be bound not to 
marry another so long as the first companion 
lives. (1 Cor. 7:11.) Unfaithfulness to marriage 
vows would include, on the husband's 
part, a failure to provide, so far as possible, for 
his wife's necessities, and would be desertion, 
even though he should desire to stay with her 
and have her support him. Of course in a 
case of the husband's sickness, and inability 
to provide, the wife's duty according to the 
marriage covenant would be to spend herself 
to the last, in his support. 

Whatever may be the world's ideas with reference 
to the privileges and obligations of the 
marriage relationship (and alas! they are far 
from purity and righteousness, making it very 
generally but "an occasion to the flesh"), those 
who are united in the Lord should remember the 
Apostle's counsel, "Walk in the spirit [or mind 
of Christ], and ye shall not fulfil the desires of 
the flesh; for the desires of the flesh are contrary 
to the spirit, and the spirit contrary to 
the flesh."-Gal. 5:16,17. 

But all the married saints are not married in 
the Lord, and hence many are obliged to consider 
the human aspect of that relationship, and 
to devote themselves measurably to its earthly 
objects and aims, viz., the increase of posterity, 
and their care and training; such obligation 
being implied in the marriage contract, from 
which a subsequent consecration to the Lord 
grants no release. Mutual obligations are accepted 

R1555 : page 214 

in marriage from which there can be no 

departure except by mutual consent. The Apostle's 

advice on this subject is very clear, and in 

perfect accord with what we have just seen respecting 

the mutual obligations of the married 

(1 Cor. 7:1-9); and the due benevolence and 

continence counseled on the part of both should 

obviate any necessity for domestic imposition 

and consequent discord, and should insure harmony 

on the firm foundation of mutual love 



and respect. But blessed are those who are 
able and willing to keep the fleshly desire under 
full control, and to walk in the spirit. "He 
that is able [both from his own disposition and 
from his circumstances] to receive [this teaching], 
let him receive it."— Matt. 19:12. 

As some of the Lord's dear people come thus 
to view and consider the sacredness of the contract 
into which so many of them have entered, 
perhaps they will begin to see how they can 
glorify God more in their domestic life than they 
have hitherto thought possible. Indeed, it will 
be strange if all cannot see wherein they can 
improve upon the past. Is it not the case sometimes 
that brethren and sisters whose souls have 
been refreshed by the truth have zealously borne 
it to others, and have taken for granted that 
husband or wife would not be interested? 

Some husbands think of their wives as too 
busy with domestic cares to be interested in the 
Truth; or too worldly, or too fearful of the reproaches 
of the world, to have anything to do 
with it: and so leave them, and bear the truth to 
others. But is this doing a husband's part? A 
true husband is a provider, and his care should 
include provision of spiritual as well as natural 
food and raiment for his wife and family. 
Hence on learning the truth his first endeavor 
should be to serve it also to his help-mate. 
Should he come home in the evening and find 
her occupied with family cares— preparing and 
clearing away the evening meal, looking after 
the little ones and arranging for the necessities 
of the coming day, etc.— long after the hours of 
his working day are past, and leave her to bear 
these domestic cares alone, and to feel neglected 
and underrated, a mere household accommodation, 
instead of a worthy and honored companion, 
while he seeks a quiet nook to read, or 
goes out alone to bear the message of salvation 
and joy to neighbors or others? 

Ah, no! Let charity begin at home. If an 
unwise course in the past has overwhelmed the 
wife with family cares too numerous for her to 
bear with easy grace, see that no more are added, 
but, instead, "put your shoulder to the wheel" 
and help her with them as much as possible. 
What if tending the babies and washing the 
dishes is woman's work! if she has too much of 
it to do to admit of an hour's leisure with you, 

R1555 : page 215 

or with the Lord, or with the study of his Truth 
for herself— or if, under the pressure of constant 
duties, she has lost all relish for intellectual 



culture, and much of her faith in spiritual realities 
—it will do you good to share these tasks 
with her, until you have tied the last knot of 
the day's duties, and can then sit down together 
to study the Truth. 

As gradually she comes to realize your love 
and interest she will have the more respect for 
you and for the doctrines whose fruit she sees 
exemplified in your daily life. At first, if this 
is a new thing, she may regard it as only a little 
unusual freak; but, by and by, constancy 
will increase confidence, and a responsive chord 
will be found in her heart; and the soil, thus 
carefully plowed and prepared, will be mellow 
and ready for the seeds of truth, and you 
and she and the home will be blessed. Try it 
brethren— any of you who find you have been 
to any extent remiss in these matters in the past. 
And in writing to the WATCH TOWER office 
mention your wife or your husband, if interested 
in the Truth. 

Sometimes it is the wife who first catches a 
glimpse of the Millennial dawn, and she should 
value her opportunities for bearing to her husband 
the favors of which she has been made a 
partaker, although the outlook for his conversation 
to it may not seem very hopeful. Often, 
when the husband learns of his wife's departure 
from the beaten track of so-called orthodoxy, 
he forthwith concludes it is some new fanaticism; 
and seals up his heart and closes his ears 
to it. What should she do in such a case? 
Force it on him? No: that might only arouse 
antagonism. She should first of all let him 
read it in the living epistle of her daily life. 
Let him see the good effects of the truth in 
your carefulness to make home pleasant; let 
him realize your sympathy with his trials and 
vexations, your helpfulness to the extent of ability, 
and your appreciation of all his kindness. 

It may sometimes require long and patient 
preaching of this kind before the husband is 
attracted to the plan of the ages; but let the 
light of a holy life and of a consistent walk and 
conversation continue to shine, while you in 
various ways hold forth to him the word of life, 
and in due time a response will be manifest. 
Let not such wives make the mistake of ignoring 
the headship of the husband (even though 
they be better informed concerning the divine 
plan), in appropriating the home of which he 
is the acknowledged head to the service of the 
Lord for the assemblies of the saints, if he is 
opposed to so using it, or in other ways. Even 
if the home is the wife's property a deference 
is due to the husband's wishes as the head of 



the house, so long as the relationship is recognized; 
his responsibility is to God, whether 
he recognizes that responsibility or not. But 
a wife is not bound to continue to supply a 
home; and should cease to do so if she be denied 
reasonable privileges in it, since in so doing 
she would be encouraging a wrong. As before 
shown, if a husband possesses the health, etc., 
necessary to the support of his wife and family 
and fails to provide for them, he has proved 
unfaithful to his marriage vow, which was to 
nourish and care for his companion; and in 
the eyes of the civil law he has committed 
"constructive desertion." A wife so circumstanced 
may, if she choose, consider herself as 
literally deserted, and may refuse to entertain 
and support such deserter. But desertion 
would not grant the right to either party to 
remarry so long as the other lives. 

As the head of the domestic arrangement it is 
the duty of the Christian husband to say, "As 
for me and my house [as far as lies in the power 
of my influence], we will serve the Lord." And 
the Christian wife, recognizing this responsibility 
on his part, will gladly co-operate, in so 
far as she can conscientiously do so; and will 
put no stumbling block in his way, although 
she may view his methods differently. She 
may carefully endeavor to convince him of the 
truth, but she may not interfere with his conscience 
or his responsibility to God. Nor 
should the husband's course with the wife be 
arbitrary and unreasoning. He should not disregard 
her conscience, to hinder the full and 
free exercise of all her talents in God's service; 
but should grant her as great latitude in the 
use of the home as his conscience and responsibility 
as the head of the family will permit; 
for they are "heirs together of the grace of life." 

R1555 : page 216 

If he sees differently he should bring forth his 
strong reasons for her consideration and possible 
approval, and patiently hear her different 
views, in hope of final harmony. But if harmony 
cannot be reached, the responsibility for 
the home and its influence rests with the husband, 
who, by divine appointment, is its head. 

HONOR TO WHOM HONOR IS DUE. 

In viewing this whole subject we are forcibly 
reminded of the Apostle's counsel to the entire 
Church in their individual relationship to the 
powers that be, which are ordained of God— 



"Render therefore to all their dues; tribute to 
whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, 
fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor. Owe 
no man anything, but to love one another."— 
Rom. 13:7,8. 

Peter's counsel is to the same effect— "Honor 
all men; love the brotherhood; fear God; 
honor the king."— 1 Pet. 2:17. 

Kings are not always personally worthy of 
honor; but honor is always due to the office, 
which is "ordained of God." (Rom. 13:1. See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. L, chap, xiii., for the 
sense and purpose of their ordination.) Many 
of the magistrates ruling Judea in the days of 
the Lord and the Apostles were personally very 
unworthy of honor, yet the Lord and the apostles 
left us, not only their precepts, but also 
their example of submission to the authority 
thus represented: they were all respectful and 
law-abiding.-Matt. 17:27; Acts 25:8,10,11. 

So also in the domestic relation, the office 
of the husband and father, as the head of the 
family, is worthy of honor, both from wife and 
children, and also from the stranger within the 
gates, enjoying the protection and hospitality 
of the home. Even if the one so situated be 
personally unworthy of the honor, it is nevertheless 
due to his office, on the same principle 
that honor is due to unworthy civil magistrates. 

The Apostle puts these duties of love and 
honor and custom, etc., in the light of obligations 
—as debts that should be promptly paid; 
saying, Owe no man anything but love. While 
love would be the ruling principle if all were 
perfect, yet in the fallen state selfishness is the 
common disease which devours and blights the 
happiness of home and family and business. 
True nobility would prompt every man in health 
to consideration not only toward the weaker 
sex but toward the aged and infirm of his own 
sex, in the crowd, in the car, and in any 
neighborly service; much more in the home 
and toward the life-companion will consideration 
be manifested, in the bearing of the cares 
and burdens of life. And the truly noble man 
or woman, whether at home or abroad, will be 
disinclined to disturb or inconvenience anyone; 
and if such accept a kindness it will 
be as a favor, and will be amply and graciously 
acknowledged. 

The fall has developed in all selfishness instead 
of generosity; so that those who desire 
to be generous, finding selfish ingratitude their 

R1556 : page 216 



principal reward, are often discouraged and 

consider few if any worthy of it. But Christian 

men and women are to remember the unselfish 

example of their great Redeemer, that selfishness 

lies at the bottom of every sin, and that 

in striving against sin they must of necessity 

strive against selfishness, and endeavor to cultivate 

love. It is as a help to the right course 

that the Apostle points to justice as a consideration 

for rendering honor, respect and service 

—honor to whom honor is due, etc. 

How beautiful is God's order, and how conducive 
to lasting peace and happiness to all 
who faithfully adhere to it! Let us thus carefully 
distinguish and mark the principles which 
God has laid down in the Scriptures for our 
guidance, and his approval will be our exceeding 
great reward; and his wisdom will by and 
by be manifest. 



R1556 : page 216 

OUR CONVENTION AT CHICAGO. 



AS already announced, it is purposed to have 
a Convention at Chicago, this Summer, of 
those deeply interested in the truths of God's 
Word as presented in ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
and MILLENNIAL DAWN. The time fixed upon 
as most suitable is August 20th to 24th, inclusive, 
the last day to be specially devoted to the 
interests of the Colporteur work;— arranging 

R1556 : page 217 

for future fields of service, and instructing the 
less successful and beginners as to methods, etc. 

The main object of the gathering is to permit 
as large a number as possible to enjoy a 
spiritual feast of personal communion— one 
with the other, and all with the Lord, who 
serves the feast, and who for some years past 
has been so richly fulfilling his promise to his 
people in this respect. (Luke 12:37.) A secondary 
object will be to meet and encourage 
and instruct in the work colporteurs and intending 
colporteurs. Opportunity will also be 
afforded for symbolizing (in water) baptism 
into Christ's death. Many find no proper 
means of thus following the Lord's command 
in this (see our last issue) without disobeying 
his counsel by joining some sectarian system 



of men. Arrangements will be made and robes 
provided for serving such who may attend the 
meetings. 

The date fixed is in view of the fact that the 
lowest Railroad Excursion Rates may be expected 
about that time. We are not asking 
or expecting special rates, but believe that by 
that time general competition will have brought 
fares down to about one half the present rates, 
or one fourth the usual rates. Such terms will 
prevail very generally, we believe; but if no 
cheaper rates are granted than at present, it 
will be much cheaper than usual, and afford an 
opportunity for many to attend whom we could 
not other wise hope to meet in the flesh. 

As the opening day will be Sunday, it will have 
three meetings or practically be an all-day meeting, 
commencing at 10 A.M. Subsequent sessions 
will also open at 10 A.M., and close about 
3 P.M., with an hour's intermission for dinner. 
This arrangement will not over-weary with 
sitting and thinking those of the truth-hungry 
who are in ordinary health, and it will afford 
an excellent opportunity, from 3 P.M. to 9 P.M. 
each day, for those who desire to learn, from 
visits to the Columbian Exposition, some very 
valuable lessons on the progress of our times— 
on the evidences that we are in "the day of 
his [God's] preparation," in which arrangements 
are being perfected for the great work 
of blessing and lifting up again the fallen race 
to opportunities for life everlasting by their 
great Redeemer. The rest of the meetings, 
and the knowledge of the divine plan, will 
thus prepare for an appreciation of the greatest 
exhibit the world has ever seen; and the exercise 
of mind and body in studying the 
wonders of the exhibit will but refresh and 
quicken mind and heart for communion with 
God and study of his great Plan of the Ages, 
of which the cross of Christ is the center. 

We well know that the item of expense will 
be a particular one to almost all of the "household" 
(for not many rich or great hath God 
chosen, but the poor of this world, rich in 
faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom). Hence we 
must make arrangements which will be economical. 
We have not as yet concluded any 
arrangements; but can promise the following 
very reasonable terms, viz.:— 

A comfortable bed and three substantial 
meals for One Dollar per day for each person. 
Those who desire to visit the Exposition should 
count on about One Dollar per day extra, for 
car-fare and entrance fee. 



WHO ARE INVITED. 

All MILLENNIAL DAWN and WATCH TOWER 

readers, who are trusting in our Lord Jesus as 
their Redeemer— their corresponding price, 
their substitute— and especially all such who are 
fully consecrated, body, soul and spirit, to the 
Redeemer's service, are cordially invited to 
come. 

Any such who anticipate being able to attend 
are requested to send us their full names and 
addresses at once, stating the facts. After arrangements 
have been fully perfected, particular 
directions will be mailed to such as thus 
apply;— for something may yet make a change 
of date necessary: but notice will be sent in 
good season for you to reach the lodgings on 
the day preceding the Convention. 

Colporteurs (and all who think of becoming 
colporteurs) are specially urged to attend this 
convention, as valuable instructions respecting 
the best methods of work will be given, which 
we trust will more than double the results with 
many. Bring with you full data respecting 
routes and towns already worked, as changes 
of routes, etc., may be necessary. 



page 218 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF 

OUR READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1556 : page 218 
PAUL AT PHILIPPI. 



III. QUAR., LESSON II., JULY 9, ACTS 16:19-34. 

Golden Text— "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
thou shalt be saved."— Acts 16:31. 

The house of Lydia became the center of 
Christian work in the city of Philippi; and 



here, under the instruction of the Apostle 
Paul, a company of believers gathered, of 
whom he subsequently speaks in terms of 
strong commendation for their faithfulness 
and zeal. Paul and his companions had not 
been long in Philippi before the Lord gave 
a very marked manifestation of his power, 
working through them in casting out an evil 
spirit from one whose affliction was a source 
of gain to her owners. 

But the testimony thus borne brought upon 
the devoted heads of the Lord's messengers 
a storm of persecution. They were 
hurried to the market place, falsely accused 
before the magistrates and, apparently without 
even an opportunity to assert their innocence 
or to appeal for their rights as 
Roman citizens, they were quickly sentenced 
and immediately punished with stripes and 
imprisonment; and their ultimate fate was 
yet to be learned.— Verses 19-24. 

VERSE 25. In a prison dungeon, with 
lacerated flesh, and feet made fast in the 
stocks, these brethren found cause for rejoicing. 
They rejoiced in that they were 
counted worthy to suffer for the name of 
Christ, and so spent the night in praise and 
prayer to God. And do not forget that it 
is in view of such trials that the Apostle's 
exhortation should be read— "Rejoice in the 
Lord always, and in every thing give thanks." 

VERSE 26. It is not always that God interferes 
to liberate his persecuted saints: 
there is a glorious end in view in permitting 
them to endure hardness as good soldiers. 
Our Lord was not spared the agonies of the 
cross; Stephen was not spared the stoning 
that crushed out his life; other martyrs were 
not spared the fire and fagot, the guillotine 
and the rack; and the apostles were not 
spared the torture of the rod, the stocks and 
dungeon miseries. But, says the great 
Apostle, who bore a large share of these 
sufferings, "They are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory that shall be revealed 
in us." When that glory shall appear the 
present privilege of enduring hardness as 
good soldiers will be manifest, though the 
opportunity for so doing will then be past. 
By faith only can the privilege now be duly 
appreciated. 

But God had yet a further use for Paul 
and Silas, and therefore, though from a human 
standpoint their release seemed hopeless, 
it was quickly and wonderfully accomplished 
when God saw fit to manifest his 



power. Just so it will be when God's time 
has fully come for breaking down all the 
barriers which men have set up against the 
establishment of his kingdom. What are 
thrones and empires and armies to withstand 
his might? Surely they are as nothing. 

VERSES 27,28. There was no vindictiveness 
in these abused servants: they were 
ready immediately to bless their persecutors. 

VERSE 29. This manifestation of the spirit 
of forgiving love was the best sermon 
they could have preached to the jailer; and 
it quickly brought forth its fruit in his repentance 
and conversion. 

VERSES 30-34. His conduct indicated 
genuine repentance. He sought to reward 
them for their generosity in saving his life; 
and then inquired what he must do to be 
saved. Saved from what? from any penalty 
of the Roman law? No: his prisoners 
had not escaped: they were all there. He 
meant, What should he do to be saved with 
the great salvation which Paul and Silas 
preached. Then Paul preached the great 
salvation through faith in Christ, both to 
the jailor and to all that were in the house, 
showing that it is free to all who accept 

R1557 : page 218 

it, not only to the jailor but to all the rest of 
them on the terms of simple, obedient faith. 
It is not at all strange that the preaching 
under such circumstances brought forth fruit 
in the conversion of all that heard. 

R1557 : page 218 

PAUL AT ATHENS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON III., JULY 16, ACTS 17:22-31. 

Golden Text— "God is a spirit, and they that worship 
him must worship him in spirit and in truth."— John 4:24. 

Having been by divine providence delivered 
and honorably discharged from the 

R1557 : page 219 

prison at Philippi, the zealous and undaunted 
Apostle to the Gentiles was again about 
his Master's business; and the interim between 
the account of our last lesson and that 



of this lesson shows him (1) giving his 
parting counsel and encouragement to the 
Philippian Church at the house of Lydia; 
(2) thence departing for Thessalonica, where 
he again boldly declared the truth and made 
many converts, and again brought upon himself 
the wrath of many enemies; (3) and 
when persecuted in that city and no longer 
permitted to preach Christ, we find him 
escaping by night to Berea, where similar 
success and similar persecution awaited him. 
His work there accomplished, we next find 
him in Athens, whither he had fled alone 
without his companions, Silas and Timothy, 
who were to follow him. 

While here awaiting the arrival of the 
brethren, he first quietly took observation 
of the religious conditions of this great city, 
far famed for its literary and artistic genius 
—the city where Homer sung, where Socrates, 
Plato and Aristotle philosophised, 
where Solon promulgated his famous code 
of laws, and where Demosthenes held his 
audiences spell-bound with his eloquence. 
But Paul was stirred with holy zeal when, 
notwithstanding its marvelous crop of wise 
men and philosophers and all its learning 
and accomplishments, he beheld this famous 
city wholly given over to idolatry.— 
Verse 16. 

With characteristic zeal he began at once 
to present the profounder philosophy of divine 
truth, both in the synagogues of the 
Jews, and daily to the multitudes in the 
market-places. This new philosophy soon 
attracted the inquiring minds of many of the 
two most distinguished schools of Greek 
philosophy— the Stoics and the Epicureans. 
As they listened to the eloquent logic of the 
Apostle in the market-places they said 
among themselves, This is no place for such 
profound discourse; and they led the Christian 
orator to the Areopagus, or Mars' Hill, 
where the supreme court of Athens convened 
and where Demosthenes and other 
eloquent orators had spoken. From this 
notable place many of the learned and wise, 
in the wisdom of this world, heard for the 
first time the heavenly wisdom, the new divine 
philosophy which far outshines the 
wisdom of the world. 

VERSES 22,23. The courteous address of 
the Apostle to the cultured audience before 
him is made to appear rather rude by our 
common translation— a rudeness quite incompatible, 
too, with the Apostle's own culture 



and refinement, and with his tact in 
presenting truth. The Revised Version is 
an improvement, and shows the Apostle to 
have been complimentary rather than rude: 
"Ye men of Athens [the address usual with 
all Greek orators], in all things I perceive 
that ye are somewhat religious; for as I 
passed along and observed the objects of 
your worship, I found also an altar with 
this inscription-TO THE UNKNOWN GOD.' 
What therefore [by your own confession] 
ye worship in ignorance, this set I forth unto 
you." 

This exhibition of tact in the presentation 
of the truth is worthy of the imitation 
of all who are seeking to declare the 
good tidings with effect. It is not wise to 
begin with a rude attempt to batter down 
prejudices, but rather we should begin with 
that which is already known or conceded, 
and then proceed by logical and Scriptural 
reasonings from the known to establish that 
which is as yet unknown to the hearer. 

VERSES 24,25. The one true God, hitherto 
unknown to the Athenians, as the author 
and sustainer of all life, and hence incomparably 
greater than the gods they had 
hitherto worshiped, instead of needing gifts, 
is himself the giver of every good and perfect 
gift. 

VERSE 26 declares the brotherhood of all 
the world of mankind (aside from the 
Church), and the earth to be their dwelling 
place; and that God has fixed times and 
seasons in working out his great plan respecting 
them. 

VERSES 27,28. God is near to all who 
seek him, even though it be a blind feeling 
after him as an unknown God. As certain 
of their own poets had said, and so had 
come very near the truth, We are his offspring 
—the offspring of his creative power. 

VERSE 29. The logic which would trace 
the existence of living intelligent creatures 
to a source so unworthy that man could imitate 
it in silver and gold, is evidently faulty 
and untrue. 

VERSE 30. God is not holding man accountable 
for this ignorance of him and his 
ways; but when the truth is presented, it 
should be regarded as a call from God to 
repentance, and the knowledge brings a 
responsibility. 

VERSE 3 1 declares an appointed time for 
the world's judgment and Christ Jesus as 



R1557 : page 220 

the Judge of all the earth; and that this, 
God's declared purpose, is corroborated by 
the resurrection of Christ from the dead. 

VERSES 32-34 show the usual results of 
the preaching of the truth. Like a magnet 
it attracts those who have an affinity for it, 
and others will not have it. Some mocked, 
and others desired to hear him further; but 
the real lovers of truth were evidently few. 
Worldly wisdom is not of itself sufficient 
to find out God; and, except when accompanied 
by humility and sincerity, it proves 
an obstacle rather than an aid to the attainment 
of that heavenly wisdom whose price 
is far above rubies. 

R1557 : page 220 

PAUL AT CORINTH. 



III. QUAR., LESSON IV., JULY 23, ACTS 18:1-11. 

Golden Text— "The preaching of the cross is to them 
that perish, foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is 
the power of God."— 1 Cor. 1:18. 

After his work in Athens, the intellectual 
metropolis of the world, Paul's next point 
was Corinth, the great commercial center of 
Greece, its cosmopolitan population and commercial 
business making it a specially good 
field from whence the influences of Christianity 
might extend far and near. It was 
a desperately wicked city, its very name at 
that time being a popular synonym of vice 
and profligacy. But its wickedness was not 
Paul's reason for carrying the gospel there; 
and he did not seek its degraded and profligate 
class. He knew that the gospel was 
for the meek, the lovers of righteousness, 
and that only such were counted worthy of 
it (Isa. 61:1; Psa. 97:11); and the Lord assured 
him (verse 10) that even in that wicked 
city were many of this class, and therefore 
counselled his remaining there. 

VERSES 1-3. Having arrived at Corinth, 
the Apostle first found two worthy Israelites, 
Aquila and Priscilla, who, with other 
Jews, had been exiled from Rome. These 
were of one mind and heart with the Apostle, 
and being of the same craft— tent-makers 
—he abode with them and wrought. 



VERSES 4-8. Observing the Lord's order 
—"To the Jew first, and afterward to the 
Gentile"— the Apostle improved the opportunities 
of the Sabbath in the Jewish 
synagogues. This was, of course, the seventh, 
not the first day of the week; and Paul 
made use of it, not as a Jew under the law, 
but as a Christian free from the law, and 
who therefore esteemed every day alike 
(Rom. 14:5; Col. 2:16), all the days of the 
week being consecrated to the service of the 
Lord, and all the labors of the week— 
whether of preaching the gospel or making 
tents— being done with an eye single to his 
glory. The Jewish Sabbath and the privileges 
of the synagogue afforded special opportunities 
for the promulgation of the truth 
(any person of ability being permitted to 
speak to the people in attendance); and of 
these the Apostle availed himself. 

Here Paul was refreshed by the arrival 
of Silas and Timothy. And doubtless he 
needed their encouragement; for the majority 
of his Jewish hearers opposed him and 
blasphemed his doctrine. When they thus 
proved their unworthiness of the truth, Paul 
shook his raiment and said unto them, 
"Your blood be upon your own heads [The 
reference here is to the second death, toward 
which such a course of wilful opposition 
surely tends. The statement does not imply 
that they were already doomed to it, but 
rather that, from their present attitude and 
course, they were in great danger of it. 
The expression is of similar import to that 
of our Lord recorded in Matt. 23:33. See 
also Matt. 12:31.]; I am clean [I have done 
my duty toward you, and the responsibility 
is now with yourselves only]: from henceforth 
I will go unto the Gentiles." 

Nevertheless, though such was the general 
attitude of the Jews toward the truth, 
some, both of Jews and Greeks, believed, 
and the house of Justus, a Jewish proselyte 
—"one that worshiped God"— living next 
door to the synagogue, furnished a suitable 
place for further discoursing the truth. 

VERSES 9-11. The Lord specially encouraged 
the Apostle's continued efforts in 
this place by a vision. Thus reassured of the 
Lord's personal care and supervision, Paul 
was prepared for any trial, and in his weakness 

R1558 : page 220 

was made strong. And these things 



were written for our learning, that we might 
always realize the Lord at the helm, and 
trust and follow him in the footsteps of this 
the noblest of all the noble apostles. 

R1558 : page 220 

PAUL ATEPHESUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON V., JULY 30, ACTS 19:1-12. 

Golden Text— "When the spirit of truth is come, he 
will guide you into all truth."— John 16:13. 

This lesson shows Paul a second time at 
Ephesus since leaving Corinth. In the interim 
(chap. 18: 18-23) he had first spent a 

R1558 : page 221 

brief time here, where he was accompanied 

by Aquila and Priscilla, and then visited 

Jerusalem, Antioch and the churches of Galatia 

and Phrygia, strengthening the disciples. 

Now he has returned to find a pleasant 

surprise: A cultured and eloquent Alexandrian 

Jew, a convert to Christianity, has 

been here in his absence, mightily convincing 

the Jews, and that publicly, that Jesus 

is the Christ, and many have believed and 

are ready and anxious for further instruction. 

Apollos himself knew only the baptism 
of John— the baptism unto repentance (the 
same now taught by the Disciples or Christian 
denomination-See last TOWER- Acts 18:25; 
19:4), and they had been so baptized. 
Aquila and Priscilla heard him speak, and, 
perceiving his imperfect knowledge, took 
him home and instructed him more perfectly, 
so that when he went away from Ephesus 
to Achaia, he went better equipped for the 
work. The coming of the Apostle was just 
in time to encourage the infant Church and 
to correct the mistakes of the zealous and 
beloved Apollos. His inquiry and their reply, 
with reference to receiving the holy 
spirit, showed their entire ignorance of the 
privileges of believers— of entire consecration 
and adoption as sons of God into the 
divine family, implied in the ordinance of 
baptism into Christ. This subject of the 
high calling of believers, of the gospel age, 
Paul opened up to them, probably in quite 
extended discourse, of which verse 4 must 



be understood as a mere synopsis. This 
clearer understanding was at once acted 
upon, and they were again baptized— not 
this time with the significance of John's 
baptism (unto repentance), but of Christ's 
baptism (of entire consecration and full submission 
to the will of God). 

Then followed the evidence of their acceptance 
with God, granted to all the early 
Christians through the laying on of the Apostles' 
hands (never otherwise communicated, 
except at the beginning): the power of the 
holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke 
with tongues and prophesied. (Verse 6.) 
These gifts were necessary to the Church then 
in its incipient stage, both for their own full 
assurance of faith, and also for the world's 
recognition of them as specially owned of 
God; but they were not intended to be continued 
beyond the days of the Apostles.— 
1 Cor. 13:8. 

VERSES 8-10. Paul continued his reasonings 
with the Jews in the synagogues three 
months, when, as usual, his advanced and 
clear teachings produced a division among 
the Jews, for and against the truth— the opposition 
of the unbelievers being very pronounced. 
He therefore, with the believers, 
withdrew, and thereafter taught in the school 
or lecture room of one Tyrannus. Here Jews 
and Greeks were alike welcome, and from this 
place the truth spread over all Asia Minor. 

The lesson taught by the Apostle's course 
in thus ceasing to intrude upon the unbelieving 
Jews, who were no longer willing 
to give the truth a hearing in their synagogue, 
is one that all believers should note 
and follow. What communion hath light 
with darkness, or truth with error? After 
using such privileges as are freely accorded, 
if the truth has no effect, its servants are 
not justified by any Scripture in intruding 
upon the rights of others. 

R1558 : page 221 

PAUL AT MILETUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON VI., AUG. 6, ACTS 20:22-35. 

Golden Text— "Remember your leaders, those who 
spoke to you the Word of God; and viewing attentively 
the result of their conduct, imitate their faith."— Heb. 13:7. 
-Diaglott. 



We stand in awe before such an example 
of moral heroism as we find in the Apostle 
Paul: and the passage chosen for this lesson 
makes it specially manifest. As we follow 
him from city to city and mark his faithful 
labor and care, his patient endurance of persecution, 
his untiring devotion and zeal for 
the truth, his patience in instructing and 
bearing with the weak and ignorant, and all 
his sufferings for Christ's sake, and then 
hear him say, "None of these things move 
me," we feel that we are indeed contemplating 
a sublime character. 

To say that Paul was a remarkable man, 
a wonderful man, a grand man, gives no 
adequate conception of his character. See 
how in every city, bonds and afflictions 
awaited him: mobs and stripes and imprisonment 
were his constant expectation. Then 
read his epistles and mark his fervency of 
spirit, his deep insight into the things of 
God, his care for the churches and his deep 
solicitude for their spiritual welfare, his 
earnest exhortations and his living example. 
Read till you are filled with the inspiration 
of his noble example and behold in him a 
miracle of divine grace. 

No ordinary hopes and ambitions could 
inspire such a life. His eye of faith was 
fixed on the things as yet not seen. He was 

R1558 : page 222 

a man of superior advantages and blessings, 
as well as of peculiar and almost unprecedented 
trials. "Like one born before the 
time" (1 Cor. 15:8), he had seen the Lord in 
his glory and heard his gracious voice saying 
to him, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest 
thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against 
the pricks." It was unto him as Ananias 
said,— "The God of our fathers hath chosen 
thee, that thou shouldst know his will, and 
see that Just One, and shouldst hear the 
voice of his mouth; for thou shalt be his 
witness unto all men of what thou hast seen 
and heard." (Acts 22:14,15.) In mental 
vision he had been "caught away to the 
third heaven" (to the Millennial reign of 
Christ), and had been granted a glimpse of 
the glory and blessedness of that reign of 
righteousness. Again and again he received 
special, individual encouragement from the 
Lord. In Corinth the Lord spoke to him 
by a vision, saying, "Be not afraid, but 



speak and hold not thy peace; for I am 
with thee, and no man shall set on thee to 
hurt thee; for I have much people in this 
city." (Acts 18:9,10.) Again, in the midst 
of fierce persecution "the Lord stood by him, 
and said, Be of good cheer, Paul; for as thou 
hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so must 
thou bear witness also at Rome. " (Acts 23 : 1 1 .) 
And again, when in imminent danger 
of shipwreck, the angel of the Lord stood 
by him, saying, Fear not, Paul, thou must be 
brought before Caesar: and lo, God hath given 
thee all them that sail with thee." (Acts 27:23,24.) 
And the Lord constantly witnessed 
with him to the truth of the gospel, by miracles 
and signs which mightily convinced the 
people.-Acts 19:11,12; 20:9-12; 28:3-6,8,9. 

In view of these things, do we not truly 
say that Paul was a miracle of grace? He 
himself said, "I can do all things through 
Christ who strengtheneth me" (Phil. 4:13); 
and that it was the power of Christ that 
rested on him. (2 Cor. 12:9,10.) The grace 
given was indeed sufficient for the heavy 
labors and incessant toil of this beloved 
witness of the Lord unto us Gentiles. And 
as we look upon his shining course we see 
Christ in him; and reason says, If one who 
thus saw the Lord and heard his gracious 
voice, and who lived in such close and constant 
fellowship with him, was so inspired 
with hope and joy, and so nerved to cheerful 
endurance of hardship, pain and loss of 
every earthly treasure, the reward itself must 
indeed be glorious. 

Beloved, let us mark the noble examples 
of the Lord and of Paul, and let us run with 
patience the race set before us, looking unto 
Jesus, as did Paul, for all needed strength 
and consolation. 

With these thoughts, returning to the lesson, 
we see, in the parting of the beloved 
Apostle with the elders of the church at 
Ephesus, who had come to bid him farewell 
before he set sail for Jerusalem, and to receive 
his parting counsel, another reminder 
of his faithfulness and a worthy example for 
our imitation. 

VERSES 25-27. He said to them, "I know 
that ye shall see my face no more. Wherefore, 
I take you to record this day, that I am 
pure from the blood of all men [He was 
bearing in mind his personal responsibility 
as a steward of the Lord and the solemn significance 
of it as indicated by the Prophet 
Ezekiel— 33:7-9]; for I have not shunned 



to declare unto you all the counsel of God." 
On the part of Paul there was no compromise 
of the truth, no mixing of it with human 
philosophies to make it more palatable 
to either Jews or Gentiles, or to avoid thus 
any measure of the otherwise inevitable 
persecution. The Christian teacher who can 
truly bear such testimony under such circumstances 
is indeed a soldier of the cross. 

VERSES 28-31. Note his fatherly counsel 
to these elders to continue to supplement 
the Apostle's labors with their own; and 
with the same zeal and carefulness in which 
he had set them an example. Note also his 
faithful warning against false teachers, who 
would surely develop in their midst; against 

R1559 : page 222 

wolves in sheep's clothing, who would not 
spare the flock while selfishly seeking their 
own temporal advantage. The Apostle did 
not counsel the handling of these wolves 
very gently, as some teachers of to-day advise. 
He did not say, you must call them 
all brethren, and tell them they are probably 
as near the truth as you are, and that 
you have a broad charity for all sorts of vain 
philosophies, etc., etc. No, Paul was not the 
man for such compromises.— Rom. 16:17,18; 
2Thes. 3:6,14; 2 Cor. 6:14-18; 
2 Tim. 2:15-19. 

VERSES 32-35 are touching words— the 
eloquence of noble deeds, the exhortation of a 
living example, the benedictions of a loving 
heart, the incense of a devoted and holy life. 

VERSES 36-38. Since the fervent prayer 
of a righteous man availeth much, we cannot 
doubt that all their hearts were refreshed 

R1559 : page 223 

and comforted with a blessed sense of divine 
grace for this and every time of need, though 
their tears flowed freely at the thought of 
parting, to meet no more until the blessed 
day of final recompense. 

The golden text is well chosen, though 
the common translation gives a significance 
at variance with the teachings of the Lord 
and the Apostles. (See Matt. 20:25-28; 2 Cor. 1:24; 
1 Pet. 5:1-3. The Lord does not 
raise up rulers from among our brethren in 
the body of Christ; but he does raise up 
faithful leaders, to whom earnest heed should 
be given, and whose faith and example 



should be imitated. 
R1559 : page 223 
PAUL AT JERUSALEM. 



III. QUAR., LESSON VII., AUG. 13, ACTS 21:27-39. 

Golden Text— "For unto you it is given in the behalf 
of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for 
his sake. "-Phil. 1:29. 

Leaving Miletus, the scene of our last lesson, 
Paul pursued his journey toward Jerusalem, 
making several brief visits on the 
way— at Tyre seven days, at Ptolemais one 
day, and at Caesarea many days. And although 
forewarned of persecution at Jerusalem, 
he was persuaded that the Lord would 
have him go; and against all the entreaties 
of the brethren he was therefore invincible, 
saying, "What mean ye to weep and to 
break mine heart? for I am ready not to be 
bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for 
the name of the Lord Jesus." When he 
would not be dissuaded from his purpose, 
the brethren submitted, saying, "The will 
of the Lord be done" (Acts 21:1-14), and 
some of them went with him from Caesarea. 
This was his fifth visit to Jerusalem since 
his conversion, twenty years before. The 
day after his arrival he made a report of his 
missionary work to the brethren, of whom 
James, the Lord's brother, was chief. 

In the eight years since Paul had visited 
the brethren at Jerusalem (Acts 18:21,22) 
he had (1) made two long missionary tours; 
(2) revisited and strengthened the churches 
in Asia Minor; (3) carried the gospel into 
Europe; (4) founded churches in Philippi, 
Corinth, Thessalonica and Ephesus; and (5) 
had widely extended the gospel and made 
many converts to Christianity, whose genuine 
faith and zeal for the cause of Christ 
was expressed in their contributions, sent by 
Paul, for the poor saints at Jerusalem. 

At the previous conference, eight years 
prior to this, the elders at Jerusalem had concurred 
with Paul's judgment and previous 
practice, that it was not necessary to put 
the yoke of Judaism upon Gentile converts. 
He had taught that the Mosaic law was no 
longer in force; that its forms and ceremonies 
could not save any one, not even a Jew; 



and that faith in the Lord Jesus was the 

only way of salvation. He had taught, 

further, that the chief promises of God were 

to the spiritual seed of Abraham, of which 

seed are all who are Christ's by faith and consecration, 

whether Jews or Gentiles. At the 

same time he himself, being a Hebrew, properly 

observed certain features of the Jewish 

law; not, however, as a condition of salvation, 

but rather as a justifiable expediency— 

a concession to his Jewish brethren who had 

not yet fully comprehended their liberty in 

Christ, that so his liberty might not become 

an occasion of stumbling to them.— See May 

1st TOWER, page 142. 

The narrative of this lesson needs no special 
comment, but is another illustration of 
the dauntless courage and holy enthusiasm 
of this noble soldier of the cross, a noteworthy 
instance of which is seen in his request 
to the chief captain to suffer him to 
speak to the people,— as soon as they had 
left off beating him. (Verses 37-40.) And 
the noble address which followed (chap. 22) 
was a model of skill, logic and eloquence; 
and a fair reflection of the worthy character 
of the Lord's chosen Apostle. May its inspiration 
fire our hearts to the furtherance 
of the Lord's work. The Apostle's course 
was a practical exemplification of his teaching 
in the golden text of this lesson. 



page 223 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am again in 
the harvest field. What a privilege not only to 
feast ourselves upon the fat things, but to feed 
others as well. When we take Brother Paul's 
advice, and present our bodies living sacrifices to 
God and his service, there seems to be a change 
in our being. We continually grow in love to 
God, in heart, mind, soul and strength, and 
to love our neighbor as ourselves. It seems 
to me, dear Brother, that we sometimes realize 
in our own hearts, to some extent at least (notwithstanding 
our weakness under the Adamic 

page 224 

fall), the wonderful sympathy and love our 



dear Savior manifested toward the city of Jerusalem, 
when, but a few days before he suffered, 
he wept over the city, and, again, as they 
pierced him on the cross, he uttered that 
wonderful prayer, "Father, forgive them." I 
used to read those things with deep interest, 
and could hardly realize such great love; but 
now I not only realize it, but see my own privilege 
to share that same love, and to sacrifice 
for the sake of others. 
Yours in the service of the Master, 
J. S. BOTT. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just finished 
this week's work, and wish you to know 
that I am still fighting away, and still trusting 
in our dear Redeemer, who died that we might 
live. And I do thank our Heavenly Father 
that I am so privileged to be used of him in 
spreading the "glad tidings of great joy which 
shall be to all people." 

I met a dear brother to-day, who seemed to 
be thoroughly consecrated to God's service. 
He has some truth, and I hope DAWN will help 
him to more. He had only to look at it a moment 
to see that it was something good. Perhaps you 
do not just realize how good it makes me feel 
to meet anyone I can grasp by the hand and 
call "brother." When we meet so much error 
everywhere, it is such a delightful contrast to 
meet one of like precious faith— one who is on 
the Rock. I took one hundred and forty orders 
this week; and owe many thanks to Brother 
Rogers for his helping hand, enabling me to 
do so much better than previously. 

Your brother in Christ, WM. Mc ALPINE. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We received 
the three Bibles, etc., in good condition, and 
are well pleased with them. I also received 
your kind letter of May 30. It encourages me 
to press on. I am heavy laden with cares, but 
strength is graciously supplied to me; and I 
trust that I shall never become overcharged. 
I surely can see the hand of the Lord leading 
me on. All my ways, my thoughts, my words 
and desires, are known to him; and I desire to 
keep that thought always before me: it is a 
safeguard against the many snares of the devil. 

I have received and read the June 1st TOWER. 
The article, "The Lord's Sheep," is good. 
How glad I am that I ever heard the Good 



Shepherd's voice! I will endeavor to follow 
wherever he leads, for the path is safe, and 
will end in glory. The knowledge of the good 
Shepherd, who he is, what he has done for his 
sheep and what he is still doing for us, has 
drawn out my love for him; and I desire to 
follow him because I love him. Dear Shepherd, 
keep me ever near thee, is my prayer. Amen. 

The article, "The Relative Claims of Love 
and Justice," has opened my eyes as never before. 
I have read it twice, carefully, and I 
want to keep it before me continually. I never 
saw so much injustice before. I see that justice 
is what is needed in this world more than 
anything else. I see now that justice is righteousness; 
and there can be no peace on earth 
until justice is established in it; but we have 
the "sure word of prophecy" pointing out a 
time when the "people shall be all righteous," 
and inherit the land for ever.— Isa. 60:21. 

Your brother in Christ, N. BARRETT, SR. 



DEAR FRIENDS :-How the WATCH TOWER 

grows on one! It breathes the Spirit of Truth. 
I look upon the letters from friends and workers 
published in the TOWER as one of its strong 
features, and take great pleasure in reading 
them all— they are so clean and honest and 
straight-forward. 
With best wishes, I remain Yours truly, 
A. R. PEARSON. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am digging 
down into the three volumes of DAWN, trying 
my best to get its treasures; for I find that all 
the truth does not lie on the surface. Each 
time I read them through I grasp the truth more 
firmly. 

Please send me the TOWER for April 15th, 
and the one treating the first chapter of John. 
Never before did anything open up so beautifully 
to my mind. 

Yours in love and truth, R. P. PHELPS. 



DEAR FRIENDS:-I failed to receive the 
TOWER of April 15th. If you have one I would 
be glad to have it. I feel it a great loss to 
miss a single number. Would be pleased to receive 
a few tracts for distribution. 

A few of us, here, are endeavoring to walk 



in the strait, narrow way of self-denial, trusting 
in the ransom sacrifice of our blessed Redeemer, 
and endeavoring to walk in his footsteps. 
Oh, how wonderful that we are invited 
to be heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus 
Christ, our Lord. Amazing grace! 

We are circulating a few DAWNS and other 
publications of the Tract Society in our thinly 
settled section, though there are but few that 
have the hearing ear. Yet how clear and refreshing 
is the truth to the household of faith! 
I feel I have but a little while to stay in the 
flesh. I have passed the seventieth mile-post, 
and hope soon to be like my Lord, and see 
him as he is. Yours in hope, G. S. PERRY. 



page 226 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



OUR CHICAGO CONVENTION:-- 

Full particulars (so far as yet arranged) were 
given in our last issue, except to note that the 
entertainment offered includes pure water from 
artesian wells. 

Responses so far received indicate that we 
will have a good attendance. Colporteurs, and 
those proposing to enter that work, should 
sacrifice something in order to attend. We expect 
a blessing and a fresh impetus to the general 
work. Let all the consecrated pray for 
themselves, and especially for all who shall attend 
the Convention, that selfishness and pride 
may be swallowed up in love and humility— 
that the blessing may be general. 

R1559 : page 226 

BROTHER RABINOWITCH IN ALLEGHENY. 



Joseph Rabinowitch, of Kishenev, Russia, is 
well known to our readers as by birth a Hebrew, 
but a convert to our Lord Jesus, who is laboring 
for the conversion of the Jews. He is 
stopping with the editor for a couple of days, 
resting. Mr. Moody was instrumental in bringing 
him to Chicago, with a view of having him 
aid in work for the Jews in that city. 

Brother Rabinowitch addressed a meeting of 
about 500 Jews at Warszawiak's Mission in 
New York. (Hermann Warszawiak is a converted 
Russian Jew who is preaching Jesus to 
his country-men here.) In Chicago he several 
times addressed above 200 Jews, and on his 
way back he is to address about 600 Jews at 
Gaebelein's Mission in New York. We were 
agreeably surprised to learn of so many Hebrews 
in this country interested in Jesus as the Messiah 
—even though all are not converted to him. 

When asked his opinion of the work being 
done for the Hebrews in the United States, 
Brother Rabinowitch said: "I am pleased with 
what I have seen; but it is rather raw yet. It 
needs more system, and a better system. My 
theory and plan are somewhat different; and 
I think better for reaching the heart of the Jew. 
I do not introduce the Jews into any denomination 
of Christians, nor to any creed of Christendom. 
Rather I introduce them to Jesus as 
the King of the Jews— their own brother, their 
own lineage. I show the fulfilment of prophecy 
in him; and seek to have them accept him 
as Redeemer and Messiah. I leave out all 
those special doctrinal features which separate 
the denominations of Christendom, and preach 
Christ Jesus the Jew, crucified as our Redeemer 
and resurrected to be our King, our Deliverer 
from sin and death, in God's due time." 

We were forcibly struck with the fact that Bro. 
Rabinowitch's gospel to the Jews is so much in 
correspondence with our message to Christians. 

R1563 : page 226 

PROSPERITY IN JERUSALEM 

The price of land about Jerusalem is something 
surprising when we consider that the 
place has almost no manufactures, very little 
foreign commerce, and that the city contains 
a multitude of poor people. Two acres that 
were sold in 1890 for $250 per acre sold in 
1891 for $750; twelve acres sold in 1890 
for $435 per acre sold in 1892 for $2,178; 
seven acres sold in 1886 for $363 per acre sold 



in 1892 for $6,534; two acres sold in 1886 for 
$1,200 per acre sold in 1892 for $3,000; half 
an acre sold in 1871 for $200 sold in 1892 for 
$3,700, that is, for the half acre; one acre sold 
in 1872 for $40 sold in 1892 for $12,000; two-thirds 
of an acre sold in 1886 for $100 sold in 
1891 for $3,600; one acre sold in 1865 for 
$1,000 sold in 1891 for $24,000. These are 
not in one section or locality, but in different 
directions about the city, varying from one-fourth 
of a mile to one mile distant from the 
town.— Scribner's. 

"A correspondent in Jerusalem informs us 
that the Sultan's government has again licensed 
Jewish real estate brokers and purchasers to 
acquire landed property in Palestine without 
being Mussulmen, and secures to all settlers the 
protection of the high porte and equal rights 
with the natives of the land. This opens that 
country to foreign immigration and will attract 
thousands from Roumania, Russia and 
Morocco." —American Israelite. 



R1560 : page 227 

VOL. XIV. AUGUST 1, 1893. NO. 15. 

SPECIAL DIVINE PROVIDENCE. 



"Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and 
afterward receive me to glory."— Psa. 73:24. 

ON the subject of divine providence there are 
many widely diverging views. Even among 
Christians some are quite skeptical with reference 
to it, while others view it in a light so 
extreme as to destroy in their minds the idea 
of human free-agency and accountability. But, 
to rightly understand the subject, we must carefully 
observe the Scripturally marked metes and 
bounds within the limits of which divine providence 
can be and is exercised. First, we observe 
that, since God is good, all his providences 
must be with a view to wise and benevolent 
ends, either near or remote: Secondly, that 
since he made man in his own image— morally 
free— and with the alternatives of good and 
evil before him, it would be contrary to his 
purpose, thus manifested, to so hedge him about 
with his providences as to interfere with his 
moral free-agency, which is the crowning glory 
of humanity, and the right exercise of which 



gives to virtue all its worth: Thirdly, we 

see that, since God is working all things after 

the counsel of his own will according to a plan 

of the ages, which he purposed in himself before 

the foundation of the world (Eph. 1:9-11; 

3:11), and since he changes not (Mai. 3:6), 

but all his purposes shall be accomplished (Isa. 55:11), 

it is manifest that he cannot exercise 

his providence in any way which would be 

detrimental to the ultimate ends of his perfect 

plan. 

If these three principles— viz., the divine 
goodness, the inviolability of human free-agency, 
and the necessary consistency of the divine 
providences with the divine purposes— be always 
borne in mind, they will save, both from 
skepticism on the one hand, and from fanaticism 
on the other, as well as greatly assist the 
believer to a clearer understanding and fuller 
appreciation of God's dealings, both in general 
and in particular. 

The Psalmist says, "The Lord is good to 
all, and his tender mercies are over all his 
works." (Psa. 145:9.) This sweeping statement 
takes in the utmost bounds of the material 
universe and also the humblest, as well as 
the most exalted, sentient being. The whole 
creation is his care. Jehovah, our God, is the 
great Emperor of the whole universe, and his 
wisdom, power, goodness and benevolence are 
abundantly equal to all the responsibilities of 
so exalted an office. The human mind staggers 
in its efforts to comprehend the mental 
resources of a being who is able to assume and 
to bear such responsibility. Think for a moment 
of the memory that never fails; of the 
judgment that never errs; of the wisdom that 
plans for eternity without the possibility of 
failure, and that times that plan with unerring 
precision for the ages to come; of the power 
and skill which can harness even every opposing 
element, animate or inanimate, and make 
them all work together for the accomplishment 
of his grand designs; of the tireless vigilance 
that never ceases, nor seeks relief from the 
pressing cares of universal dominion— whose 
eye never sleeps, whose ear is ever open, and 
who is ever cognizant of all the necessities, and 

R1560 : page 228 

active in all the interests, of his broad domains. 

Well has the Psalmist said, in consideration 
of the immensity and the minutiae of God's 
providence over all his works— "Such knowledge 
is too wonderful for me: it is high, I 



cannot attain unto it." (Psa. 139:6.) No, we 

cannot; but Oh, what a thrilling sense of mingled 

reverence, love and adoration fills the 

heart, when thus we catch a glimpse of the intellectual 

and moral glory and majesty of our 

God! As we thus contemplate him, all nature 

becomes eloquent with his praise: the heavens 

truly declare his glory, and the firmament 

showeth his handiwork: day unto day uttereth 

speech and night unto night showeth knowledge. 

(Psa. 19:1,2.) They tell of the order 

and harmony of the circling spheres, and the 

benevolent purpose of their great Creator and 

Controller, as the changing seasons and the 

alternating days and nights fill up the copious 

horn of plenty and refresh and invigorate the 

animate creation. 

Since we are distinctly told that his tender 
mercies— his kind providences— are over all his 
works, that all his wise purposes shall be accomplished, 
and that the ultimate design in all 
his works is the firm establishment of universal 
harmony and peace, and the eternal happiness 
of all his subjects (Psa. 145:9; Isa. 55:8-13; 
1 Cor. 15:24,25), whatever inharmonies we now 
see in nature must be viewed as incidental 
to the preparations for the perfection of all 
things, which is not due until "the dispensation 
of the fulness of times," following the 
Millennial reign of Christ. (1 Cor. 15:24,25; 
Eph. 1:10; 3:11,15.) And since we are enlightened 
by a knowledge of the divine plan 
of the ages, we see, further, in the introduction 
of the human race upon the earth before the 
physical perfection of nature has been attained, 
a wonderful display of wisdom. This measure 
has furnished the necessary condition for the 
experience and trial of the human family, and 
has made use of the labor of the race, while 
under condemnation, to urge forward the work 
of preparing the earth for its final glorious 
condition, as prefigured in Eden, by the time 
the race will be fully recovered from the fall 
and established in righteousness. 

If we keep this thought in mind, and do not 
lose sight of the ultimate purpose of God, 
and of the fact that the present is only a preparatory 
state, progressing toward final completeness, 
we need never be skeptical about an 
overruling providence which now permits a 
cyclone, a tornado, an earthquake, a volcanic 
eruption, or any other of nature's throes and 
distresses. They are all means working toward 
the grand ends of eternal peace and glory and 
beauty. Even that widespread calamity of 
Noah's day, which deluged the world and 



wiped out the whole mongrel race with which 
sin had peopled the earth (Jude 6; 2 Pet. 2:5), 
sparing only righteous Noah (who "was perfect 
in his generation"— Gen. 6:8,9— and not of 
the mixed or hybrid race), and his family, was 
probably part of the natural process of preparation 
of the earth also for the new dispensation 
which began, with Noah and his family, after 
the flood. 

But while God's tender mercies are over all 
his works, and the whole creation is his care, 
we must not overlook the fact that man, by 
sin, has forfeited all claims upon the divine 
providence. As a son of God, Adam had a 
son's claim upon his heavenly Father's benevolent 
providence; but when God condemned 
him to death on account of sin he thereby 
rightfully repudiated all human claims upon 
his fatherhood. The creature was thenceforth 
unworthy of life, and of the divine providence 
which alone could sustain it. Therefore the 
condemned world has no right to question why 
God permits one calamity after another to 
overtake them and to sweep them into oblivion. 
They have no right to expect anything else; 
and if calamities do not hurry them off, they 
are perishing just as surely by more gradual processes, 
in consequence of the curse pronounced 
on account of sin. 

The condemned world is thus left to its fate 
—to reach the tomb by gradual or by hurried 
processes. Sometimes the death-penalty is executed 
by the disturbances of the elements of 
nature incident to its yet imperfect condition; 
—such, for instance, as tempests, cyclones, earthquakes, 
volcanic eruptions, lightning shocks, 
etc.;— sometimes by the aggravated results of 

R1560 : page 229 

sin entailed by inheritance; sometimes by the 
sinful war of angry human passions, resulting in 
wars and in private and domestic feuds and 
revenges; and sometimes through lack of good 
judgment in discerning and avoiding danger, 
such as fires, railway and ocean disasters, etc. 
All of these are the executioners of the just 
penalty for sin, pronounced against the whole 
race. 

Then why should any expect God to interfere 
and interrupt the course of justice?— especially 
in the case of those who still continue unrepentant 
and utterly regardless of his holy law, 
and who have no desire to return to his favor 
and control? True he might, and sometimes 
does, temporarily interfere with the present 



course of evil in order to facilitate his own wise 
plans; but man has no right to expect such 
interference in his behalf, nor would it be an 
evidence of divine favor toward the sinner. 
Sometimes, but not always, sudden calamities 
are the servants of some special purpose of God 
—as, for instance, the deluge, the destruction 
of Sodom and Gomorrah, the fall of the tower 
of Siloam (Luke 13:4), etc.; but usually they 
are only serving his general purpose as executors 
of the death-penalty upon the condemned. 

While the condemned world of mankind is 
thus left to its fate, men are permitted largely 
to pursue their own course in the management 
of their affairs. They may take such advantage 
as they can of the elements of nature, or 
of their own medical and surgical skill and ingenuity, 
to prolong their days and to ameliorate 
their condition under the curse; they may 
control their evil passions for their advantage, 
or give them loose rein, to their individual 
and mutual detriment; they may institute and 
maintain such forms of civil jurisprudence as 
they can agree upon, subject to the secret and 
cunning intrigue of the wily and powerful, but 
unrecognized, prince of this world, Satan. But 
their course is their own course, and God is not 
in it. Hence God has no responsibility with 
reference to it; nor can he in any sense be held 

R1561 : page 229 

accountable for the misery that men bring upon 
themselves and each other in pursuance of 
their own godless and evil way. Yet God 
could, and undoubtedly would, put a sudden end 
to the sin and misery that is in the world, were 
it not that his far-seeing judgment counsels its 
temporary permission for a benevolent ultimate 
purpose, toward which even the wrath of men 
is unconsciously ministering. 

But the case is quite different with those who 
have renounced their own way and turned to 
the Lord, who have accepted of his forgiveness 
through Christ, and who have thus been restored 
to their original standing (as in Adam 
before sin) as sons of God. All so recognized 
of God are again the heirs of his favor 
through Christ— "If a son, then an heir." 
(Gal. 4:7.) And it is to such, and such only, 
that the promise of divine guidance, referred 
to in our text, belongs:— "Thou shalt guide 
me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me 
to glory." 

What advantages, then, should be looked for 
in the cases of these sons of God, who have 



separated themselves from the world and its 
spirit? By natural inference, we should expect 
the return of God's favor to restore again the 
blessings lost by the fall— the blessings of lasting 
life, health, peace, prosperity and happiness. 
Yet what do we see? We see these 
justified ones suffer and die just like other men. 
Evils befall them; disease lays hold of them; 
poverty hampers them; friends desert them; 
and death overtakes them, as well as other 
men; and, the whole course of the present evil 
world being against them, their pursuit of righteousness 
is attended with great difficulty and 
privation. Wherein, then, are they profited? 
The world cannot see that they are profited 
at all; for the profit is discerned only 
by the eye of faith in the counsel of God's 
Word. That counsel, all the sons of God take 
for their guidance. It describes the present 
life as a preparatory state, which, if rightly 
used, prepares for the truly glorious condition 
designed for sons of God hereafter. It is in 
view of this instruction of the Word of God, 
that the Psalmist, in the words of our text, expresses 
his confident realization of present 
guidance and of the eternal glory to follow. 
The present life, being preparatory, is a time 
for the schooling and discipline of the sons of 
God; and their subjection to the present ills, 

R1561 : page 230 

while it is often painful, is recognized by them 

as necessary, in the providence of God, to 

work out for them an exceeding and eternal 

weight of glory. (2 Cor. 4:17.) In this confident 

realization they have peace, and even 

joy, in the midst of present tribulation. And 

this present peace and joy in a realization of 

the divine forgiveness and favor, and the privilege 

of present experience, discipline and instruction 

under the divine tutorship, is the 

present advantage of the sons of God, while 

an eternal weight of glory is in store for all 

who prove faithful under it. 

The providence of God over these, his sons, 
is a very particular providence:— All their steps 
are ordered of the Lord (Psa. 37:23); and the 
very hairs of their head are all numbered (Luke 12:7.) 
His eyes are ever upon the righteous, 
and his ears are open to their prayers. (1 Pet. 3:12.) 
All the angels are ministering spirits 
sent forth to minister to these heirs of salvation. 
(Heb. 1:14.) All things are made to 
work together for good to these, who love God 
and are called according to his purpose (Rom. 8:28); 



and no good thing is withheld from 

them. (Psa. 84:11.) How wonderful and particular 

is this care; and they have the promise 

of it to the end of their trial state. God is indeed 

a Father to all that put their trust in him; 

but there is a wide difference between those 

who are his sons, and those who remain aliens, 

and even enemies. 

While we thus view the present providence 
of God and his opposite attitude toward the 
world and toward those who are now recognized 
as his sons, we may rise to a still higher altitude. 
Here we observe the breadth and scope of 
the divine plan, and see that even now, while 
God does not and cannot treat the world as 
sons and grant them his fatherly grace and 
blessing, he is nevertheless preparing to bless 
them with his favor as soon as they come to 
the proper attitude of sons. 

He has devised, and already partly executed, 
a plan for the redemption and restitution of 
all who will by and by repent fully and submit 
themselves to his righteous requirements; and, 
in their present alien and outcast condition, 
he is giving them such experiences as will in 
time bring them to realize their own helplessness 
and to desire and seek the favor of God. 
In the working out of his grand general plan, 
which has for its ultimate end the blessing of 
all the families of the earth, all the bitterness 
of sin and evil that men have experienced have 
had a part. To this end God has also been 
over-ruling the affairs of men for the past six 
thousand years. That is, while he has been 
permitting men to rule themselves according 
to their own ideas, he has been, unknown to 
them, so over-ruling as to make even their blind 
and evil course bring to pass circumstances and 
events which they did not foresee nor contemplate, 
but which in the long run of his plan 
ministers to his purpose. Thus, for instance, 
the world's present blind and wrong course is 
bringing about a great time of trouble, which 
God foresaw and will permit, whose final outcome 
under the overruling of God, will be the 
overthrow of human governments and the establishment 
of the divine. In the past men have 
had their affairs their own way to the extent 
that they could agree among themselves, to the 
extent that the unseen prince of this world, 
Satan, did not interfere and overpower them, 
and to the extent that their plans were not interfering 
with the purpose and plan of God. 

Thus, though men have not been aware of 
it, and have conducted their affairs regardless 
of both God and Satan, God has all the while 



been overruling both man's and Satan's designs 

in the affairs and destinies of nations, so 

as to give to men the largest possible experience 

with sin and its consequences, thus to 

prepare them eventually for willing submission 

to the righteous reign of the Prince of peace. 

They have had experience with every shade 

and form of government; and now, as the end 

of Gentile times approaches, the world is preparing 

to express its complete dissatisfaction 

with all, in general and world-wide anarchy. 

The crisis is fast approaching and the end is 

nearing when the wayward, prodigal world will 

come to its last extremity. But man's extremity 

will be God's opportunity; and to this extremity 

he is therefore permitting them blindly 

to drift. But when, with broken and contrite 

hearts, they turn to the Lord, they will 

R1561 : page 231 

prove the joys of his forgiving love, and mark 
how, even before they called upon him, he was 
preparing to answer (Isa. 65:24)— first, in the 
redemption provided; and secondly, in the 
necessary, hard experiences which shall have 
brought them to repentance and to a full realization 
of their need of God's fatherly providence, 
and to humble, grateful dependence. 

These overrulings of God among the nations 
are not to be regarded as providences over, 
and favors to, sinners, but rather as measures 
preparatory to the blessing of future repentant 
and obedient sons, who will profit by contrasting 
the coming good with the present evil; 
and also as measures necessary for the present 
welfare of those who are now his sons. 

With these thoughts in mind, mark the stately 
steppings of our God along the aisles of history 
—how even the wrath of man has been 
made to further the interests of the divine plan. 
The rise and fall of empires and the wars and 
revolutions that have unsettled and disturbed 
the world, while they were great evils in themselves, 
nevertheless saved men from sinking 
lower and lower in lethargy and vice: they 
roused ambitions; they kept the human mind 
awake, and set men to thinking and planning 
to improve their conditions. They brought 
men of different tribes and nations together, 
sharpened intellectuality, stimulated ambition, 
led to discoveries and inventions, and thus 
helped to keep the race above the level of the 
brute creation. Even the infamous slave trade, 
which brought thousands of black men from 
Africa to this favored land, was, as viewed in 



the light of God's overruling providence, a 
blessing in disguise; for the black man in America 
has enjoyed advantages of civilization here 
that he would never have known in his native 
land. And similar providences we can also 
mark in the great persecutions and distresses 
of the old world, which drove the lovers of 
liberty to our shores, here to establish a free 
government and conditions of society specially 
favorable to the consummation of God's great 
purpose to gather a people for his name. The 
subject is too large for extended discourse here, 
but with this brief suggestion the reader will 
mark thousands of instances where God's overruling 
providence can be seen in history working 
together to the predetermined end; and 
yet in it all the world is still pursuing its own 
wilful and wayward course, and will continue 
to do so until the judgments of the Lord overtake 
and subdue them. 

No nation on the face of the earth can now 
be said to have God's special fatherly providence 
over it; for there is no nation even 
claiming to be the sons of God. Consequently, 
no nation can claim his care and protection. 
All are alike exposed to the fortunes or misfortunes 
of the course they pursue; and God will 
not interfere, except in so far as to shape the 
end toward the final accomplishment of his 
great work; and that shaping, we are informed, 
will soon require the overthrow of all the 
thrones of earth and a great time of unprecedented 
trouble.-Jer. 25:15,16,26,27; Dan. 2:44; 
12:1; Hag. 2:21,22; Heb. 12:26,27; 
Rev. 11:15. 

But let the surges of trouble rise: God's people 
—his sons and daughters— can still claim 
the precious promises of guidance with his 

R1562: page 231 

counsel. They are his "peculiar people," "a 

holy nation," unrecognized by the world, as 

yet, but soon to be manifested in power and 

great glory. Previous to the Gospel age the 

Lord had a special holy nation, and his special 

providence over that nation was illustrative of 

a similar providence over the antitype, the 

Gospel Church. But let us not overlook the 

fact that the providences of God over typical 

Israel were of a disciplinary character, as are 

those of the Church, the spiritual Israel, now. 

They were led, instructed, chastened and encouraged 

according to the necessities for their 

development and perfecting as children of 

God. And those of that age who meekly submitted 



to the Lord's providential care and 
leading, walking by faith as we do now, though 
they received not the reward of their faithfulness 
then (Acts 7:5; Heb. 11:39,40), were laid 
away to rest until God's set time to recall 
them, and were marked by him as the precious 
heirs of his loving favor to be granted in due 
time. 

A similar course has been pursued all through 
the Gospel age, wherein consecrated believers 

R1562 : page 232 

have experienced the favor of God's providential 

leading, teaching, chastening and encouragement; 

and, having received the seal of sonship, 

they too have one by one been laid away 

to rest until the day of his appearing and kingdom 

—and "Precious in the sight of the Lord 

has been the death of his saints." (Psa. 116:15.) 

They have been guided by his counsel, 

and shall in due time be received into glory— 

those of the Jewish age into the glory of the 

earthly phase of his kingdom; and those of 

the Gospel age into the glory of its heavenly 

phase. (See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chap. 

xiv.) In our treatment of the S.S. Lesson for 

July 2nd, attention is further called to the special 

providences of God in the general direction 

and course of the work of the Gospel 

Church, which on that account we omit here. 

In this reasonable and Scriptural view of divine 
providence, the humble and believing 
children of God will realize that, while they 
may not be able at all times to understand the 
Lord's ways in all his dealings, they can know 
of his wisdom, love and care, and that they 
can therefore trust him where they cannot trace 
him. We should not expect to be able always 
to comprehend the divine wisdom, which is so 
much beyond our own; yet we can often see it 
afterward. Sometimes his discipline may be 
severe, and by no means easy to bear, yet 
"afterwards, it yields the peaceable fruits of 
righteousness." After the bitter comes the 
sweet; so let us take the bitter patiently, and 
rejoice in hope of the sure fulfilment of all the 
exceeding great and precious promises to be 
realized in due time by those who patiently 
continue in well doing— in submitting without 
reserve to the providence of God, to the guidance 
with his counsel. 

The Psalmist represents a large class of the 
immature, inexperienced and only partially instructed 
children of God, when he says (Psa. 73:2-12), 
"But as for me, my feet were almost 



gone; my steps had well nigh slipped: for I 
was envious at the foolish, when I saw the 
prosperity of the wicked.... Their eyes 
stand out with fatness, they have more than 
heart could wish. They are corrupt and they 
speak in the wickedness of oppression. From 
on high [from the chief places of power and 
control] they speak. They set their mouth 
against the heavens, and their tongue walketh 
[their influence hath free course] through the 
earth. Therefore do his [God's] people turn 
away hither [into the wilderness condition of 
separation from the world] and waters of a full 
cup [of affliction and persecution] are wrung 
out to them. And they [the ungodly] say, 
'How doth God know? and is there knowledge 
in the Most High?' Behold, these are 
the ungodly, who prosper in the world; they 
increase in riches." 

The picture is a true one of the present reign 
of evil. (See also Mai. 3:15.) It is those who 
selfishly seek their own present aggrandizement, 
regardless of the interests of others, that 
are most prosperous now, and that occupy the 
chief places of control— political, financial, and 
even religious; while the godly, who despise 
oppression and love righteousness, and who, 
therefore, live contrary to the course of the 
present evil world, become the subjects of 
oppression. 

Taking a narrow or merely human view of the 
matter, we might well question why God permits 
the wicked so to triumph at the expense 
of the righteous. The Psalmist says (verses 16,17), 
again speaking for the same class of God's 
children, that the problem was too difficult 
for him to solve until he went into the sanctuary 
of God (into the Holy Place of entire consecration 
to God, typified in "the holy" of 
the Tabernacle. See Tabernacle Shadows of 
Better Sacrifices.) There, being specially taught 
of God through his Word and his providences, 
we are made to understand the reason for the 
present perverse order of things— that for a 
wise purpose it is permitted for a time; but 
that by and by there will be a great change, 
when the righteous, now being tested and tried 
under the reign of oppression, will come forth 
to honor and glory and power. 

It is indeed impossible to understand this— 
to rightly appreciate the deep philosophy of 
God's plan of the ages and our privilege of 
trial and discipline under the present reign of 
evil— until we come into the sanctuary condition 
of entire consecration to the will of God, 



R1562 : page 233 

where the meat of the Word and the light of 
the holy Spirit are granted to us. Then, like 
the Psalmist (verse 22), we see how ignorant 
and foolish we were in being envious of the 
prosperous wicked. And though, in our former 
ignorance and foolishness, our feet were almost 
gone, and our steps had well nigh slipped, we 
have reason to thank God that he held us by 
the right hand and did not suffer us to fall. 
And in view of such care in the past, we joyfully 
and confidently trust him, not only in 
the midst of the present trial state, but also for 
the future outworking of his plan with reference 
to ourselves and all mankind. The Psalmist 
has well expressed the present confidence 
thus acquired, and the grateful adoration of all 
the consecrated or sanctuary class, saying, 
(verses 24-26), "Thou shalt guide me with thy 
counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. 
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there 
is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. 
My flesh and my heart faileth [the flesh is too 
weak and the heart too faint to pursue the 
course marked out for the righteous in this 
present evil day, except as strengthened and 
upheld by power from on high]; but God is the 
strength of my heart, and my portion forever. 

When God's wonderful plan of the ages is 
understood, every thing in nature and in experience 
bears testimony to the overruling of 
his providence. The heavens declare the glory 
of God and the earth showeth his handiwork; 
all speak of an intelligent Designer, wisely 
adapting means to good and benevolent ends, 
and ministering to the necessities of his intelligent 
creatures. Every leaf and every sunbeam 
bears a loving message of divine providence 
to the thoughtful. And every inharmony 
of nature, when viewed in the light of God's 
plan, is seen to be but a part of that great process 
whereby God is preparing for the perfect 
order of things which shall continue forever, 
when sin and its entailments shall have been 
banished under the successful reign of Christ; 
and even the long permitted wrath of man and 
Satan will eventually be to God's praise. 



R1562 : page 233 
"KEEP THY HEART. 



"Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out 
of it are the issues of life."— Prov. 4:23. 

THE heart, which is the center and mainspring 

of physical life, is here used as a symbol 

of the affections— which are the center and 

mainspring of the moral nature. Keep the center 

of the affections right, true and pure, and 

the words and deeds and looks and plans emanating 

therefrom will be good, true and pure, 

even though not always perfect. On the contrary, 

unless the heart is thus fixed, all attempts 

to otherwise regulate the life will be measurably 

fruitless and, at best, only spasmodic. How 

necessary, then, if we would live consistent 

Christian lives, moving steadily on in the way 

of righteousness, that our affections should be 

centered in God, that our hearts should be as 

true to him as the mariner's needle to the pole. 

The apostle wrote, "A double minded man 
is unstable in all his ways." A man whose affections 
are not centered in God, but which 
are divided with others, or centered on self and 
its varied whims, cannot be otherwise than vacillating 
in his course through life, just as a 
ship's course would be irregular had it two 
rudders, one before and the other behind, and 
operated by two masters whose ideas as to course 
were generally different. They never could 
accomplish results satisfactory to either. 

If we attempt to steer our course acceptably 
both to the world and to God, we will fail to 
please either. And, further, the Lord will be 
a party to no such contract; and, when he steps 
out, the influence of the other master, the world, 
will increase, and the result will be slavery to 
the world. This is the mistake which so many 
make after coming to recognize the Lord's 
goodness. Being justified by faith in Christ's 
redemptive work and realizing peace with 
God through the merit of the precious blood, 
they do not make a covenant with the Lord, 
giving up to him their little all of both the 
present and the future. Feeling their freedom 
from the slavery of sin, the temptation is to 
stand free from God as well as free from Satan, 
and to do their own pleasure— serving either 

R1562 : page 234 

God or self, or, to some extent, both God and self. 

Such generally agree that obedience to God, 
even to the extent of sacrifice, would be a reasonable 

R1563 : page 234 



service in view of his favor in their redemption; 
yet somehow they feel a disinclination 
to so fully surrender all to God, lest this 
should imply too great a sacrifice of self-convenience 
and self-will. But let no one so 
minded conclude that he has given his heart to 
God. To give the heart to God is to surrender 
the whole being to his will at any cost, even of 
self-sacrifice, if his will and his work should require 
it. To give the heart to God is, therefore, 
to meet and measurably overcome all the 
coming temptations at once, by a complete 
surrender of the affections, and consequently of 
the will, to God. It will settle every question 
of right and privilege, and make no attempt to 
distinguish between God's positive commands 
and his intimated wishes, finding its meat and 
drink to be the doing of his will, whether pleasant 
or unpleasant to the flesh, and whether the 
outcome can be fully seen or not. 

This giving of the heart to God, this full 
complete consecration of every interest, hope 
and aim, present and future, is sanctification. 
And those thus fully sanctified may implicitly 
trust divine wisdom, love and power, and hold 
fast the exceeding great and precious promises. 
God will never leave them nor forsake them, nor 
suffer them to be tempted above what they are 
able to bear and withstand. All things shall 
work together for good to such. Only those 
thus consecrated can and do have the deep 
peace and joy of heart which the passing storms 
and difficulties and tribulations of the present 
time cannot disturb. 

Though but few take this step of entire consecration 
to God's will, still fewer live it out 
practically, keeping their hearts constantly submissive 
to the Lord's will only; hence few 
keep their hearts fully in the love of God (Jude 21); 
and hence it is that so few enjoy the full 
measure of the joy and peace and communion 
with God, which is the privilege of all the fully 
consecrated and faithful. To maintain our 
hold upon our new relationship as consecrated 
sons, to maintain the spirit of adoption now, 
and to realize in due time our promised join t-heirship 
with our Lord Jesus in the divine glory, 
we must let, permit, and not oppose the Lord's 
plan and leading— let our wills remain dead 
to self and subservient to God's will, and let 
God's will direct and rule all our course of 
action according to his plan. It is thus that 
we are to fulfil the apostolic instructions— "Let 
the peace of God rule in your hearts;" "Let 
this mind [this disposition of heart and consecration 



of will] be in you, which was also in 
Christ Jesus our Lord."— Col. 3:15; Phil. 2:5. 

And it is in anticipation of our join t-heirship 
with Christ in glory, that the fully consecrated 
rejoice to partake of his affliction, as the 
Apostle exhorts, saying, "Rejoice, inasmuch 
as [or to the extent that] ye are partakers of 
Christ's sufferings; that, when his glory shall 
be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding 
joy."-l Pet. 4:13. 



R1564 : page 234 
LEAD ME. 



I do not ask, dear Lord, that life may be 

A pleasant road; 
I do not ask that thou wouldst take from me 

Aught of its load; 
I do not ask that flowers should always spring 

Beneath my feet; 
I know too well the poison and the sting 

Of things too sweet. 
For one thing only, Lord, dear Lord, I plead: 

Lead me aright, 
Tho' strength should falter, and tho' heart should bleed, 

Through peace to light. 

I do not ask, dear Lord, that thou shouldst shed 

Full radiance here; 
Give but a ray of peace, that I may tread 

Without a fear; 
I do not ask my cross to understand, 

My way to see; 
Better, in darkness, just to feel thy hand, 

And follow thee. 
Joy is like restless day, but peace divine 

Like quiet night; 
Lead me, O Lord, till perfect day shall shine, 

Through peace to light. 



R1563 : page 235 

QUESTIONS ABOUT POLITICS, VOTING, ETC. 



DEAR SIR:— I am endeavoring to "walk in 
the light, as He is in the light," believing myself 
fully consecrated, and solicitous to understand 



his will concerning us. I read the TOWER 
with pleasure and profit, and quite approve of 
most of its utterances. Here is one, however, 
I wish you would further explain and justify: 

"As concerns voting, the case is somewhat 
different, and we fully agree with you in the 
view expressed— that our covenant with the 
Lord, and our fidelity to him, practically make 
us aliens in our relations to all human governments, 
and that, therefore, we would best take 
no part in the election of officers or in the 
management of the affairs of this world." 
-Z.W. TOWER, May 15, 1893. 

I am far from taking any particular interest 
in political affairs, and, indeed, rarely vote: 
but I have not refrained from voting through 
any sense of duty so to do. 

Cannot, and does not, God sometimes use 
his people to accomplish some good even through 
the much abused ballot box? 

Whatever is his will concerning me I desire 
cheerfully to do. 

With best wishes for success to your earnest 
efforts, and prayers that his "will be done on 
earth as it is in heaven," I am, dear brother, 

Yours sincerely, DR. S. L. . 

Another brother writes urging that the Prohibition 
Party should have our votes and influence. 
He claims that the reform that it is 
attempting to bring about is in perfect accord 
with our teachings relative to the character of 
the Millennium; and that it is, therefore, evident 
that the Prohibition Party is of the Lord's 
institution, and that to fail to support it is to 
fail in that degree to serve the Lord. 

IN REPLY. 



These two brethren present their side of this 
question in its best form— pure patriotism— 
the welfare of the people. And we confess that, 
if we considered it possible to bring in the blessings 
of the Millennium by political reform, 
there would be a great temptation to help it on 
by voting. 

But we see no reason for supposing that a 
majority of the people, of this or of any other 
country inhabited by the fallen race of Adam, 
will join in the interest of righteousness and 
establish it. Some of the vast majority are 
wicked; more are blind and stupid and easily 
misled in judgment; and nearly all are ruled 
by selfishness, which is the very spirit of Satan. 



Hence we have no confidence in the flesh, 
nor that any government that the majority of 
fallen men could institute would be anything 
more than relatively good— and that in comparison 
with the terribly bad institutions, which 
have for centuries more or less abused power 
and oppressed the masses, especially the meek. 

Not only is this our judgment based upon 
the history of centuries, but the infallible Word 
of God more than corroborates this view. It 
declares that present governmental institutions 
are simply human efforts and not of God; and 
that because mankind in general are sold under 
sin and blinded by Satan, and thus his dupes, 
therefore, Satan is really "the prince of this 
world" or age. It pictures present governments 
as beastly, and bids God's saints rejoice 
in the promise that soon Christ will overthrow 
all these, and on their ruins establish the long 
promised and prayed for Kingdom of God.— 
Dan. 2:44. 

The testimony is that it will not be by a bloodless 
revolution at the ballot box, but by "a 
time of trouble such as was not since there was 
a nation;" in which the Lord will dash the 
Kingdoms of this world to pieces, as pottery 
is shivered before the blows of an iron rod.— 
Dan. 12:1; Rev. 2:26,27. 

True, all who love righteousness should feel, 
and do feel, a sympathy for every moral reform 
which gives the slightest promise of helping 
roll away the curse which now rests upon the 
world by reason of the reign of sin and death. 
But those who get into the Lord's confidence, 
and are granted an insight into His Word, are 
there informed regarding the divine plan; for 
the "secret of the Lord is with them that reverence 
him." And thus getting the spirit or 
mind of the Lord— "the spirit of a sound 
mind"— they are saved from following the various 
delusions, which swallow up the time 
and energies of many well-meaning people; 
and are enabled to give their time and energy 
in harmony with the great plan which God is 
out-working, viz., the call and "perfecting of 

R1563 : page 236 

the saints," thus making ready the kings and 
priests who, under Christ, their "head," shall 
soon rule and bless all the families of the earth. 

It is therefore a mistake to suppose that the 
Prohibition Party is God's Party, laboring under 
his direction, and that he will bring to its 
efforts success. While it is less selfish than 
other parties, and while it probably contains 



proportionately a larger number of good people 
than do other parties, yet it is only man's 

R1564 : page 236 

party carrying on man's idea. It is going about 
to establish righteousness, etc., on its own lines, 
and has not submitted itself to the divine plan 
for establishing righteousness, presented in 
God's Word. 

Let us not forget to look to the Lord and 
the apostles as our patterns in this as in every 
matter: There were many moral, social and 
political reforms possible in the days of our 
Lord and his apostles, but we do not read of 
any effort on their part either to inaugurate or 
to assist in such movements. Why? Because 
they knew that such was not God's plan; and 
they desired to be and were co-workers with 
God in his plan. If God had seen fit to give 
the four great empires, pictured in Daniel, the 
control of the world "until the times of the 
Gentiles are fulfilled," why should they attempt 
to take it from them sooner. If God saw fit to 
permit the groaning creation as a whole to continue 
to groan and to gain experience for a 
few years longer, until the Kingdom Church 
has been selected and set up in power and 
great glory, cannot his children acknowledge 
the wisdom of his plan and co-operate in it by 
giving their energies, as he directed, to the 
selecting and polishing of each other as members 
of that Kingdom Church? "Trust in the 
Lord, and wait patiently for him;" for all his 
purposes shall be accomplished in his own due 
time. Let us work with him as much as we 
can, and follow in the footsteps of our Lord 
and the apostles by preaching God's Kingdom 
(and not moral reforms) as the hope of the 
world, and let us seek to perfect the members 
of that Kingdom. 

Furthermore, looking at the subject from 
another stand-point, we remark that, He who 
votes at an election is morally bound to sustain 
the government he has participated in making 
—even to the giving of his life in its defense. 
On the contrary, soldiers of the cross are not 
to battle with carnal weapons, but have consecrated 
their lives even unto death in the service 
of another kingdom, whose interests are often 
against those of all the kingdoms of this world. 



page 236 



STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1564 : page 236 
PAUL BEFORE FELIX. 



III. QUAR., LESSON VIII., AUG. 20, 

ACTS 24:10-25. 

Golden Text— "Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit 
you like men, be strong."— 1 Cor. 16:13. 

The clamor against Paul, started at Jerusalem, 
was a determined one, and his enemies 
persistently sought his life. This lesson 
finds him in Caesarea (Acts 23:23,24) before 
Felix, the governor of the province; and 
Paul, in the presence of his accusers— the 
high priest Ananias, with a deputation from 
the Sanhedrin and a professional advocate, 
Tertullus— was permitted to speak for himself. 
The charges brought against him were, 
(1) that he was guilty of sedition, and so 
of disloyalty to the Roman government; (2) 
that he was guilty of heresy; (3) that he 
was guilty of profaning the temple, and thus 
of affronting a religion which was under the 
protection of the Roman government. 

VERSES 10-13. The first and last charges 
Paul positively denies, and challenges them 
for proof of their impious assertions. 

VERSE 14. To the charge of what they 
call heresy he freely pleads guilty; but intimates 
that their calling it heresy does not 
prove it to be such. In those days, as well 
as to-day, the truth is generally classed as 
heresy. The truth never was, and never 
will be, popular, until the Kingdom of God 
is established in the earth. And yet all that 
is termed heresy is not truth. For instance, 

R1564 : page 237 

while the so-called orthodoxy of to-day, with 



all its confusion and contradicting testimony, 
its unscriptural and unreasonable claims, and 
its poor human philosophies, however popular, 
is manifestly untrue, there are other 
vain philosophies and human speculations 
called heresies, as truly they are, which go 
even farther astray from the Truth. The 
Briggs doctrine is one of these, and their 
number is constantly increasing. 

But Paul's kind of heresy is the kind that 
all the saints should have— the kind which 
worships the one true God, believing "all 
things which are written in the law and in 
the prophets." The teachings of the Lord 
and the apostles never conflict with these; 
but together they form one harmonious 
system of divine truth worthy of all 
acceptation. 

VERSE 15. The doctrine of the resurrection, 
both of the just and the unjust, at the 
second coming of Christ, was the Apostle's 
special theme. He defined it, showed it to 
be the legitimate result of the ransom paid 
for all mankind, and held it forth as the 
blessed hope for the Church and for the 
world, and bade the Church rejoice in the 
special privilege of the first resurrection. 
See our treatment of this subject in our issue 
of April 1st. 

VERSES 17-21. With reference to the 
last charge, Paul brought forth the clearest 
proof of innocence. He was found in the 
temple purified, according to the Jewish 
ceremonial, which symbolized full consecration 
to God. And also in the presence 
of the Jewish council he had showed no disrespect, 
and this whole tumult had been excited 
by the strife of the two parties— the 
Pharisees and the Sadducees which composed 
it— when he declared his faith in the 
resurrection, which the Pharisees believe, 
but which the Sadducees deny. 

VERSES 22-26. Paul improved his opportunity 
when brought before Felix, the governor 
—who was notoriously avaricious, cruel 
and licentious, and who, Josephus says, 
was one of the most corrupt and oppressive 
governors ever despatched from Rome to 
Judea— to reason of righteousness, self-control 
and judgment to come. And his reasoning 
was such as commended itself to the 
hardened sinner before him. Felix trembled 
with fear before his own self-accusations 
and in view of the judgment to come, 
although there was no repentance in his 
heart. The reasonable inference of a judgment 



to come is most manifest from the established 

truth of a just and holy and powerful 

God; but the world sees no reasonableness 

in the false doctrine of eternal torment, 

which Antichrist has invented to scare men 

into a profession of godliness and an assumption 

of its forms. But the true doctrine of a 

coming judgment, which will require men 

to render an account for all their sins against 

any measure of light, may well cause men 

to tremble when forced to consider their 

crimes, and the reasonable inference that 

God will not always permit sin to go unpunished, 

neither will he allow virtue to 

lose its reward. 



R1564 : page 237 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



DEAR SIR AND FRIEND:-"Honest confession 
is good for the soul." This maxim 
is an old one, and I have believed it as far 
back as memory can reach. I have a confession 
to make, and as there are none near 
me willing to lend a sympathizing ear, I 
come to you— personally a stranger— feeling 
that you can understand fully what my 
friends will not even listen to. 

My parents were what may be termed 
strict Methodists, and in that faith I was 
reared. Duty to them compelled me to attend 
the church and Sabbath-school of that 
denomination, though I comprehended but 
little, as the teachings were too deep for my 
immature mind. The doctrine of eternal torment, 
however, was preached and taught me 
so persistently, and was so vividly illustrated 
to me, that through fear I believed or thought 
I believed it. These teachings were undoubtedly 
meant for my good; but from a retrospective 
glance I am forced to admit they 

R1565 : page 237 

have worked the opposite; for, from hearing 

so much of them, I made up my mind, 

when but a mere boy, that as soon as I became 

released from parental control, I would 

keep clear of churches in general and 

the Methodist one in particular. This liberty 

came to me more than a dozen years 



ago, and during the intervening period I 
have remembered my resolve. Until three 
months ago, I had attended church only about 
four or six times. I drifted here and there, 
paying attention to nothing but pleasure 

R1565 : page 238 

and bodily comforts, a very heathen in fact, 
until about three months ago. Conscience 
told me I was leading a wrong life, and that 
in duty to myself and my children I should 
change my mode, and give them a good example, 
if nothing more. I tried to hush its 
voice by applying myself to congenial tasks, 
but it would not be hushed. Finally, I made 
up my mind that attendance at church would 
satisfy this silent monitor, so to the Protestant 
Episcopal church I went, and I have 
attended it regularly ever since. 

About two weeks after I had resumed 
church attendance and my mind had become 
reasonably easy, I was putting my wardrobe 
in order, and found two OLD THEOLOGY 
tracts, entitled Thy Word is Truth, and 
Dr. Talmage's View of the Millennium. I 
read them, carelessly at first, then again with 
more attention. They were something new 
to me, and seemed to appeal to common 
sense and reason. I inquired of my wife 
where they came from, and was informed 
that they had been left by a Mrs. Bergner, 
who had promised to send a paper bearing 
on the same subjects. This paper came in 
due time and proved to be the February 
number of the TOWER, containing an article 
entitled "What say the Scriptures concerning 
Hell." This article riveted my attention, 
and I read it over and over again, and confirmed 
it with the Bible. It was a wonderful 
new doctrine to me, and upset all former 
beliefs on this subject. These readings 
prompted me to send for the three volumes 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN. I have read them 
all very carefully, and, I believe, understandingly. 
I have proved them by the Bible, and 
my faith in their truth is as firm as the Rock 
of Ages; for if the plan of the ages is not 
true, the Bible is not; and I have always 
reverenced that grand old book, though previous 
to reading DAWN I never understood 
it, but persistently misapplied the grand 
truths it teaches, and used to take great 
pleasure in pointing out what I foolishly 
called its contradictions. 

Now, how shall I attempt to describe the 



conflicting emotions the reading of the 
DAWN series has caused to arise within me, 
when I cannot understand their meaning 
myself? My earnest wish is to be able to do 
something in God's service, but my will does 
not seem to be strong enough to put the 
wish into execution. Am I to persevere in 
trying in my weak way to grasp that prize 
which seems so far above my reach? Is 
there any hope of my ever being able to attain 
that blessed peace of mind possessed 
by so many of the TOWER readers, and 
breathed in every line of the correspondence 
column? I sincerely ask that you join your 
prayers with mine, in asking the Great 
Father above that he will give me abundant 
light to dispel the present darkness. As one 
hoping and trusting, I beg to remain, 
Sincerely yours, WM. F. POTTER. 



page 238 



DEAR FRIENDS:-It is with the deepest 
gratitude that I write, for I have to tell the 
same old story that others have often cheered 
you with before: light where there was 
darkness, understanding and clear sight 
where before there was but dim vision and 
uncertainty; and this through the guidance 
of our loving Lord in putting it into the 
heart of a dear friend to spread the truth he 
had already found. He sent three sets of 
the DAWNS to his friends in this far-away 
valley. Two have found good soil wherein 
to grow, and it is our prayer that the third 
will also be heeded and the truth diligently 
sought after. Pray that my life may testify 
to the reality of the faith that is in me, that 
others may be led to inquire and learn of 
Christ Jesus. 

I have also seen a few copies of the TOWER, 
which is a great help to the study of the 
Scriptures. I enclose my subscription, and 
an order for DAWNS, as some are willing to 
read them. My whole life, with the exception 
of nineteen years, which have only been 
completed, is before me, and I am waiting 
for God to open the way to a life of service 
and witnessing for Christ. I did not like to 
send a bare order, without letting you know 
how the Truth is spreading in this part of 
the country. 

Yours in sincerity, A. CARMICHAEL. 



MY DEAR FRIENDS :-True friends and 
helpers indeed! With all my heart I thank 
the Lord, and with my whole life I will 
thank him and praise him, for the light I 
have received from the reading of the three 
volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN; and to you 
also, I owe a debt of gratitude. It is the 
Lord who thus blessed your heart, awakened 
your understanding and filled your hands to 
sow the good seed and spread the glorious 
truth— God's living truth. I feel it from line 
to line, from sentence to sentence, that this 
is not the outcome of speculation, not the 
scheme of human intellect, not an uncertain 

page 239 

grasp for truths and teachings, but a living 
stream of water out of the living fountain. 
That the Lord may guide you and strengthen 
and uphold you is, and will henceforth be, 
my daily prayer. 

The Lord will guide me. I am willing to 
be a reaper. My heart is full. I am convinced 
of God's revealing these things to 
you. To him be all praise. 

Yours in Christ, J. C. ZIMMERMANN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I received 
the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 
was well pleased with it. Before reading 
it, I was a Universalist; but its plain teaching 
of the Second Death has convinced me 
of my error. Since God's plan is to save 
all men through the second Adam, Christ, 
from all that was lost in the first Adam, it 
follows that when every child of Adam has 
been brought to a full knowledge of God's 
plan and a full opportunity for forgiveness 
and restitution to divine favor, all will have 
been saved from death. Then, however, their 
individual trial begins; and the length or 
brevity of salvation depends upon their own 
(not Adam's) course. If, after all that, they 
sin wilfully, the death-penalty will be the 
result of their own, and not Adam's sin— 
for which Christ died; and there is no authority 
in the Scriptures for the statement 
of some that our Lord's death was for, or 
that it will have any effect upon, those who 
will die the second death. 

Dear Brother and Sister, pray for me, that 



I may be faithful to the Lord in this work 
of spreading his Truth. 
Your brother, J. O. HUGHES. 



DEAR BROTHER:-Permit me in a few words 
to tell you how I have enjoyed the "meat in 
due season" which the Lord has provided for 
me (us) through your instrumentality. I have 
had The Plan of the Ages on my shelves for 
years, but, I cannot explain why, without 
reading it until a few weeks ago. I know, 
however, that before now I have not been prepared 
to appreciate it, having had, last winter, 
a most precious, new experience of the grace 
and power of God through Jesus Christ. The 
reading of Vol. I. only sharpened my appetite 
for the other volumes, although on beginning 
to read it I remarked to my wife that I feared 
it was "heretical." I read and pondered, read 
and wondered, all through the first volume, 
bought the other two, subscribed for the WATCH 
TOWER, and found out before long that I had 
either to surrender to the Truth, or else to reject 
the whole Bible; and I assure you it was 
an unspeakable pleasure to me to surrender. I 
have done it enthusiastically, heartily and 
gratefully. These things are just what I have 
been yearning for, unknowingly, for years. I 
have been praying God to lead me, teach me, 
and how wonderfully he has redeemed his promises. 
He had been drawing me slowly, but 
surely, out of the bonds of sectarianism. I had, 
so to speak withdrawn one foot from the denomination 
(Baptist), and was on the verge of 
taking the other step; and now I know I shall 
not be tolerated among them. But thanks to 
God for the Truth; how it liberates! 

When in 1880, 1 was immersed, and joined 
the then (in Denmark) despised "Baptists," I 
did it on conviction of truth, and meant to 
pursue it even unto death; and the Lord has 
been leading me on until I now have left most 
of the Baptists behind— many of whom I trust 
will follow in due time. When I read your 
article on "Baptism and its Import" in the 
TOWER, I thought it was the way every Baptist 
desired to put it, but had failed for stopping 
short in the progress of Truth. 

I was very glad to see announced that a 
Dano-Norwegian translation of Vol. I. is in the 
type-setters' hands, for I am anxious to have 
this marvelous knowledge of the Truth given 
to my countrymen here and in Denmark. Is 
any work being done among them? I could use 



some tracts. 
Yours in the Lord, H. C. A. SAMSON. 



DEAR SIRS:— Have you any special form of 
application for colporteurs? If so, I would be 
obliged if you would send me one; and, at the 
same time, please give me the cost of the complete 
outfit for the sale of your books, tracts, 
etc. I have for some years been watching for 
an opportunity to engage in some work which 
would furnish me occupation, in which I might 
find satisfaction, which would be of actual 
benefit to others, and in which the gain of 
money should not be any incentive to work. 
I am an invalid, but there are many days I am 
able and willing to work, and would be glad 
to do so in such a suitable and satisfactory 
labor as I believe the sale of your books would 
give me. 

I have had the three volumes of DAWN in my 
possession for nearly a year, and would sooner 
have notified you of the indescribable blessings 
I have experienced by their study, but I deferred 
any such expression until I had critically 
examined and studied all that is therein 
written. Not that my opinion is of any value, 
but because I did not want again to expose 
myself as a victim of premature enthusiasm 

page 240 

over something new I had found— which I have 
done several times during many years. My 
last and most disappointing effort was with 
"Christian Science." Of your DAWNS I do 
now boldly declare that they are not only the 
most wonderful exposition, but the only one I 
have ever found strictly and perfectly in accord 
with God's revealed Word. 

I have been greatly comforted in my confinement 
by the study of your Tabernacle 
Shadows. You have certainly made very clear 
the things to come by your excellent explanation 
of the types of the real. With such a 
model before me I can locate myself on my 
journey toward the celestial city or "the Most 
Holy." 

Very truly yours, L. M. WATERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose fifty 
cents for the WATCH TOWER for the next six 
months. I am a new subscriber, but I have 



read a few copies kindly lent me by brother 

T. Mitchell, and I beg to say I am much interested 

in them. Day by day they bring new 

light. It is about eighteen months since I commenced 

to read MILLENNIAL DAWN, and I thank 

God that I was brought in contact with the 

precious food. I have been convinced for 

several years that the nominal church under 

her present system could not be in accord with 

divine revelation, and that she is daily drawing 

nearer to the world. 

I am doing all I can to bring the precious 
Truth to others, and I thank God that one dear 
friend of mine has been brought to see the 
Truth. He has been an agnostic for about fifty 
years. He told me recently that he has a 
sister in London who has been praying for him 
for years, and that he wrote her about three 
weeks ago that he was loving the same God as 
she loved, and had been converted by reading 
the TOWER on "Hell." 

Dear Brother, believe me to be yours in 
Christ, G. LEE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Anyone who has 
been led out of darkness into the marvelous 
light of the glorious gospel, always feels kindly 
toward the medium through which he was delivered. 
Therefore, and understanding that 
you are always glad to hear from the interested, 
I send a few lines with my order for books. 

Some years ago, before I had heard of your 
writings, I had concluded that denominationalism 
was wrong and caused only strife and 
contention; and, failing to find in the Scriptures 
anything about organizing and joining 
churches, I determined to have nothing to do 
with anything of the kind. So I withdrew 
from the Christian church, against the protest 
of my friends (a very hard thing to do), and 
have ever since been trying to learn more truth. 
Brother Roberson, of Texas, obtained my address 
through a paper, and wrote to me persistently 
until he got me to studying your books; 
and by his help I found it was the very thing 
I had been so long looking for. While I can 
not understand all, yet I find it a grander and 
more sublime theme, with more harmony in all 
its details, than I thought was possible. I will 
ever feel grateful to Brother Roberson and yourself 
for this help in time of need. 

May God's richest blessings rest on you and 
Sister R. and all co-laborers. 

DR. R. H. STRICKLAND. 



DEAR SIR & BROTHER: --Pardon my familiarity 
in thus addressing you without a formal 
introduction; but after reading your three volumes 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN, the contents of 
which are so near my own convictions of the 
present state of affairs, it seemed to me when 
reading them that I was receiving a long-prayed-for 
light upon various topics that had 
hitherto been quite dark, and I wish to express 
my appreciation of this light and joy. It 
seemed as if great scales were being taken from 
my eyes, and I began to see men as trees walking. 
Being very desirous to obtain more light 
and meat in due season, I would kindly ask 
you to send me your paper and such books as 
bear upon the subject in hand. It is my earnest 
desire to know just what Christ's will is concerning 
me. 

Yours in Christ, WM. H. HOEGEE. 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-I have read, and 
am now re-reading, your excellent volumes, 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, and have been so much 
helped by them that I have recommended them 
to many friends. 

I wish to ask you in regard to "particulars" 
concerning arrangements for those wishing to 
help in their distribution. I cannot afford to 
order many copies for free gifts; but am anxious 
that the works shall be read. I was so 
discouraged and disheartened myself, and every 
effort to "search the Scriptures," on my part, 
was so frowned upon by ministers and church 
members, that I cannot but feel that your books 
have saved me from Infidelity. 

It is among the poor and the discouraged 
that we find the great heart-hunger that calls 
for the Bread of Life; and I have in mind several 
who, I am sure, would be glad to be 
enlightened. 

Earnestly your well-wisher, 

MRS.H. W.McVEY. 



page 242 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 



HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



THE SEPTEMBER TOWER will probably be a 
double number, and may not be issued before 
the middle of the month. 

R1565 : page 242 

OUR CONVENTION IN CHICAGO. 

From present indications it seems evident 
that our convention will be well attended;— 
addresses of intending comers are from every 
quarter of the Union, and from Canada. Let 
all come hungering and thirsting for righteousness 
(for a right life, as well as for a right faith); 
for only such have the promise of being filled. 
Come prepared to do good to others as you 
may find opportunity, as well as to get good 
from contact with others of like precious faith. 

Some of the colporteurs write that they long 
to be there, but many of them fear that they 
cannot incur so much expense— boarding and 
lodging, in addition to railroad expenses. To 
all regular colporteurs, who for more than a 
month past have been giving their time exclusively 
to this work, we would say: This will be 
a special occasion! We want to meet and greet 



every one of you! It will be profitable to you, 
not only spiritually, but temporally; for after 
the meeting you can get instruction in the successful 
methods of colporteur work: instructions 
which will help you in coming years to 
make the work a success, and thus will greatly 
increase your talents as stewards. Therefore, 
if necessary to the meeting of your rail-road 
fare, we will give you a little longer credit on 
DAWNS. And, if you need it, your boarding 
and lodging expenses during the period of the 
Convention will be paid out of the Tract Fund. 
Surely come! 

To all we would say: Bring none with you 
that you have not previously mentioned to us 
by letter, as our lodging quarters must be arranged 
for in advance. And please remember 
that only those who believe in Christ as man's 
redeemer, substitute, corresponding price, are 
at all invited. For what communion hath 
light with darkness, or believers with unbelievers? 
Make a distinction, therefore, between 
the clean and the unclean;— between those 
who stand washed by faith in the precious 
blood, and those who stand uncleansed, in the 
filthy rags of their own righteousness. 

Uncertainty as to the number who will attend, 
and other matters, have prevented our 
completing arrangements so as to be able to 
give particulars at this date. But cards with 
instructions will be mailed, in due time, to all 
who write accepting the invitation. These 
should be preserved and brought along to the 
Convention. They will serve to identify you 
to the person having the lodging arrangements 
in charge. For further particulars see July 
TOWER, page 216. 

page 242 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., IN THE 
GERMAN LANGUAGE. 



Our readers will be glad to learn that our 
dear Brother von Zech, full of zeal for his 
country-men, that they should enjoy the meat 
now in due season, has just finished the translating 
and publishing of DAWN, VOL. III., Thy 
Kingdom Come. 

The work is in every way very creditable. 
The prices are necessarily a little higher than 
the English, but still are lower than prices 
usually charged for similar works. In paper 
covers, 35 cents. You may have friends who 



cannot read English, or who cannot understand 
it so well as German. Remember these for 
such. 

We have heretofore mentioned the fact that 
Brother Zech edits and publishes, in German, 
Die Ernte Sichel, semi-monthly. Having no 
knowledge of German, we cannot speak of it 
intelligently; but we are pleased to be assured 
by others that it is on the same line with 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and loyal to the doctrine 
of the ransom finished at Calvary. 

Address, Sichel Publications Haus, 
Allegheny, Pa. 



R1570 : page 243 

"CHRIST IN YOU, THE HOPE OF GLORY." 

(COL. 1:27.) 



LANGUAGE is but a medium for the communication 

of thought, and words are but 

symbols of ideas. When words are so framed 

in sentences as to express an impossibility or 

an absurdity, when considered literally, but to 

forcibly illustrate a known truth, when symbolically 

interpreted, we instinctively recognize 

the figure, and are instructed by it. In this way 

many of the deep things of God— the spiritual 

things— are expressed to us, since they are often 

forcibly illustrated by things familiar to us on 

the natural plane. Thus, for instance, the resurrection, 

both natural and spiritual, finds an 

illustration in the processes of vegetation (1 Cor. 15:35-38); 

and the processes of the beginning, 

development and final perfecting of the spiritual 

sons of God find a remarkable illustration 

in the begetting, quickening and birth of the 

natural man. (James 1:18; Eph. 2:1; John 3:3.) 

But if, when we read these symbols or 

illustrations of spiritual things, we pervert and 

dishonor our God-given reason by accepting 

palpable absurdities as their interpretation, we 

deceive ourselves, and in so doing are not blameless. 

In parables and dark, symbolic sayings 

our Lord opened his mouth and taught his disciples, 

expecting them to use their common 

sense in either interpreting them themselves, 

or in judging of the correctness of any interpretation 

offered by others as they should become 

meat in due season. And when on one 

occasion, instead of using their brains to draw 



from it the implied lesson, the disciples asked 

for the interpretation of a parable, Jesus suggestively 

and reprovingly replied, "How then 

will ye know all parables?" (Mark 4:13.) He 

would have us think, consider and put our God-given 

mental faculties to their legitimate use. 

Bearing in mind these wholesome reflections, 
together with the fact that the Scriptures abound 
in these symbolic expressions of truth, let us 
consider the Apostle's meaning when he speaks 
of "Christ in you, the hope of glory." He 
uses the same figure again in his letter to the 
Galatians (Gal. 4:19), saying, "My children, 
whom I am bearing again, till Christ be formed 
in you," etc. Here the Apostle is likening his 
care and labor and endurance, for those who 
had been begotten by the Truth to the new nature, 
to the physical endurance of a mother in 
nourishing and sustaining the germ of human 
life until the new human creature is formed and 
able to appropriate for itself the life-sustaining 
elements of nature, independent of her life. 
So the Apostle sought to nourish and sustain 
those germs of spiritual being with his own 
spiritual life until, apart from his personal work 
and influence, they would be able to appropriate 
for themselves the God-given elements of 
spiritual life contained in the Word of Truth, 
until the Christ character should be definitely 
formed in them. 

In no other reasonable sense could the Apostle 
bear those Galatian Christians; and in no 
other reasonable sense could Christ be formed 
in them, or in us. The thought is that every 
true child of God must have a definite individual 
Christian character which is not dependent 

R1570 : page 244 

for its existence upon the spiritual life of 

any other Christian, but which, from the Word 

of Truth, proclaimed and exemplified by other 

Christians, has drawn those principles of righteousness 

and those elements of life which give 

him an established character, a spiritual individuality 

of his own. So positive and definite 

should be the spiritual individuality of every 

one, that, should even the beloved brother or 

sister whose spiritual life first nourished ours 

and brought us forward to completeness of character 

fall away (which the Apostle shows is not 

impossible— Heb. 6:4-6; Gal. 1:8), we would 

still live, being able to appropriate for ourselves 

the spirit of truth. 

Paul feared, and had reason to fear, that the 
Galatian Christians had not yet come to this 



condition of established character— that the 
Christ life was not yet definitely formed in them. 
He said, "I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed 
upon you labor in vain" (Gal. 4:11); 
for already they were giving heed to seducing 
teachers and departing from the faith, showing 
that they were not established in the Truth, and 
consequently not established in the spirit of the 
Truth, which is the spirit of Christ, and hence 
that Christ was not yet formed in them.— 
Verse 19. 

Alas, how often we see among those who 
bear the name of Christ, and who have truly 
received the spirit of adoption as sons of God, 
that Christ is not yet formed in them: that 
they have not yet reached that degree of development 
which manifests a distinct spiritual individuality. 
They depend largely upon the 
spiritual life of others, and if their spiritual life 
declines these dependent ones suffer a similar 
decline; if they go into error, these follow, as 
did many of those Galatian Christians to whom 
Paul wrote. How is it, beloved, in your several 
cases? Apply the question to yourselves— Is 
Christ formed in you so fully that none of these 
things move you? that, however they may grieve 
you at heart, they cannot affect your spiritual 
life? This is what it is to have "Christ in you, 
the hope of glory." 

A cloak of mystery and superstition has been 
thrown around this expression of the Apostle, 
evidently by the great adversary of the Truth 
and the Church, to the effect that in some secret 
way, known only to the initiated, Christ personally 
comes into the consecrated soul and 
uses that soul simply as a machine; and that 
consequently the machine is about infallible, 
because Christ is using it; that for them to 
speak, or think, or act, or interpret the Scriptures, 
is for Christ to do it, in whose hands they 
are merely the passive agents. With this idea 
they generally go further, and claim that Christ 
personally talks with them and teaches them 
independently of his Word; and some go so 
far as to claim that they have visions and special 
revelations from the Lord. Some speak of this 
presence as Christ; some as the holy Spirit; 
and some speak of them interchangeably. 

While there is a semblance of truth in all 
this, and while we remember that Jesus said, 
"He that hath my commandments and keepeth 
them. ..shall be loved of my Father, and 
I will love him, and will manifest myself to him; 
...and we will come unto him and make 
our abode with him" (John 14:21,23), it is 
true that a more serious error could scarcely 



be entertained than this idea of personal infallibility 
because of the supposed mysterious 
presence of another being within. 

Notice that this promise of the abiding presence 
of the Father and the Son is to those who 
have and keep the commandments of the Lord 
Jesus. Those, therefore, who ignore the Word 
of the Lord and have not his commandments 
—who do not know what they are, and hence 
cannot keep them, but who hearken to the 
voice of their own imagination and note all 
the changing states of their own feelings, mistaking 
them for the voice of the Lord, and following 
the impressions arising from this source, 
instead of the commandments or teachings of 
the Lord— are quite mistaken in claiming this 
promise. Under their delusion they are following 
another spirit than the spirit of truth; 
and unless recovered from the snare they must 
inevitably plunge deeper and deeper into superstition 
and error. 

The first difficulty we meet, in attempting to 
dispel this delusion from the minds of those infatuated 
with it, is the claim that this is a higher 
attainment in the spiritual life, up to which we 

R1570 : page 245 

have not yet measured. If the testimony of 

the Scriptures bearing on the subject is brought 

forward they say, "Oh, I see you have the 

head-knowledge, but you have not the spirit, 

you have not Christ in you." They then proceed 

to tell how Christ is in them, and that he 

is "teaching them wonderful things," which we 

shortly discover to be quite out of harmony 

with the Word of God. The case is indeed a 

sad one when all Scripture testimony to the contrary 

of their belief is set aside with claims of 

superior revelations of Christ or the holy Spirit 

which other children of God do not enjoy, and 

that Christ personally dwells in them, etc., etc. 

Who but these deceived ones cannot see 
that, if their theory be true— if God talks with 
them and answers all their queries aside from 
his written Word, the Bible, through mental 
inspiration, or by dreams, or by audible sound 
—then the Bible is to such a useless book; 
and time spent in its study is so much time 
wasted. Who would "search the Scriptures" 
as for hid treasures, as the Lord enjoined and 
as all the apostles searched, if they could shut 
their eyes, or kneel, and have God make a 
special revelation to them, respecting the information 
desired. Surely any sensible person 
would prefer a special revelation on a subject, 



rather than spend days and months and years 

examining and comparing the words of our 

Lord and the apostles with those of the prophets 

and the Book of Revelation ("searching 

what or what manner of time the spirit did signify"), 

if they could ask and have an inspired 

and infallible answer in a moment. None of 

God's consecrated ones should be thus misled 

of the Adversary. It is the stepping-stone 

to pride and every evil work;— to pride, because 

those who are thus deceived soon feel 

themselves honored of God above the apostles, 

who even in conference judged of the mind of 

the Lord as read in his Word and in his providential 

leadings in harmony with his Word 

(Acts 15:12-15); to every evil work, in that 

those thus puffed up fancy themselves infallible, 

and, separated from the anchor of truth, the 

Bible, Satan can soon lead them rapidly into 

the outer darkness of the world, or into yet 

darker delusions. 

But the testimony of the Scriptures is quite 
to the contrary of this vaunting spirit. Paul 
says, "Know ye not. .that Jesus Christ is 
in you, except ye be reprobates;" and then he 
exhorts that we examine ourselves whether we 
be in the faith, or whether we have rejected the 
faith and thus become reprobates— no longer 
acceptable to God. (2 Cor. 13:5.) Every true 
child of God has respect to the commandments 
of God: he searches the Scriptures that he 
may know them, and is not left in ignorance 
of them; and, learning them, he endeavors to 
keep them, and the abiding presence of the 
Father and the Son is with all such so long as they 
continue to hold and to keep (obey) his commandments 
—to hold the truth in righteousness. 

To have the truth and to keep it is not 
merely to accept it on the recommendation of 
some friend, and because it gives some comfort 
and costs nothing, and to hold it until some 
other presumed friend dazzles the unsettled 
mind with some fanciful theory. The promise 
of the abiding presence of the Father and 
the Son is not to such. Christ is not in them; 
Christ is in the humble and sincere ones. He 
and the Father love and abide with them. 

But how? To illustrate— a friend accompanying 
another to a railway station said, as he 
was about to board the train, "Remember, I 
will be with you all the way." He meant that 
his thoughts would be with his friend and that 
he would be concerned for his welfare, etc. 
In a similar, and yet in a fuller and broader 
sense, the Lord is ever present with his people. 
He is always thinking of us, looking out for 



our interests, guarding us in danger, providing 
for us in temporal and spiritual things, 
reading our hearts, marking every impulse of 
loving devotion to him, shaping the influences 
around us for our discipline and refining and 
hearkening to our faintest call for aid or sympathy 
or fellowship with him. He is never for 
a moment off guard, whether we call to him in 
the busy noon hours or in the silent watches of 
the night. And not only is the Lord Jesus 
thus present, but the Father also. How blessed 
the realization of such abiding faithfulness! 
And no real child of God is devoid of this evidence 
of his adoption. Sometimes it is more 

R1570 : page 246 

manifest than at others; as, for instance, when 
some special trial of faith or patience or endurance 
necessitates the special call for special help, 
and forthwith comes the grace sufficient with a 
precious realization of its loving source. Thus 
"E'en sorrow, touched by heaven, grows bright 

With more than rapture's ray, 
As darkness shows us worlds of light 
We never saw by day." 

Every true child of God has these precious 
evidences of sonship, and the roughest places in 
his pathway are so illuminated with divine 
grace that they become the brightest, and memory 
continues to refer to them with thankfulness; 
and faith and hope and love grow strong 
and inspiring. 

Our Lord always links the progress and development 
of our spiritual life with our receiving 
and obeying the truth, and every child of 
God should beware of that teaching which 
claims to be in advance of the Word, and that 
Christ or the holy Spirit speaks to such advanced 
Christians independently of the Word. The 
snare is a most dangerous one. It cultivates 
spiritual pride and boastfulness, and renders 
powerless the warnings and expostulations of 
the sacred Scriptures because the deluded ones 
think they have a higher teacher dwelling in 
them. And Satan, taking advantage of the delusion, 
leads them captive at his will. 

These symbolic expressions of the Scriptures 
must be interpreted as symbols, and to force 
any unreasonable interpretation upon them manifests 
a culpable wilfulness in disregarding the 
divinely appointed laws of our mind, and the 
result is self-deception. When we read, "He 
that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God 
in him" (1 John 4:16), the only reasonable interpretation 
is that we dwell in the love and 



favor, and in the spirit or disposition of God; 
and that his spirit or disposition dwells in us. 
Thus God by his indwelling spirit works in us 
to will and to do his good pleasure (Phil. 2:13); 
and we are reckoned as not in the flesh, but in 
the spirit, if the spirit of God dwells in us.— 
Rom. 8:8,9. 

Let us endeavor to have more and more of 
the mind, the spirit of God— to have his word 
abide in us richly (John 15:7; Col. 3:16)— to 
have and to keep his commandments, that the 
abiding presence of the Father and the Son 
may be with us; and that, realizing that the 
Christ character and life are definitely formed 
in us, the hope of glory may be ours; for our 
Lord said, "Not every one that saith unto me, 
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of 
heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father 
which is in heaven." (Matt. 7:21.) How careful 
then should we be in seeking both to know 
and to do the will of God. Many indeed will 
come forth with the plea of their wonderful 
works, hoping to be admitted into the kingdom, 
but only those will be recognized who 
have done the will of the Lord, and who 
have no theories or works of their own whereof 
to boast. 



SOMETIME WE'LL UNDERSTAND. 



Perhaps 'twill be in coming years, 
It may be in the better land, 
We'll read the meaning of our tears, 
And thus, sometime, we'll understand. 

We'll catch the broken threads again, 
And finish what we here began; 
Heav'n will the mysteries explain, 
And then, ah! then, we'll understand. 

We'll know why clouds instead of sun 
Were over many a cherished plan; 
Why song has ceased when scarce begun; 
Ah, yes! sometime, we'll understand. 

Why what we longed for most of all, 
Eludes so oft our eager hand; 
Why hopes are crushed and castles fall- 
Anon, sometime, we'll understand. 

God knows the way, he holds the key, 
He guides us with unerring hand; 



Sometime with tearless eyes we'll see; 
Yes, there, beyond, we'll understand. 

Then trust in God, thro' all thy days, 
Fear not, for he doth hold thy hand; 
Tho' dark thy way, still sing and praise; 
Sometime, sometime we'll understand.— Sel. 



R1565 : page 247 

THE OFFICE OF REASON 

IN THE FORMATION OF CHRISTIAN CHARACTER AND FAITH. 



IN these days, when rampant Infidelity and 
stolid Conservatism are each striving for the 
mastery among professed Christians, it would 
be well for all to carefully observe the divinely 
appointed metes and bounds of human reason, 
especially in its relationship to divine truth. 

The reason is the noblest faculty of the human 
mind. It is the prominent mark of the 
divine likeness in humanity: it is this which 
gives to man his superiority over the brute 
creation: it is this which makes him a creature 
worthy of eternal life: it is this which also 
makes him capable of communion with God, 
and capable of knowing and loving and serving 
him. "Come, let us reason together," 
says the Lord, because we are thus created in 
his own likeness. 

To ignore or depreciate the human reason 
is, therefore, to greatly undervalue God's gift — 
our greatest blessing and highest endowment. 
That God would not have us do so is very 
manifest from his constant appeals to the human 
reason in the presentation of his truth. 
Divine truth is set before us as a complete and 
philosophical system, consistent with itself and 
with the divine character in every element and 
feature; and when God would reveal it to his 
people, he inspired his specially chosen and 
prepared Apostle (Paul— Gal. 1:15; Acts 9:15) 
to present it to us with all the power and force 
of logical deduction, so that our faith in his 
plan might be a reasonable faith, and that we 
might be able to give to our fellow-men a reason 
for the hope that is in us. 

The Apostle Paul, it will be noticed, was an 
acute logician. From the text books of the 
law and the prophets, and the histories of 
God's typical people, Israel; and from the 



teachings and the life and death of Christ, and 

the special revelations made to himself as an 

apostle, he reasons out the whole plan of redemption, 

and shows how, step by step, its 

various features logically follow. He points 

to the original perfection of man and to his 

fall into sin; and shows how, by the law of 

heredity, all the race were involved in the fall 

and in the sentence. (1 Cor. 15:21,22; Rom. 5:17-19.) 

He then vindicates the justice and 

wisdom of God in instituting such a law for 

the propagation of the race as would involve 

all in the Adamic fall and penalty and all the 

present distresses, pointing out the final and 

glorious outcome by means of the redemption 

of all by the one offering of Christ, and the 

wisdom whereby the blessed results of redemption 

and restitution are secured for all.— 

Rom. 11:32,33. 

He shows how necessary was the death of 
Christ to this grand scheme of salvation. (Heb. 9:15-28), 
and, by logical deductions, how far-reaching 
will be its results (1 Tim. 2:3-6); 
and how, on philosophical principles, those 
results are as sure to follow that cause as the 
results of mathematical propositions follow their 
antecedents. (Rom. 3:10,21-26,29. See also 
1 John 1:9.) Then he forestalls any charge 
of injustice on God's part in permitting the 

R1566 : page 247 

sacrifice of his Son, by pointing to the fact that 
the Son of God undertook the heavy task of 
his own free will, and "for the joy set before 
him" by the Father, who in consequence highly 
exalted and abundantly rewarded him.— 
Heb. 12:2; Phil. 2:9. 

He then sets forth the high calling of the 
Gospel Church, to follow in the Lord's footsteps 
of humiliation and sacrifice, with the prize 
in view of being joint-heirs of his glorious inheritance. 
(1 Cor. 1:26,27; 2 Tim. 2:11,12; 
Rom. 8:17.) He shows that their consecration 
to the Lord's service is "reasonable" (Rom. 12:1), 
and how the glorious end will more 
than compensate for the present comparatively 
"light afflictions." (2 Cor. 4:17.) Thus 
reason is continually appealed to and satisfied 
with reference to divine truth; and law and 
prophecy and type and history are all brought 
forward to minister to the same end; for, for 
this very purpose they were given— that in due 
time for the instruction of the Church, all 
should bear their parts in confirming the faith 
of God's elect, the bride of his dear Son. 



Thus we see that the faith which God expects 

R1566 : page 248 

his people to exercise is a reasonable faith: 

it is drawn by logical deductions from established 

premises, and there is no cause for uncertainty 

or superstition in it. It is a reasonable 

confidence in that which God has done, 

or offered, or promised, backed by a knowledge 

of his general character and grand plan, 

which inspires a full reliance upon his promised 

providence and leading, even when our 

short-sighted judgment cannot trace all his 

doings. 

It is further noteworthy that when the Lord 
Jesus opened his mouth in parables and dark 
sayings, and even when he gave a special revelation 
to his Church in strange and difficult 
symbols, he left it for reason to discern their 
deep significance, when in due time they 
should be made manifest. 

Thus we see how the Lord honors the human 
reason, and that while it is true that without 
faith we cannot please God, it is none the less 
true that without reason we cannot please him. 
Jesus expected his disciples to draw the reasonable 
inference from his parables, and on one occasion, 
when they asked for the interpretation, 
he reprovingly inquired, "And how then will 
ye know [understand] all parables?" (Mark 4:13.) 
And to some of the Jews who accused 
him of performing his miracles by the power 
of the devil, instead of by the power of God, 
which was so manifest in their good and benevolent 
character, he administered a severe rebuke 
for so unreasonable and therefore unjustifiable 
a conclusion. (Matt. 12:24-34.) Again 
says the Lord by the mouth of the Psalmist 
(Psa. 32:8,9), "I will instruct thee and teach 
thee in the way which thou shalt go: I will 
counsel thee; mine eye shall be upon thee. 
[But] be ye not as the horse or as the mule, 
which have no understanding, whose mouth 
must be held in with bit and bridle,"— i.e. 
God would have his reasoning creatures serve 
intelligently and without force. 

Since God thus honors the human reason, 
this likeness to himself which he has bestowed 
upon his human creatures, who are we that we 
should despise it, ignore it, or degrade it, or 
teach others to do so? Rather let us give it 
its appointed place, and thus honor our Maker; 
for we are awe-fully and wonderfully made 
(Psa. 139:14): we are noble creatures, in the 
image of our God, except as marred by sin. 



We cannot, therefore, despise or degrade these 
human faculties without dishonoring our Maker, 
whose workmanship we are, or were originally, 
the defects resulting from the fall being no 
part of his work, but a marring of it. 

But while we honor the human reason as the 
workmanship of God, and recognize its present 
nobility and use, as did the Lord, even 
under the circumstances of our present lapsed 
condition, we show a great lack of both wisdom 
and humility if we do not recognize the 
manifest limitations of human reason; that 
it can only exercise its power within the 
range of human perception and conception, 
and that though it is an image of one of the 
attributes of God, it is of necessity vastly inferior 
in scope and power to his reason. This 
would be the reasonable inference of the creature 
in comparing himself with his Maker; 
but, in addition to this reasonable inference, 
we have the Lord's own statement— "As the 
heavens are higher than the earth, so are my 
ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts 
than your thoughts."— Isa. 55:9. 

In view, therefore, of this superiority of the 
Creator over the creature, and also of the filial 
reverence and subserviency we owe to him as 
our benevolent and loving Father, it is right 
that we should always hold the deductions of 
our reason in abeyance to God's superior wisdom, 
as he may reveal it. Especially is this 
our proper attitude in our fallen condition, 
when we remember that all our faculties have 
suffered a decline of power. 

In failing to recognize this limitation and subserviency 
of the human reason to the divine, 
many have gone to an opposite extreme of error 
from that of ignoring the human reason, to 
that of unduly glorifying it. The former error 
tends to superstition, and places its subjects 
at the mercy of the adversary's many deceptions, 
while the latter tends to egotism, pride 
and infidelity. A large class of the professed 
children of God are bound by the former error, 
and an increasingly large number are rapidly 
drifting to the latter extreme; among them 

R1566 : page 249 

recently some of the most prominent of the 
clergy of all branches of the nominal church. 

This error, however, is the inevitable reaction 
which always follows in the wake of the 
error of ignoring reason. Thus, for instance, 
in France, when reason, long fettered by Papacy, 
had given place to wide-spread superstition, 



and superstition had reigned until its absurdities 

became palpable, a terrible reaction 

followed, in the French Revolution, which 

shook the domains of superstition from center 

to circumference, and led to an extreme glorification 

of the fallen human reason under the 

control of ignoble and selfish principles, finally 

enthroning a profligate woman as the Goddess 

of Reason and producing a reign of terror. 

Infidelity soon stamped out the hated superstitions 

with which the people had been surfeited, 

and with it reverence for God and 

religion. Poor human reason soon lost its 

balance; and insane results followed, when it 

forgot to recognize the superiority of the divine 

and to submit thereto. 

The trend of the present times is in the same 
direction: the reaction from a state of lethargy 
and of blind superstitious reverence for religious 
teachers and their teachings, and for the 
Word of God from which all the various conflicting 
creeds of "Christendom" claim to emanate, 
has commenced, and is making rapid 
headway toward open and world-wide infidelity. 
The reason, so long divorced from faith, 
has come to be regarded as a separate and antagonistic 
element. And, vice versa, faith is 
regarded as antagonistic to reason. Many devout 
souls are striving to hold on to their blind 
faith, and to silence the protests of their reason 
against it, while others— a constantly increasing 
number— awakened to a sense of the absurdities 
of their professed faith, cast it away 
entire, and determine to follow reason. They 
then set about laying down certain principles 
which seem to them reasonable, and make these 
their standards in judging every thing, even 
the Word of God not excepted. 

Miracles, say they, are absurd and unreasonable: 
therefore we cannot accept the miracles 
of the Bible as true. Prophecy, they regard 
as merely human judgment forecasting the future, 
sometimes correctly and sometimes erroneously. 
The Law of Moses, they esteem 
merely as the culmination of the human wisdom 
of that time, gained in the school of past 
experience. The teachings of the apostles, 
they regard as the counsel of well-intentioned 
men, to be heeded only in so far as seems to them 
reasonable. The doctrine of the atonement, 
through the vicarious sacrifice of Christ, which 
the various creeds have taught, they regard as 
absurd and unreasonable, and therefore reject 
it. The doctrines of the fall of man, and of 
the necessity for an atonement, they reject as 
incompatible with their, to them, more reasonable 



theory of evolution; and so they proceed 

through the entire volume of the sacred Scriptures, 

expunging from it everything for which 

their untutored and short-sighted reason cannot 

account. And since the spiritual things therein 

revealed cannot be understood by those who 

have not the mind of the Spirit of God, it is 

manifest that their inability to grasp and reasonably 

comprehend the deep things of God 

is an evidence, not of the unreasonableness of 

divine truth, but of the lack of the power to 

comprehend its reasonableness. Thus do these 

blind leaders of the blind arrogantly exalt human 

reason above the divine wisdom set forth 

in the Word of God. 

Thus these two extremes, of underrating and 
of overrating human reason, are seen to be 
fraught with evil consequences— with the loss 
of the truth, of the divine favor, and of the 
blessings which can reach us only through the 
channels of inspired truth. Let us, therefore, 
heed well the counsel of the holy Scriptures on 
these two extremes— "Be ye not as the horse 
or as the mule which have no understanding, 
whose mouth must be held in with bit and 
bridle;" but, "I [Paul] say to every man that 
is among you, not to think of himself more 
highly than he ought to think, but to think 
soberly." "See, then, that ye walk circumspectly, 
not as fools, but as wise." (Psa. 32:9; 
Rom. 12:3; Eph. 5:15.) The truth of God, 
when clearly understood, is seen to be in accord 
with the highest development of human 
reason; but let us not forget that human reason 
cannot attain full development except under 

R1566 : page 250 

the divine instruction; and only the meek 
can receive such instruction and be truly wise; 

R1567 : page 250 

and it is these wise that the Prophet Daniel 
said should understand. (Dan. 12:10.) Human 
reasoning which fails to recognize the metes 
and bounds of divine revelation is earthly, 
selfish, and eventually devilish, leading to envy, 
strife, confusion and every evil work. 
But the wisdom that is from above, that reasons 
on the basis of a proved divine revelation, is 
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be 
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without 
partiality and without hypocrisy.— 
Jas. 3:15-17. 



R1567 : page 250 

"A PECULIAR PEOPLE. 



"Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, 
an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show 
forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness 
into his marvelous light."— 1 Pet. 2:9. 

DURING the Gospel age, which is now drawing 
to a close, the Lord has been making 
ready a peculiar people for a very peculiar and 
very glorious purpose. The purpose is nothing 
less than that of a joint-reign with Christ for 
a thousand years, by means of which, not only 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed, 
but angels also shall be brought to a righteous 
judgment and reward, and all things in heaven 
and in earth will be brought into perfect harmony 
with and conformity to the divine will, 
and universal peace and joy and praise shall 
abound to the glory of God. 

This peculiar people is a new and chosen 
generation. They were first chosen out from 
among men, "through sanctification of the 
spirit and belief of the truth." (2 Thess. 2:13.) 
Or, in other words, having believed the message 
of salvation through Christ the Redeemer, 
and having gratefully accepted the same, and 
being earnestly desirous of perfect personal conformity 
to the divine will, and having therefore 
humbly submitted themselves entirely to God, 
they were chosen of God to be his peculiar 
people. 

That which renders this people peculiar as 
compared with all other people in the world 
is a very radical change— a change of nature, 
from the human to the divine. (2 Pet. 1:4.) 
This change of nature has been brought about 
by the power of the Truth, which leads those 
who are rightly exercised by it to a full consecration 
of heart and life to the will and service 
of God, even unto death. This change of 
nature is, however, only begun in the present 
life and consists as yet only of a change of 
mind and a consequent change of character and 
action in harmony with the new hopes, aims 
and aspirations generated by the "exceeding 
great and precious promises." No wonder is 
it that a people actuated by such hopes and 
aims should be a peculiar people— a people 
separate from the world— in the world and yet 



not of it. 

They are indeed a new "generation"— i.e., 
a new race, of a new and noble nature, distinct 
and separate from the human race, although 
as "new creatures" they are as yet only begotten 
and developing in the embryo state, the 
full development or birth being due at the resurrection. 
Wonderful indeed is this truth— 
"Ye," brethren, "are a chosen generation" 
—a new order of beings and chosen of God as 
the heirs of his special favor. And not only 
so, says the Apostle, but ye are a priesthood, 
a royal priesthood— a people to be clothed with 
authority and power to stand between God 
and fallen humanity to lift humanity up from 
its degradation and restore it to the divine 
likeness and favor. Ye are indeed a royal 
priesthood, whose power and glory will appear 
in due time to the glory of God and the blessing 
of all the families of the earth. 

But further, says the Apostle, Ye are "a 
holy nation." In what sense can this people 
be called a nation? A nation is a body of 
people united under one government and having 
common interests and bound by mutual obligations 
and mutual consent, either expressed 
or implied, to conserve those interests. Truly 
such a people, such a nation, are we under 
Christ Jesus our King, and our interests are 
indeed one: they are the interests of the truth 
concerning the establishment of Christ's Kingdom 

R1567 : page 251 

in all the earth. Our national policy is 

aggressive, and contemplates the complete subjection 

of every other power; but its object, 

unlike that of all other ambitious powers, is 

not the glorification of selfishness, but the exaltation 

of meekness and righteousness and the 

establishment of universal peace and happiness. 

Every loyal citizen of this nation is deeply interested 

in its politics, and is ready to take up 

the sword for its defense at any moment. 

However, we remember that the weapons of our 

warfare are not carnal, but they are mighty, 

through God, to the pulling down of strongholds. 

Our sword is "the sword of the spirit, 

which is the Word of God," and an everyday 

exercise and drill in its use makes us able 

soldiers. 

Let all the members of this "chosen generation," 
this "royal priesthood," this "holy 
nation," this "peculiar people," seek more 
and more— by vigilance, by faithfulness and by 
holiness— to separate themselves from the spirit 



of the world, to submit themselves to the transforming 
influences of the spirit of God, and to 
discipline and drill themselves in the use of the 
sword of the spirit, that so they may "show 
forth the praises of him who hath called them 
out of darkness into his marvelous light." 

BABES IN CHRIST. 



This peculiar people the Apostle likens, in 
the beginning of their life of faith, to babes. 
Though they may be men of mature years, they 
are but babes beginning a new life. And the 
Apostle counsels them, as new born babes, to 
earnestly desire and seek for the sincere milk 
of the Word of God— the simple truths, the 
foundation doctrines. These are the plain 
clear statements of the Scriptures— (1) of the 
original perfection and glory of humanity, created 
in the image of God— Gen. 1:27,31; 

(2) of the fall of Adam and the race represented 
in him in trial— Gen. 3; 1 Cor. 15:22; 

(3) of the death penalty-Gen. 2:17; 3:19; 
Rom. 6:23; (4) of the redemption of Adam, 
and therefore also of the race represented in 
him, by the payment of an equivalent price— 
the sacrifice of "the man Christ Jesus who gave 
himself a ransom for all— 1 Cor. 15:22; 1 Tim. 2:6; 
(5) of the actual deliverance of the redeemed 
race in God's due time and order. ~ 

Acts 3:19-21. 

Those who in simple faith accept these truths 
and who, laying aside all malice, and all guile, 
and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speaking, 
endeavor to live worthy of this salvation, 
esteeming it as only a reasonable service to 
devote themselves thenceforth to the service 
of God, are accepted of him as sons and heirs 
—as spiritual sons. And precious indeed are 

R1568 : page 251 

these little ones in the Lord's sight. It was with 
reference to such that the Lord said to Peter, 
"Feed my lambs;" and again that he gave 
warning to false teachers, saying, "Whoever 
shall ensnare one of the least of these who believe 
in me, it would be better for him that a 
millstone were hanged about his neck and that 
he were sunk in the depth of the sea." (John 21:15; 
Matt. 18:6.) And again, under the figure 
of a tender shepherd caring for a weak and 
straying lamb, he shows his tender solicitude 
for these babes of the family, saying, "It is 



not the will of your Father which is in heaven, 
that one of these little ones should perish."— 
Matt. 18:14. 

But while the babes in Christ, because of their 
very feebleness and inexperience, have much 
special care bestowed upon them, and are dearly 
beloved of the Lord, and while their meek 
and teachable spirit is commended to all (Matt. 18:4), 
it is not the will of God that they should 
always remain babes. The very object of his 
commending to them the milk of the Word is 
that they may grow thereby out of this infantile 
state, up to the maturity of spiritual life — 
"that we be no more children tossed to and 
fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine." 
(Eph. 4:14.) There should come a 
time in the experience of every healthy growing 
child of God, when he should be able to 
leave the principles of the doctrine of Christ 
—the foundation doctrines— having them firmly 
established and settled in his mind, and 
therefore not needing to dig them up and lay 
them over again— and go on growing in grace 
and in the knowledge of the truth unto perfection. 
-Heb. 6:1. 

The Apostle Paul reproved some of his day 
because they did not thus grow, saying, "For 
when for the time [spent] ye ought to be 
teachers, ye have need that one teach you 
again which be the first principles of the oracles 
of God; and are become such as have 
need of milk and not of strong meat: for every 
one that useth milk [only] is unskilful in the 
word of righteousness, for he is a babe." (Heb. 5:12,13.) 
We are not to live continually on 
the milk diet, "but by every word that proceedeth 
out of the mouth of God." (Matt. 4:4.) 
Some of these words are the simple truths above 
noted— the milk; and others are deeper truths, 

R1568 : page 252 

the strong meat for those who, nourished by 
the pure milk, had grown and had developed 
considerable firmness and strength of Christian 
character. This "solid food," says the Apostle 
(Heb. 5:14), is for adults— for those possessing 
faculties habitually exercised in the 
discrimination of both good and evil. He also 
warned them of the dreadful result to them if 
they should fall away.— Heb. 6:4-6. 

If the babes in Christ are fed on adulterated 
milk— a confused mixture of truth and error 
concerning the above mentioned foundation 
doctrines— the result will be that they will 
sicken and die, unless the unwholesome diet is 



speedily removed and the sincere, pure milk is 
sought after and used. As a general thing 
there is not sufficient care on the part of the 
babes in Christ about seeking the pure milk of 
the Word; and many of the adults are too 
careless about setting the impure milk before 
them. Let those who are truly the Lord's little 
ones bear in mind the Apostle's counsel to 
desire and seek after only the pure milk of the 
Word and to resolutely discard all else. Any 
theological views which will not rest squarely 
upon the above named foundation doctrines, 
so plainly enunciated in the Scriptures, but 
which attempt to pervert and to shift and to 
make them void, do not constitute the pure 
diet for the Lord's children. Let them cautiously 
beware of all such adulterations, and 
feed only upon the pure milk, and by and by 
upon the more solid food— that is food indeed 
to those who have their faculties exercised— 
and thus grow up to maturity, to a full development 
of Christian character and faith. 

THE SPIRITUAL HOUSE. 



The Apostle then shows (1 Pet. 2:4-8) that 
such consecrated and faithful children of God 
have the privilege of becoming members of a 
grand spiritual house, of which Christ Jesus is 
the head. The shape of the building to which 
reference is made, evidently, is that of a pyramid, 
and was probably suggested to his mind 
by the words of the Prophet Isaiah (28:16) to 
which he refers, saying, "Behold, I lay in Zion 
a chief corner stone, elect, precious;... 
the same is made the head of the corner, and 
a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence, 
even to them which stumble at the Word, being 
disobedient, whereunto also they were 
appointed." 

The chief corner stone in a pyramid is the 
top stone, which is also the model after which 
the whole building is being fashioned. The 
Prophet Zechariah (4:7) calls it the head-stone, 
and Isaiah (28:16) calls it a foundation-stone. 
At first thought these figures seem incongruous, 
but they are not really so when we consider 
that this building is not an earthly, but a heavenly 
building, having a heavenly foundation, 
and that it is held together, not by earthly, 
but by heavenly attraction. And it is in accordance 
with this thought that we are invited 
to come unto Christ, the chief corner stone, 
to be built up under him and to be fashioned 



for our places as living stones in this building, 
in accordance with the lines and angles seen 
in him who is the model. 

The great work of preparing these living 
stones for their places in this building of God 
is still in progress, although it is almost completed. 
This is the painful part of the work 
to every one of the stones. The blows of the 
hammer and the chisel— the hard discipline of 
experience— are not desirable except for the 
effects— the peaceable fruits of righteousness. 
And if we would have the results, we must patiently 
submit to the painful processes, and see 
to it that no cross-grained wilfulness on our 
part shall interfere with the work; for such interference 
would sooner or later be the occasion 
for abandoning us, and the builder would 
substitute another stone more pliable and easily 
worked; for the time is short, and what is 
to be done must be done quickly. 

The Prophet further showed that the foundation 
stone of this great building would be a 
stone of stumbling and a rock of offence to 
many until the time of its exaltation. Those 
who will stumble over it, says the Apostle, are 
not those faithful and loyal to the Word of 
God, but those who stumble at the Word, being 
disobedient, and who will not accept 
its plain and simple teaching relative to the 
great foundation of our faith— Christ Jesus, 
who gave his life a ransom for many. (Matt. 20:28.) 
And this class, he assures us, were appointed 
to stumble— that it does not happen so, 
but that God designed that they should stumble, 
because they are unworthy to stand, being 
disobedient. 

God lays great stress upon loyal and loving 
obedience on the part of all his children. It 
was only a little matter of disobedience that 
cost Adam and his posterity so dearly; and 
that will bring similar results to all those who, 
having once escaped the condemnation of death 
through faith in Christ the Redeemer, thereafter 
refuse to stand before God in the robe of 
his righteousness, but prefer to appear in their 
own. All such were appointed to stumble; 
but blessed are the meek, for they shall stand. 
"The Lord knoweth them that are his." 



R1567 : page 253 

CATHOLICS, METHODISTS AND BAPTISTS TOGETHER. 



New York papers give lengthy accounts of a 
peculiar blending of three creeds under the roof 
of the East Avenue Baptist Church of Long 
Island City. It appears that St. Mary's Roman 
Catholic Church of that city was recently destroyed 
by fire; whereupon the pastor and 
trustees of the Baptist Church tendered them 
the use of the Baptist Church until such times 
as they can rebuild or repair their edifice. 

The Catholics accepted the invitation, and 
celebrated mass in the Baptist Church last 
Sunday (July 31) four times— a temporary 
altar, erected for the purpose, surmounted by 
holy candles and crucifix, being used. The 
altar, candles, etc., were removed in time for 
the service of the Baptists and Methodists, 
which followed the 9:30 A.M. mass. 

The presence of the Methodists is explained 
by the fact that the Baptist and Methodist pastors 
had arranged that, during their vacations, 
their congregations would unite, and the services 
be held in the two churches alternately. 

No wonder Infidelity laughs at Christianity, 
and asserts that they are either fools or knaves: 
fools, if they believe their unreasonable creeds; 
knaves, if they profess what they do not believe. 

Roman Catholicism has written her view of 
Protestantism in characters not to be mistaken; 
—with sword, and fagot, and rack in the past, 
and with threats, curses, anathemas and declarations 
of eternal torment in modern times. 

Baptists and Methodists both have professed 
to recognize Papacy as the very Man of Sin— 
Anti-Christ— pictured in the Scriptures; and 
the mass has been seen, by some at least, as 
the very center of error (See M. DAWN, VOL. 
III., pages 64, 98-104), the "abomination that 
maketh desolate." 

Not only so, but Baptists have long claimed 
that in their view immersion is essential to a 
membership in Christ's Church, and hence that 
all not immersed, and not members of the 
saved Church, would be eternally lost. 

While, therefore, many will applaud the action 
of the Baptists as liberality, thinking people 
will see in it inconsistency and a denial of 
all the principles involved in the names Christian 
and Protestant. It is significant of the 
coming federation foretold in the Scriptures, 
as one of the signs of degeneracy of faith of 
this harvest time of this Gospel age, and frequently 
pointed out in these columns. 



page 253 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1568 : page 253 

PAUL BEFORE AGRIPPA. 



III. QUAR., LESSON IX., AUG. 27, ACTS 26:19-32. 

Golden Text— "Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom 
ofGod."-lCor. 1:24. 

For two years Paul remained a prisoner 
in Caesarea, during which time Porcius Festus 
was appointed in the place of Felix, as 
governor of Judea. As a judge, he evidently 
desired to do right, and also to conciliate the 
people and maintain peace. 

As soon as Festus was installed in office, 
he was besieged by leading Jews, to send 
Paul to Jerusalem for trial, their intention 
being to murder him on the way. (Acts 25:1-3.) 
But Festus preferred to have the 
man tried before him, and told them they 
might come down to Caesarea and prefer 
their charges against him. This they did, 
but their false accusations were all refuted 
by Paul, who was permitted to answer for 
himself. Then Festus, anxious to conciliate 
the Jews, answered Paul, and proposed 
that, since the accusations pertained principally 
to the Jewish religion, he go up to Jerusalem 
to be tried. But Paul was on his 
guard, and having in his hand, as a Roman 
citizen, the power of averting the danger of 
the governor's compliance with the desire 
of the Jews, viz., the right of appeal to 
Caesar, he refused to be tried at Jerusalem, 
saying, "I stand at Caesar's judgment-seat, 
where I ought to be judged. To the Jews 
have I done no wrong, as thou very well 
knowest: for if I be an offender, or have 
committed anything worthy of death, I refuse 



not to die; but if there be none of these 
things whereof these accuse me, no man 
may deliver me unto them. I appeal unto 
Caesar." (Acts 25:4-11.) The case was therefore 
postponed for a hearing at Caesar's judgment-seat, 
and Paul was to be sent to Rome 

R1568 : page 254 

under military protection.— Acts 25:12; 27:1. 

Before the prisoner had been dispatched 
to Rome, Herod Agrippa, king of the country 
east of the upper Jordan, came to pay his 
respects to the new governor of Judea, and 
on hearing from him of the peculiar case of 
the Christian prisoner, against whom the 

R1569 : page 254 

Jews were so incensed, but against whom 
Festus was unable to formulate any charge 
to present before the court of Caesar, Agrippa 
consented to have Paul brought before him, 
that they might determine what charges to 
make against him.— Acts 25:25-27. 

Accordingly, at a set time, Paul was permitted 
to speak for himself before the assembled 
royalty. (Acts 26:1-29.) With the 
respect and decorum due to the civil powers, 
Paul began his address; but he seemed to 
forget that his life trembled in the balance, 
while he used the opportunity to preach 
Christ. The address was full of logic, eloquence 
and pathos. He recounted the circumstances 
of his conversation, declared his 
zeal for the cause of Christ, showed this to 
be the cause of the opposition from the Jews, 
and attributed his protection thus far, and his 
liberty to preach the gospel in Caesarea for 
the past two years, to divine interposition 
and providence. So mightily did he show 
forth the truth and with such vehement eloquence, 
that with a loud voice Festus cried 
out, "Paul, thou art beside thyself: much 
learning doth make thee mad."— Verse 24. 

The Apostle's reply was a clinching exhortation 
which almost persuaded even 
Agrippa to become a Christian; but how 
hardly the rich enter into the kingdom ! 
During the two years in Caesarea Paul had 
witnessed to both small and great, but as 
usual with more effect among the small— 
the poor and middle classes. 

His preaching was from the text book of 
the prophets, and was shown to be in harmony 
with all their teaching, so that those 



who truly believed the prophets must of necessity 

accept the fulfilment of their predictions 

in Christ. The force of this truth is 

seen in Agrippa's reply to his searching 

question— "King Agrippa, believest thou 

the prophets? I know that thou believest. 

Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou 

persuadest me to be a Christian"— for to believe 

the prophets is to believe in Christianity. 

The Lord's prophecy and promise of Matt. 10:18-20 

was strikingly fulfilled to Paul. 

As we read this account, the burning eloquence 
of this Christian orator seems almost 
to fall on our ears, and we seem to see the 
light of a countenance radiant with heavenly 
enthusiasm as the Apostle exclaims, "I would 
to God, that not only thou, but also all that 
hear me this day, were both almost, and 
altogether such as I am, except these bonds." 
—Verse 29. 

The conclusion of the examination was 
that no true charges could be made against 
the Apostle; and had he not appealed to 
Caesar he might have been immediately released. 
But nevertheless it was well that 
he had appealed to Caesar; for had he been 
released, he would again have been at the 
mercy of the Jews. During the two years 
of his detention in Caesarea he had enjoyed 
the greatest liberty to preach the gospel, all 
the while under the protection of the government 
as an imperial prisoner. And now 
he was to be conveyed under the same protection 
to Rome, to enjoy similar privileges 
for the truth. Thus all things worked for 
good in the furtherance of the gospel. 

R1569 : page 254 

PAUL SHIPWRECKED. 

III. QUAR., LESSON X., SEPT. 3, ACTS 27:30-44. 



Golden Text— "God is our refuge and strength, a very 
present help in trouble."— Psa. 46:1. 

This chapter finds Paul under a military 
guard, in company with other prisoners, on 
his way to Rome to appear before Caesar's 
judgment-seat. The journey which can now 
be accomplished in a few days with improved 
steam navigation, then required as many 
weeks— sails and oars being the only propelling 
powers. In this case, the journey was 



an eventful one, and one of special blessing 
to all on the ship, because one of the Lord's 
elect was on board, and God was with him, 
making every circumstance of his consecrated 
life a blessing to himself and others. 

The strange prisoner, against whom no 
real charges could be made out (Acts 25:27; 
26:31,32), found favor in the eyes of the 
captain of the guard, and by his permission 
enjoyed special liberties which he used for 
the comfort and cheer of the believers at Sidon. 
(Verse 3.) When a great storm overwhelmed 
the vessel, threatening shipwreck 
and death to all on board, this calamity was 
made the special occasion of a gracious message 
for all from God, through, and on account 
of, his faithful Apostle. The angel 
of God stood by him, saying, "Fear not, 
Paul; thou must be brought before Caesar: 
and lo, God hath given thee all them that sail 

R1569 : page 255 

with thee." That is, on his account, all the 
passengers and crew should escape with their 
lives from the wreck.— Verses 23,24,34,44. 

The lesson which we are warranted in 
gathering from this circumstance is a very 
comforting one, viz., that God is not unwilling 
to let some droppings of his favor fall 
upon those associated with his saints— not 
because they know him or seek his favor, 
but because he so loved the world that he 
not only gave his Son to redeem them, but 
he thus sends to them his living witnesses 
to bear testimony of his love and grace, and 
to call them to repentance, that they may 
place themselves in a proper attitude to receive 
his favor. This remarkable interposition 
on behalf of Paul and his fellow-passengers 
was an impressive lesson never to 
be forgotten— a testimony to the power and 
love of God. 

In view of God's willingness, thus manifested, 
to show favor to those associated with 
his people, even though they know him not, 
it is plainly our privilege to request such 
favor toward our dear ones who are yet 
aliens to the commonwealth of Israel, and 
even enemies. But in so doing, let us not 
forget that severe chastenings of such are 
often, necessarily, the only marks of favor 
which divine wisdom can bestow for the 
good of the wandering and erring. And 
for these we should therefore be thankful, 
and not repine against the kind providence 



which discerns such necessity. While the 
heavy strokes of discipline fall upon the 
erring for their correction, God's children, 
through whose interposition they are thus 
specially brought under divine supervision, 
must endeavor to take God's standpoint in 
viewing the necessities of the case, and 
thankfully say, Amen! to all his wise, though 
often severe measures. 

Sometimes, as in the instance of this lesson, 
the favor shown to the unconverted associates 
of the saints is a more manifest favor; 
but in either case, like Paul, we should 
co-operate with God to the end of enforcing 
and emphasizing the lesson. 

VERSES 30,31 show that Paul understood 
the promise of God revealed in the vision 
(verse 24) to be of necessity subject to certain 
conditions— viz., that the deliverance 
would not be forced upon them, nor would 
it be granted to them without their co-operation. 
The promise presupposed both the 
desire and the effort of all to obtain deliverance, 
which desire and effort would, by divine 
interposition, be rewarded with success. 
But when the effort of the crew, which had 
assumed the responsibility of bringing the 
vessel into port, was directed to a mean and 
selfish purpose which ignored their responsibility 
and sought only to save themselves 
and leave the rest to their fate, Paul understood 
that God would be a party to no such 
selfish course, and he therefore told the soldiers 
that, notwithstanding the revelation of 
the vision, they would perish unless these 
pursued the proper course of sticking to the 
ship and making use of the means for averting 
the impending disaster. This teaching 
of the Apostle is quite contrary to the ideas 
of some Christians to-day who excuse themselves 
from active co-operation with God, 
idly expecting him to work miracles on their 
behalf. But such is not God's purpose; and 
the apostles taught quite to the contrary. 

The soldiers took immediate measures to 
frustrate the selfish scheme of the shipmen 
by cutting the ropes and letting the 
life-boat drift away, that so the crew would 
be obliged to use their efforts for the salvation 
of all; and in the use of their utmost 
means and efforts God saved all. Doubtless 
the impression made upon the minds of all 
was a deep one, which will be remembered 
when, in the times of restitution, they are 
brought to a clearer knowledge of Jesus 
Christ whom Paul preached unto them.— 



Acts 3:19-21. 

VERSES 33-36 bring into marked contrast 
the comforting faith of the children of God 
and the disquiet and unrest of those who 
lack that faith. Yet the steady faith of the 
Christian in the midst of trials is an inspiration, 
as well as a testimony, to those of 
the world about them. All the frightened 
and weary passengers and crew took courage 
from Paul's words and example, and 
were strengthened. "Ye are the light of 
the world," said the Master, "let your light 
shine." The poor world has its heavy load 
of sorrow. Give them all they will take of 
your comfort and cheer. 

VERSE 42 again reminds us of the contrast 
between ignoble selfishness and benevolent 
love. The soldiers were plotting to kill 
their prisoners, Paul included, lest they 
might escape, and they, according to Roman 
law, might have to forfeit their own. From 
this plot, also, Paul and those with him were 
saved, through the favor of the centurion, 
and all, by the blessing of God upon their 
efforts, reached the shore in safety. 

R1569 : page 256 

In considering this lesson we are forcibly 
reminded of the Apostle's advice to Timothy 
(1 Tim. 4:16)— "Take heed unto thyself [unto 
thy walk and conversation before men], 
and unto the doctrine [—Declare it and defend 

R1570 : page 256 

it on every proper occasion]; for in doing 
this thou shalt save both thyself and them 
that hear thee [from sinking into error and 
sin and reaping its bitter consequences]." 

R1570 : page 256 

PAUL AT ROME. 

III. QUAR., LESSON XL, SEPT. 10, ACTS 28:20-31. 



Golden Text— "I am not ashamed of the gospel of 
Christ. "-Rom. 1:16. 

The apparent misfortune which cast the 
shipwrecked crew upon the little island of 
Melita became another occasion to the Apostle 
for bearing effective witness for Christ, 



and both Paul and all that were with him, 
and the simple islanders, also, were blessed. 
(Acts 28:1-10.) Departing thence, other 
Christians were met, encouraged and blessed 
—at Puteoli, and possibly at Syracuse and 
Rhegium; and, nearing Rome, the welcome 
faces of brethren who had come to meet him 
were seen at Appii Forum; and Paul thanked 
God, and took courage.— Verse 15. 

The Apostle's first step, after his arrival 
and settlement in Rome, with the large 
measure of freedom he enjoyed by the favor 
of the Roman authorities, was to call together 
the chief of the Jews in Rome, desiring 
as heretofore to present the gospel "to 
the Jews first, and afterward to the Gentiles." 

In verse 20 we mark the wisdom manifested 
in his manner of presenting the subject, 
declaring and showing that for the 
hope of Israel he was bearing those chains. 
And what was the hope of Israel? It was 
in the promise of a Messiah and the establishment 
of his kingdom— the very thing that 
Paul was continually preaching, showing 
that the promise of his coming had been 
fulfilled, and that his kingdom would just as 
surely be established. At the first interview 
he merely prepared them for a subsequent 
opportunity to hear the gospel, wisely awakening 
in them a desire to hear more of his 
doctrine. Then, at the appointed time, he 
was ready with all his strong arguments, and 
spent the day from morning till evening 
preaching Jesus unto them from the text 
books of The Law and The Prophets.— 
Verse 23. 

It is very noticeable that, though Paul was 
careful to present the subject in a manner 
least calculated to stir up Jewish prejudices, 
his caution did not keep back the truth. 
He gave it to them in due time and order, 
but with all its native force, and let it do its 
separating work, as it always does. His 
reasoning was close, Scriptural and cumulative 
in its power. He reached conclusions, 
and placed the issue fairly before his hearers; 
and when they cavilled and rejected the 
truth he boldly applied to them the rebuke 
of the Prophet Isaiah (verses 24-27), a rebuke 
which the Lord so frequently applied 
to Jews. He then declared his subsequent 
purpose to be, to turn to the Gentiles, who 
should enjoy the privilege of which they 
had judged themselves unworthy. (Verse 28.) 
The rebuke of the Prophet was much 
more weighty to them than any words of 



his own would have been; for the Jews had 
not learned to recognize the inspiration of 
the apostles. From this suggestion we may 
all learn the wisdom of using the words of 
inspiration in preference to our own. 

Paul's two years in Rome, awaiting the 
due processes of the law— the arrival of 
witnesses from Jerusalem, the formulating 
of charges, etc.,— were years of special advantage 
to the work of the Lord. Here 
Paul was for the time safe from his enemies, 
the Jews, and free, under the protection of 
his lenient and favorably disposed captors, 
to preach the gospel to all who would hear, 
both Jews and Gentiles. 

The opportunity was faithfully used. Here 
he preached the gospel of the Kingdom, and 
taught the doctrines of Christ with all confidence 
and freedom; from here he wrote 
and sent letters to distant Churches; and he 
prayed for them (Eph. 1:16; 3:14; Phil. 1:4,9), 
and sent messengers and helpers to 
them. (Eph. 6:21; Phil. 2:19,25.) The 
epistles to the Ephesians, Colossians, Philippians 
and to Philemon were all written 
from Rome. 

We have no definite account of the Apostle's 
course after his liberation from captivity 
in Rome, except what may be gleaned 
from his epistles. The meagre references 
of history indicate that he afterward went 
to Spain, and again to Greece and Asia 
Minor; and that it was a second imprisonment 
at Rome that terminated in his execution. 
All evidences concur that he was a 
wonderful soldier of the cross. He was 
faithful to the Truth and to the work of the 
Lord to the end of his course, and left a shining 
record for our study and imitation. 



page 258 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



BROTHER ROGERS IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



Brother Rogers will be in England early in 
October, to begin an active campaign for the 
Truth. He will first of all make a personal 
trial of the new field, in order to discover its 
peculiarities, and to demonstrate its possibilities. 
Then he will be ready to instruct others 
in the art of selling DAWNS. 

Already we have the addresses of several who 
desire to enter this "harvest" work, preaching 
sixteen discourses with the sale of each 
volume, and thus lifting up the light;— present 
truths, meat in due season for God's people. 
Are there not others there who desire to spend 
themselves in God's service, and who believe 
that the circulation of DAWN is the best method 
known to them? Let all such write us at once. 



R1579 : page 258 
MISSING CYLINDERS. 



They have dug up many wonderful baked-clay 
cylinders out of the ruins of Babylon and other 
ancient cities, but there are some not yet found. 

I. They have not found any which speak of 
Moses and Joshua having called a "Parliament 
of Religions," of Moabites and Ammonites, 
and Edomites, and Sodomites, to come together 
and compare notes as to what things they had 
in common— and how far they could strike 
hands and have worship in common. 

II. They have not found any which speak of 
sturdy old Samuel having sent to Gath and 
Ekron to get a deputation of the priests of Dagon 
to come up to Shiloh and hold a conference 
with the priests of Jehovah; and also deliver 

a course of lectures on the best methods 
of making "cuttings for the dead;"— the best 
kind of charms and amulets to be put over the 
doors and be worn on the person, in order that 
poor, uninstructed Israelites could have a wider 
range of spiritual vision. 

III. They have not found any which speak 
of old leather-belted Elijah having proposed a 
"congress" with the priests of Baal and Moloch 
for a week's discussion of the tenets of 

their respective faiths, with a view to the promotion 

of mutual respect for each other's religion. 

In the absence of the burnt cylinders, 

we are shut up to the old Bible account of the 

practical test demanded by Elijah and the tragic 

conclusion of it. 

IV. They have not found any which speak 
of Daniel and his fellows having proposed a 
miscellaneous camp meeting to be composed of 
all sorts of religionists in the whole of the "one 
hundred and twenty provinces," to come together 
and unite on a basis for some "Absolute 
Religion" of some sort. 

None of such cylinders have as yet turned 
up, but they are still grubbing away as hard as 
they can. — W. Ashmore, China. 

A FAMINE IN THE LAND.-AMOS 8:11. 



Some who are awaking are crying out for 
bread— the bread of truth instead of the stones 
of error offered by the various sects. The Rev. 



T. Chalmers said recently:— 

"We cannot resist the inevitable. The creed 
of Calvinism is like a coat which is becoming 
too small for the rapid growth of human 
thought. With every movement of the arms 
it will be sure to rip somewhere, unless we refrain 
from all vigorous exercise. We do not 
want any coat which binds us so tightly that 
we cannot act with freedom. It is folly to attempt 
to keep pace with the ripping of the 
coat by a little sewing here and there. It is 
too small, and no amount of sewing and patching 
will help it any. It may have a good deal 
of good material which may be kept and still 
used, but the system of Calvinism as a system 
has done its service for humanity. We don't 
want systems any more. We want liberty and 
truth and love and righteousness. We want 
more of Christ and less of creed. We want 
still to grow— to grow until we come into the 
unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the 
Son of God unto the perfect man, unto the 
fulness of the measure of the stature of Christ." 



R1570 : page 259 

VOL. XIV. SEPTEMBER 1 & 15, 1893. NO. 17 & li 

"THE CHURCH OF THE LIVING GOD." 

-1 TIM. 3:15.- 



"As the body is one, and hath many members, and all the 

members of that one body, being many, are one body, 

so also is Christ; for by one spirit are we all baptized 

into one body. "..."There is one body, and one 

spirit; even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; 

one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God 

and Father of all. "..."After the way which 

they [many] call heresy, so worship I the God of 

my fathers. "..."Am I become your enemy, 

because I tell you the truth?" If so, then, 

"I have become a fool for Christ's sake."— 

1 Cor. 12:12,13; Eph. 4:4-6; Acts 24:14; 

Gal. 4:16; 1 Cor. 4:10. 

THAT during the Gospel age God has been 
selecting a Church is admitted by all Christians 
except Universalists; and that all thus 
selected constitute the one Church, and that 
a membership in that one Church can be secured 
only during the present life— during the 



Gospel age— are also generally admitted to be 
the teachings of the Bible. 

And many will admit, also, that our present 
union with Christ's body, the Church, though 
precious, is but a probationary membership, 
which will only be confirmed and made everlasting 
by introduction into full membership 
in the Church triumphant, at the close of this 
probationary period of the present life.— John 15:5,6; 
Phil. 3:12-16. 

But, while we and other Christians agree that 
the Church triumphant is to be one Church, 
and not many churches, there are parts and 
bearings of the subject regarding which we are 
not agreed. 

We hold that the conditions of the present 
trial, of all accepted as probationary members 
of the heavenly Church, are more severe and 
exacting, and that the selection is consequently 
much smaller, than Christian people generally 
suppose; that only a "little flock" is now 

R1571 : page 259 

being selected. (Luke 12:32.) Many suppose 

that the object of our God in calling the 

Church and promising her high exaltation was 

merely to save them from everlasting torment. 

We claim, and find and produce abundant 

Scripture proof of it, that God's object in this 

selection, training, discipline and final exaltation 

of the Church, is for the ultimate purpose 

of blessing through them all his fallen, sin-stricken 

creatures (human and angelic), by 

granting to all a full, perfect judgment or trial 

under most favorable conditions, of which perfect 

knowledge and sufficient help will be the 

chief elements of favor. Thus seen, the Church 

is being selected for the great work, to be 

accomplished during the Millennial age, of restoring 

"whosoever will" of the fallen ones 

back to their former estates, and of consigning 

the wilfully unholy to the second death— everlasting 

punishment— everlasting destruction. 

See TOWER for Oct. 15th, '92, for the nature 

and methods of God's elections, and Feb., '93 

for an examination of all Scripture texts bearing 

on the subject of future punishment. 

Nor can it be denied that this Scriptural 
view is much more elevating than the common, 
selfish view which originated in the great Papal 

R1571 : page 260 

apostasy. Those called out by the hope 
of sharing in God's plan for doing good to 



others— blessing "all the families of the earth" 
—are sure to be few, and spiritually above the 
masses, who are moved only by a selfish hope 
of escaping torment. 

We also differ from most Christians in that 
we regard the Church in its present condition 
as merely in a probationary state. And we further 
claim that there is only one Church now, 
even as there will be but one Church in glory; 
that our Lord and the apostles never recognized 
any but one Church on earth; that so far 
from establishing many, or recognizing many, 
they denounced all efforts to separate into different 
parties and under different names, as 
schismatic, sectarian, and contrary to God's 
will; as injurious, and as an evidence of carnality 
in all who consented to or aided such 
divisions of the probationary Church. 

Paul's able and pointed reasoning upon this 
subject is partially obscured by the common 
translation, yet even in it, when attention 
is called to it, the trend of the Apostle's reasoning 
is clearly discerned; much more so in 
that valuable and generally very faithful translation, 
the Emphatic Diaglott. He exhorts that 
those teachers who favor divisions in the flock 
of Christ be "watched," and turned away 
from; because they are not following the Lord's 
will, but their own. And he adds, "by kind 
and complimentary words they mislead the unsuspicious. 
(Rom. 16:17.) He reproved the 
Corinthian Church because of a tendency toward 
sectarianism among them. (1 Cor. 1:10-13; 
3:3-6.) They were dividing into Paulites, 
Apollosites and Peterites, while a few rightly 
clung to the name Christian. 

Each of these teachers had his peculiarities 
of manner in teaching, which caused some to 
esteem one, and others another, most highly. 
But they all had the one gospel— the one Lord, 
the one faith and the one baptism. The spirit 
of favoritism, which led to factions and divisions, 
and to the exaltation of sectarian or 
party names, or to the name of an individual 
teacher, to be the standard around which to 
rally, the Apostle declared was an evidence of 
carnality— proof of a worldly spirit. 

While the taking of different names was 
wrong, it was an evidence of a deeper wrong 
—of a selfish, party spirit. It was an evidence 
that those Corinthians who took the party 
names had never appreciated the oneness of 
the body of Christ; that they did not really 
appreciate that Christ is the only head, leader 
and standard; and that his is the only name 
by which his followers should recognize themselves 



and each other. Where scoffers apply 
a name in derision, it is not the fault of the 
faithful; but the true, loyal soldiers of the 
cross should never own or recognize such a 
name. Instances of names so originating are 
"Methodist" and "Baptist," both of which 
were given in derision, but were afterwards 
adopted as party names, representing sects, factions 
or divisions in the body of Christ. All true 
teachers are not only sent by Christ, but receive 
their instructions from him; and any man 
who attempts to put his own or any other name 
upon all or any portion of the Church is an 
opponent, an adversary to the true and only 
Lord and Head of the Church. He is a misleader 
and an evildoer, no matter what his claims 
or motives may be. 

The Apostle, upbraiding the Corinthians, and 
seeking to show them their error in owning 
any other teacher, besides Christ, to be their 
head and standard and leader, asks, "Has 
Christ been divided?" Are there several seeds 
of Abraham now, each an heir of a promise? 
Is this the reason you countenance divisions 
into different parties? Or, is it because one 
of these leaders— Paul, Apollos or Peter— has 
specially favored you and put you under obligation 
to him, that you requite him by calling 
yourselves his servants and followers, bearing 
his name? Was Paul crucified for you? or 
were you baptized in his name? 

Nay, nay, dearly beloved; one, and only one, 
deserves all the honor of the Church, both 
now and forever, and that one is her true Lord 
and Master; and his name only should she 
own in any manner. He leads, he teaches, 
he feeds; and the various human agents used 
by him, as channels for his blessings to his espoused, 
should neither take his place in her 
heart nor share his honor before the world. 

R1571 : page 261 

We may, however, and should, honor his servants 
"for their work's sake," and count those 
who serve well as worthy of double honor; 
but we must always "hold the Head," and 
render him supreme reverence and obedience. 
(1 Thess. 5:13; 1 Tim. 5:17; Col. 2:19.) Our 
esteem for others should be "in the Lord." 

For a long time, in fact until very recently, 
Christians recognized this true principle, that 
there is but one body or church on earth, even 
as there will be but one in glory. And, following 
this idea, each sect claimed to be that 
one, the only true Church, and persecuted 



others. But by and by each began to see in 
the other certain good features of doctrine and 
practice, and gradually their ideas changed, 
until to-day they claim boldly, and in opposition 
to the word of our Lord and of the apostles, 
that sects are a decided advantage; that 
the human mind is so constituted that a common 
faith, which Paul urges upon the Church, 
is an impossibility; and that the various sects 
of to-day with their contradictory diversities 
of faith are necessary accommodations to human 
prejudices and imbecility. 

Yet, still clinging to the idea that somehow 
there should be but one Church, they are anxious 
to reunite all the larger sects so as to make 
(nominally) one church, while each sect therein 
may retain its own special features of faith 
or disbelief as at present. All in such a union 
(of which the Evangelical Alliance is a beginning) 
merely agree to disagree, to live and let 
live, and to recognize each other, in this 
general way, because of an increased influence, 
power and protection which the association 
will bring to each, and because it would detract 
from the influence of other sects not so 
associated, and thus hinder independence of 
thought. This would serve to fix and establish 
an "orthodox" boundary line, inside of which 
there would be bounds to individual liberty, 
and yet a measure of freedom— a permission 
to choose a preference among the forms and 
doctrines of these associated sects, and still permit 
them to be recognized as "orthodox." 

This is, in fact, the case now, among the so-called 
"liberal minds" of all denominations; 
and it is being urged that an organization of 
this sort, already founded in the Evangelical 
Alliance, be fully consummated, and that an 
attempt be made to have such a composite 
church in some degree recognized by the government. 
The latest effort in this direction is 
"The Brotherhood of Christian Unity," of 
which we had something to say in our issue of 
Dec. 1, '92. 

But, even when fully consummated, this could 
be no more than a union in name, with the 
same divisions and differences in fact— one 
church nominally, but many sects really. 

The first danger against which the Apostle 
warned the Church was sectarianism; and he 
was evidently heeded at the time at least, for 
no great sects of Paulites or Apollosites developed. 
But, as usual, the great enemy, 
thwarted in one direction, moved to the opposite 
extreme, and attempted to insist upon 
a oneness very different from what our Lord or 



the apostles ever taught. This attempt was to 

have every recognized member of the Church 

think exactly alike, on every minutia of Christian 

doctrine. This attempt finally developed 

into Papacy, where every matter of doctrine 

was decided by the popes and councils; and 

every man who desired to be considered a 

church member was obliged to accept such decisions 

fully, and to profess that such decisions 

were his belief, his faith; whereas they were 

not his in any sense but that of adoption. 

They were generally either blindly received or 

hypocritically professed with mental 

reservations. 

This was not at all the oneness urged by 
Paul. He urged a oneness of heart and mind, 
and not a thoughtless, heartless or hypocritical 
profession. He urged a oneness such as naturally 
results from the proper exercise of the 
liberty which we have in Christ— to search and 
believe the Scriptures, and to grow in grace 
and in knowledge, every man being thus fully 
persuaded in his own mind, and firmly rooted 
and grounded in the one faith as set forth in 
the Scriptures. The oneness of faith which 
Paul urged was not that elaborate faith which 
touches and embraces all subjects, heavenly 
and earthly, divine and human, revealed and 
unrevealed. Quite the contrary: Paul's letters, 

R1572 : page 262 

weighty with logical reasoning, do not 
even mention the subjects upon which sectarians 
do most insist, and which are by them 
generally made tests of fellowship. 

Paul said nothing about an everlasting torture 
of sinners; he said nothing whatever about 
a mysterious trinity, in which three Gods are 
incomprehensibly one God and at the same 
time three Gods; he said not a word about 
man being of a nature such as could not die but 
must live everlastingly, in a place of either 
pleasure or woe; he said nothing, either, about 
the present life ending all trial for all classes; 
and he entered into no entangling discussion 
about the bread and wine used in commemoration 
of the Lord's death— as to transubstantiation 
or consubstantiation; yet it can easily 
be discerned that he was not in harmony with 
any of these errors. 

Notice particularly, however, that without so 
much as mentioning a single one of these sectarian 
tests of fellowship, Paul declares— "I 
have not shunned to declare unto you the whole 
counsel of God." (Acts 20:27.) From this it 



is very evident that none of these points, which 
are to-day regarded as the very essence and 
substance of Christian doctrine and as the 
proper tests of faith, are the one faith, or in 
any sense or degree parts of "the faith once 
delivered unto the saints."— Jude 3. 

The one faith, which all should hold, was a 
very simple one; one so simple that all, the 
learned and the unlearned alike, could grasp 
it and comprehend it, and be "fully persuaded 
in their own minds" concerning it. It was 
not a dose of incongruous mysteries, inconsistent 
with themselves and inharmonious with 
reason as well as with the Bible, to be swallowed 
by the ignorant with credulity, and by 
the learned with hypocritical mental reservations; 
but it was so simple, and clear, and 
reasonable, that any and every honest follower 
of Christ could be fully persuaded in his own 
mind concerning it. 

What was this one faith? The basis of it is 
stated by Paul, thus: "I delivered unto you first 
of all, that which I also received [first of ali- 
as a foundation truth or doctrine, upon and in 
harmony with which all other doctrines must 
be built], how that Christ died for our sins, according 
to the Scriptures; and that he was 
buried; and that he rose again the third day, 
according to the Scriptures." (1 Cor. 15:3,4.) 
"There is one God and one Mediator between 
God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave 
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due 
time."— 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

This, in a word, confesses sin and utter helplessness; 
it acknowledges God's loving plan 
for our redemption; it owns that our Lord's 
death was our ransom price; and that forgiveness 
(justification), and reconciliation to God, 
and the restitution of believers, come as a result 
of faith in this Redeemer, when in due 
time it is made known to each and all. 

These brief statements contain the whole 
gospel, in the same sense that an acorn contains 
an oak tree. Without this gospel kernel, 
the true gospel can never be possessed; hence 
this must be insisted on as a test of Christian 
fellowship. This must be received, else the 
gospel is not received. When it is received, 
the gospel is received. Then a work of growth 
begins— a development of this gospel. It may 
vary in rapidity of growth according to temperament 
and surroundings; it can develop into 
a twig, a sapling, a sturdy oak successively, 
but the nature of the seed will appertain to it in 
every stage of its development. So is faith— 
the true faith: it must begin with the one kind 



of seed-faith in all, no matter what stage of 
development each may attain. This one gospel 
acknowledges man's fall and sinfulness, and 
God's mercy and love manifested through 
Christ's great work of redemption, forgiveness 
and final restoration of all the willing and obedient, 
but of no others. All theories, and they 
are many, which omit any of these items are 
spurious. 

Some deny God's love in the matter, and 
claim that all the love was Christ's, and that he 
interposed and thwarted the Father's original 
plan; but those of the one faith are guided by 
our Lord's own testimony, that God so loved 
the world that he devised the plan as it is being 
carried forward, and sent his only begotten 
Son to do what he has done and is yet to 
do for the world. (John 3:16,17.) Others 

R1572 : page 263 

deny that any redemption was accomplished by 
the death of our Lord Jesus, deny that his life 
was substituted as a corresponding price or 
"ransom for all," and claim that the Father 
does all by simply pardoning the sinners. But 
again the one faith is clearly pointed out by 
the words of Paul— "There is one mediator 
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 
who gave himself a ransom [corresponding 
price] for all." 

When received into honest hearts, this simple 
gospel, the true gospel, will gradually open 
up and spread its roots of reason and its 
branches of hope in every direction, feeding 
upon the promises of God, building itself up 
as he designed, and grasping, as it progresses, 
the "one baptism" (See TOWER, June 15, '93) 
and every other feature of the gospel in its 
fulness. 

Note the difference between this, God's test, 
on the simple first principles of the gospel, and 
the wrong course of men who attempt to enforce 
upon all an entire system of faith (and 
that when they are the merest babes in Christ), 
so fettering them, then, that their growth is 
hindered. To ask babes in Christ to assent 
to thirty or forty articles of faith arranged 
by fellow-men, and to agree to take those as 
the infallible truth, and to promise never to 
believe either more or less than they contain, 
is like selecting in an orchard one gnarled and 
crooked tree, as a standard, and requiring all 
the other trees to be padded out to make them 
look as thick and as gnarled as the sample, and 
to be bound with iron bands that they might 



never grow larger or straighter. 

This true gospel, this simple faith, easily 
understood and confessed by the weakest babe 
in Christ, must also be, and always, and equally, 
the faith of the most developed sons of God. 
This one faith (and not the endless ramifications 
and details of faith which lead out from 
it) Paul placed as a standard or test of all 
claiming the name Christian. All the consecrated 
who agreed on this one standard, or 
foundation truth, Paul counted as in and of the 
one Church. While each member was to grow 
in grace, knowledge and love, there would always 
be harmony and oneness in the faith and 
fellowship of the Church, if all growth were 
kept in line and harmony with this foundation 
truth. 

Here was a perfect basis of union, which allowed 
for all the various stages of individual 
development in the truth, and which most effectually 
guarded against errors. For if this 
simple creed were to-day made the standard 
by which all doctrines should be tested, it would 
speedily lead to the discarding of every error 
and to the true union of the Church in the 
"one Lord, one faith and one baptism." 

The endeavor to compel all men to think alike 
on all subjects, culminated in the great apostasy 
and the development of the great Papal 
system; and thereby the "gospel," the "one 
faith," which Paul and the other apostles set 
forth, was lost— buried under the mass of uninspired 
decrees of popes and councils. The 
union of the early Church, based upon the simple 
gospel and bound only by love, gave place 
to the bondage of the Church of Rome— a slavery 
of God's children, from the degradation 
of which multitudes are still weak and suffering. 

The Reformation movement of the sixteenth 
century came as an effort to regain liberty of 
conscience; but, deluded by the idea of an 
elaborate creed, insisted upon for so many centuries, 
the reformers and their followers formed 
other systems of bondage very similar to that 
of Papacy, though slight modifications gave 
liberty to fuller ideas on some subjects. And 
so it has been ever since: each new reform 
movement has made the failure of attempting 
to make a creed just large enough for its prime 
movers. 

A "CHURCH TRUST" UNDESIRABLE. 



But while division in the Church of Christ 



are very wrong, and very contrary to the will 
and word of our Lord, they are better far than 
a union in bondage under Papacy's system, 
creed, etc. Instead, therefore, of attempting 
to get all the sects to combine in a sort of 
"Church Trust," an image or likeness of the 
Papal system of oneness (though on a higher 
plane), to regulate and restrict further investigation 
and further growth, we need to do the 
very opposite— to abolish all sects and all elaborate 

R1572 : page 264 

creeds and confessions of faith. Instead 

of being further bound (by such a Church Trust 

Union— or wheel within a wheel, double imprisonment), 

all bondage should be set aside, 

except the simple tests first imposed in the one 

faith once delivered to the saints; and all 

party sectarian names should be repudiated, 

and the name of Christ should be the only 

name borne by his Church. 

Such a breaking down of sectarian fences 
would leave the true children of God willing 
to accept the original and simple test— "all 
one in Christ Jesus;" and this is what is 
needed. It would destroy sectarian pride, 
which so often counterfeits true Christian zeal 
and love, but it would tend to develop the truth, 
and thereby to develop the real zeal for the 
truth which our Lord desires in his followers. 
The term Church of Christ would no longer 
mean to any "our denomination," but, when 
they would sing, 

"I love thy Church, O God, 

Her walls before thee stand, 
Dear as the apple of thine eye, 

And graven on thy hand," 

R1573 : page 264 

they would think, instead, of the one, true and 
only Church. 

Under such conditions, recognizing the true 
and only test, as above quoted from Paul, 
those who formerly championed opposite sides 
of the various questions of doctrine would join 
heads and hearts in carefully weighing the 
various statements of the Scriptures; and, truly 
seeking the divine plan, they would ere long, 
as promised, be guided into all truth. 

They would join hearts and hands as Christians, 
and while their heads might not at once 
agree on certain points, it would be only a 
question of a short time; for the unbiased study 
of God's plan, with no sectarian theory and 



organization to uphold, would bring the heads 
of all into union and general harmony, even 
though, as at first, the growth of faith-roots 
and faith-branches might vary. All would believe 
the "same things," even if some could see 
and believe more elaborately than others.— 
Phil. 3:15,16. 

This freedom, and yet harmony and union, 
which is the result of a full acceptance of God's 
will and Word, will not be attained in the 
present age except by the few, the "overcomers." 
Others, the Scriptures show, will continue 
in sectarian bondage, and even increase 
their bondage-union by a Church Trust or 
"confederacy" (Isa. 8:12), until, in the close 
of this time of trouble, all this is corrected by 
the fall of sectarian systems as well as of present 
political governments.— Dan. 12:1; 
Rev. 18:2-5. 

In the next age, during the world's trial, 
such great deceiving systems will not be permitted; 
but now they are permitted in order 
to the testing and manifesting of the 
"overcomers." 

Let the dear saints who now walk the narrow 
way, and whose names are "written in 
heaven" as probationary members of the one, 
true Church of Christ, patiently persevere in 
worshiping God after the manner which others 
term "heresy"— closely studying and believing 
all that is written in the inspired Word, 
however it may conflict with human creeds 
and the opinions of so-called great theologians. 
Be simple enough to take God at his Word, 
however church monopolies or trusts may seek, 
either willingly or unintentionally, to wrest it 
to their own advantage. Flee all so-called 
unions, which are merely bondages. What is 
needed is fewer of such unions, not more. 
Each individual needs to feel and exercise the 
same liberty on doctrine that each sect now 
claims. From this standpoint the bondage-union 
of the church under Papacy was the 
worst and most complete enslavement of the 
individual Christian; and the full breaking up 
of all sectarianism, so that no two persons will 
be bound to hold one faith (except on first-principles) 
is the most desirable condition. 
The breaking of Papacy into a hundred sects, 
each free from the other, was a good work, 
tending to the realization of the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free. Though at first regarded 
as a calamity, it soon came to be known 
as the Reformation. And now the breaking 
up of these numerous sects, so that each individual 
will be free, is essential to a fuller 



growth in grace, knowledge and love than is 

at present possible. This breaking up of sectarianism, 

R1573 : page 265 

now regarded as a calamity, will by 

and by be recognized as truly the greatest of 

all religious reformations. The signs of the 

times indicate that such a reformation is impending, 

and the Scriptures declare it. A little 

more light, a little more knowledge, and 

these sectarian shackles upon the individual 

conscience will fall. Then whatever union 

shall exist will be upon right principles— a 

union of hearts and principles and not merely 

a heterogeneous confederacy. Recognizing 

each other's personal liberties, each disciple of 

Christ will be bound to the other by his love 

of the Lord and of his Word alone; and others 

will be separated. 

Sectarianism has wofully distorted that beautiful 
figure of Christian union given by our 
Lord, recorded in John 15:1-6. To fit it to 
sectarianism, and to make their error in this 
appear to be supported by God's Word, it is 
claimed that the "vine" is the whole church, 
and that the various denominations of "Christendom" 
are the branches. But that the 
Lord's words will bear no such construction 
must be evident to any one who will give the 
passage candid consideration. The branches 
are the individuals, and "any branch" is defined 
by our Lord's own words to be "any 
man." Let this, our Lord's illustration of the 
proper union of all the branches in one vine, 
connected and nourished by the same sap, from 
the same roots, teach us of true union and 
personal freedom in the body of Christ. 



Suppose that the salaries and "livings" of 
all ministers, bishops, priests, etc., were cut 
off, all churches, chapels and cathedrals destroyed, 
all theological seminaries broken up, 
and their professors turned to other pursuits, 
all religious guilds and societies disbanded, including 
all sectarian organizations— what would 
be the effect? 

Who can doubt that it would be a real blessing 
under the disguise of a great and terrible 
catastrophe? The effect would be to bring true 
Christians together as the family of God, and 
not as sectarian bands; to study God's Word, 
and not human traditions and creeds formulated 
in the dark ages. Very soon, unhindered, 



God's Word would be heard by all truly 
his; and one Lord, one faith and one baptism 
would soon be the result, while the worldly 
mass would speedily drift apart, and the true 
distinction between the Church and the world 
would be discernible. The Scriptures seem to 
indicate that very much of this sort of destruction 
of present systems must take place before 
all the "wheat," the true Church, will be separated 
from the "tares," the mere professors. 
Party spirit and love of sect are so strong that, 
apparently, nothing short of a complete wreck 
of all the sects will suffice to set free all of 
God's children now bound and blindfolded in 
and by them. 

This catastrophe— sectarian destruction, the 
fall of Babylon— is what is referred to in the 
Book of Revelation under the symbol of the 
seven last plagues. (Rev. 15-18.) The pain 
from these will consist largely of mental chagrin, 
the disappointment of sectarian hopes 
and plans, and the wounding of sectarian pride. 
When the Master said, "Watch ye, that ye may 
be accounted worthy to escape all these things 
coming upon the world," it included the pain 
of these plagues, as well as other annoyances 
to which the world will be subject because of 
ignorance of the real plan of God. It is of 
escape from these plagues that the Revelator 
(our Lord— Rev. 1:1) speaks to us, saying, 
"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not 
of her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 

THREE VIEWS OF THE CHURCH. 



Brother Wright sends us the following clipping, 
with the remark, "Two views well stated. 
Please give us the third and true one, Brother 
Russell." 

"There are two conceptions of the Church, 
which, for convenience, I shall designate as the 
Protestant and Catholic conceptions. The 
Protestant idea of the Church is that it is a 
voluntary association of believers in Christ; 
that those who think alike upon religious subjects 
join together in a society and choose their 
pastor, who derives his commission and his 
authority from them. Consequently they are 
at liberty to prescribe what he shall and shall 
not teach, or to unmake their church and make 
another, precisely as the members of a club, 

R1573 : page 266 



or of a political party, have a right to withdraw 
and form a new organization. The Protestant 
theory of the Church is that of an aggregation 
of individuals, 'who can rearrange 
themselves at will, and thus create new churches 
at every re-arrangement.' (Ewer.) The Catholic 
theory, on the other hand, is that it is an 
organization which God Almighty has founded 
once for all, to last to the end of time, and into 
which he invites men: it is his family, his 
household, his kingdom, his city. Its officers 
are commissioned by him and hold their authority 
as teachers only from him. In a word, 
the Catholic Church is not a democracy but 
an empire, not a republic but a kingdom. As 
such, it comes to man with divine authority: 
its officers are under oath to the Eternal King, 
and they are to minister to man in his name, 
and for him."— The Living Church. 

In presenting the true view of the Church, 
we labor under the disadvantage that for fifteen 
hundred years people have been taught 
one or the other of the above views, or combinations 
of both, while the true idea has been 
generally lost sight of since the second century. 
The true view, as we conceive it, is as 
follows:— 

God's Church, when completed and organized, 
will be all that is given above as the 
Catholic or Episcopal view. But it is not yet 
completed, and hence not yet organized. When 
organized, it will be clothed with power, and 
will be, "not a democracy, but an empire; not 
a republic, but a kingdom. As such it [will] 
come to man [the world— during the Millennium] 
with divine authority [and with power 
to back up that authority]. Its officers are 
[then to be] under oath to the Eternal King, 
and they are to minister to man in his name, 
and for him." All this, it is to be noted, fits 
exactly to the coming reign of the Church, 
when it shall "bless all the families of the 
earth;" but it does not fit at all to the present 
state or condition. There is no organization 
to-day clothed with such divine authority to 
imperiously command mankind. There is no 
organization doing this to-day; though we are 
well aware that many of them in theory claim 
that they ought to be permitted to do so; and 
many more would like to do so. 

R1574 : page 266 

This was the fatal mistake into which the 
Church began to fall in the second century; 



and the effort to realize this false conception 
culminated in the boastful, imperious counterfeiting 
of the coming Kingdom in Papacy, which 
for centuries sought to dominate the world, by 
claimed "divine authority." This idea has 
more or less pervaded and poisoned the ideas 
of all the Protestant "clergy" as well; who, 
copying Papacy's false ideas of the Church, 
claim also that the Church of Christ is now 
organized, though they make less boastful claims 
to "divine authority," to teach and rule mankind 
in general, than Papacy does. 

God's Church is not yet organized. On the 
contrary, the Gospel age has been the time for 
calling out and testing the volunteers willing to 
sacrifice and suffer with their Lord now, and 
thus prove themselves worthy (Rev. 3:4,5,21; 
2 Tim. 2:1 1,12; Rom. 8:17) to be organized 
as joint-heirs in his Kingdom at the close of 
the Gospel age, when he shall "set up" or 
organize his Kingdom in power and great 
glory, to bless and rule the world with "divine 
authority." 

In the meantime, these unorganized but merely 
called out ones, who are seeking to make 
their calling and election sure, that they may 
obtain a share in the Kingdom (2 Pet. 1:10; 
2 Cor. 5:9), are "a voluntary association of believers, 
drawn together for mutual assistance 
in seeking to know and to do the Master's 
will, that they may be accounted worthy the 
honors and glories promised, and not now to 
rule men by divine authority; for they have as 
yet no such authority. In this "voluntary association" 
of the consecrated there is no imperial 
authority of one over another; and no 
lording over God's heritage should be permitted; 
for the one and only Lord has left the 
instruction, "Be not ye called Rabbi; for one 
is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are 
brethren. "--Matt. 23:8. 

Instead of the kingly and lordly rule prevailing 
in the customs of the world, the Master 
gave all another and an opposite rule, saying, 
"Ye know that they which are accounted to 
rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over 
them; and their great ones exercise authority 
upon them. But so shall it not be among you; 
but whosoever will be great among you, shall 

R1574 : page 267 

be your minister [literally, servant]; and whosoever 
of you will be the chiefest, shall be 
servant of all [or greatest servant]; for even 
the Son of man came not to be ministered unto 



[to be served], but to minister [to serve], 
and to give his life a ransom for many."— 
Mark 10:42-45. 

The Lord was chief servant; and those among 
the apostles who served the Church at greatest 
cost to themselves— Paul, Peter, John and James 
—are esteemed, by those who have the spirit 
of the truth, in proportion to their service, and 
not in proportion to their titles, their priestly 
vestments, or their praise among men, etc., of 
which they had none. 

The Church, or company of believers, probationers 
for coming glory, in its "voluntary 
association," was indeed to recognize "teachers," 
"helps," "apostles," etc., but not to make 
them. If they recognize a man "mighty in 
the Scriptures," "apt to teach," able to make 
clear the divine plan, and specially qualified to 
build them up in the most holy faith, they 
gladly acknowledge God's favor in raising up 
among them such a servant of all to assist them 
in the understanding of his Word. But they 
should be careful always, even while rejoicing 
in and thanking God for such a servant, to require 
a "thus saith the Lord" for every point 
of doctrine, and to search the Scriptures daily 
to see whether these things be so— whether the 
deductions and arguments of the teacher agree 
with the whole testimony of God's revealed 
plan. 

Thus the Lord is the teacher of his followers, 
sending, now and again, of their own number, 
certain ones to call attention to truths 
being overlooked, or to injurious errors being 
entertained. The "meek" among the probationers 
will hear the Master's voice by whomsoever 
he speaks; and these will be guided into 
the truth, and prepared in due time for 
organization as his Kingdom. "The meek 
will he teach his way."— Psa. 25:9. 

Thus seen, both the Catholic and the Protestant 
views of the Church are erroneous. The 
Catholic view gets the future organization applied 
to the present time, and the Protestant 
view, though ridding itself of some of that error, 
carries along enough of it to injure itself; 
for, instead of admitting all consecrated believers 
into a "voluntary association," in which 
God would raise up his own teachers, Protestantism 
attempts also to organize and bind with 
creeds and confessions into various sects, each 
of which, anxious to perpetuate itself and its 
ideas, selects and makes its own teachers in its 
own seminaries. 

THE TRUE CHURCH. 



To-day there are many organizations claiming 
to be the Church, and having various bonds 
of union; but we wish now to show, upon the 
authority of God's Word, first, what Church 
our Lord established, and what are its bonds 
of union; second, that every Christian should 
belong to that Church; third, the injurious 
effects of joining the wrong church; and fourth, 
having joined the right Church, what would 
be the results of losing our membership. 

First, then, the Church which our Lord Jesus 
began to gather during his ministry, and which 
was recognized by the Father at Pentecost, 
after the ransom price for all was paid, was the 
little company of disciples who had consecrated 
earthly time, talents and life, a sacrifice 
to God. Theirs was a "voluntary association" 
for mutual aid; and this society was 
under the laws and government of Christ, its 
head or recognized ruling authority. The bonds 
were bonds of love and common interest. 
Since all were enlisted under the captaincy of 
Jesus, the hopes and fears, joys and sorrows 
and aims of one were those of the others; and 
thus they had a far more perfect union of hearts 
than could possibly be had from a union on 
the basis of any man-made creed. Thus their 
only union was of the spirit; their law for the 
government of each was love; and all, as a 
whole, were put under obedience to the "law 
of the spirit," as it was expressed in the life, 
actions and words of their Lord. Their government 
was the will of him who said, "If ye 
love me, keep my commandments." 

There are two senses in which the true Church 
of Christ may be considered: All who, like 
the early Church, are fully consecrated to the 
doing of our Father's will, amenable only to 

R1574 : page 268 

Christ's will and government, recognizing and 
obeying none other— these, the saints, from 
the beginning of the gospel age down to its 
close, when all of this class are sealed— 
constitute 

"THE CHURCH OF THE FIRST-BORN, 



[whose names are] written in heaven." These 
are all one in aim, hope and suffering, and in 



due time will be joint-heirs with Christ Jesus 
to the great "inheritance of the saints in 
light"— joint-heirs with him of the Kingdom 
which God has promised to them that love him. 

The other sense, in which this same class is 
recognized, is by counting a part for the whole. 
Thus all the living of this class may be spoken 
of as "the Church;" or, again, any part of this 
class of living followers who may meet together 
may properly be called the Church; for, wherever 
two or three are assembled, the Lord has 
promised to be among them. Consequently, 
that would be a Church meeting— an assembly 
of "the Church of the First-born." The general 
assembly will be when all the Church are 
made like their Head, and glorified with him. 

Such, then, is our definition of the Church 
of Christ. It is perfectly illustrated by Paul 
(Rom. 12:4,5), when he compares the Church 
to a human body. In this figure the head represents 
our Lord, and all who are his constitute 
the body, over which the head rules. Jesus 
has been and always will be the Head over his 
Church as a whole; he is likewise the Head 
and ruler of the entire living Church; and 
in every assembly where two or three meet 
in his name (when his Word is sought and 
heeded), he is the Head, ruler and teacher.— 
Eph. 1:20-23. 

If it be asked, In what sense does he teach? 
we answer, by exercising the qualities of the 
Head or teacher; by using one or more of those 
present as his mouth-pieces in unfolding truth, 
strengthening faith, encouraging hope, inspiring 
zeal, etc., just as the head of the human 
body calls upon one member to minister to another. 
But here a word of caution: If one become 
as useful a member as a right hand, he 
should take care that he assume not the position 
and authority of the Head, to put forth 
his own words and ideas as truth. He must 
ever remember that his highest honor is to be 
an index-finger to point out, or a mouth-piece 
to express, the will of the one Lord and Master. 
Be not puffed up: pride will paralyze and 
render useless. "Be not ye called Rabbi 
[master, teacher], for one is your Master [head], 
even Christ, and all ye are brethren." And 
let not the least member despise his office, 
"for if all were one member, where were the 
body?" "Nay, those members of the body 
which seem to be more feeble are necessary" 
—"God hath set the members, every one of 
them, in the body, as it hath pleased him."— 
ICor. 12:12-31. 

How simple, beautiful and effectual is God's 



plan of the "voluntary association" of his 
children ! 

This brings us to our second proposition, viz." 
that all Christians should be joined to this association 
or incipient organization. In the 
light of what has just been said as to the class 

R1575 : page 268 

constituting the Church which our Lord is 
calling, it is evident that if you have given up 
all your will, talent, time, etc., you are recognized 
by the Lord as a probationary member 
of the Church, of which he is the Head, and 
whose names are written in heaven. Thus, by 
consecration, we join the true Church, and have 
our names recorded in heaven. But, says one, 
must I not join some organization on earth, 
assent to some creed, and have my name written 
on earth? No: remember that our Lord 
is our pattern and teacher, and neither in his 
words nor acts do we find any authority for 
binding ourselves with creeds and traditions 
of men, which all tend to make the Word of 
God of none effect, and bring us under a 
bondage which will hinder our growth in grace 
and knowledge, and against which Paul warned 
us, saying, "Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made you free, and 
be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage." 
-Gal. 5:1. 

Another says: If it is not proper to unite 
with any of the present nominal churches, would 
it not be well to form a visible association of 
our own? Yes, this is what we have— a society 
modeled after that of the early Church. 

R1575 : page 269 

We think we have come back to primitive 
simplicity. The Lord Jesus alone is our Head 
or law-giver; his Word is our rule of faith and 
practice; the holy Spirit is our interpreter and 
guide into truth; our names are all written in 
heaven; and we are bound together by love 
and common interest. 

Do you inquire— How shall we know one 
another? We ask, How can we help knowing 
one another when the spirit of our Master is 
made manifest in word and act and manner 
and look? Yes, the living faith, the unfeigned 
love, the long-suffering meekness, the childlike 
simplicity, coupled with the constancy and zeal 
of maturity, make manifest the sons of God, 
and we need no earthly record, for the names 
of all such are written in the Lamb's book of life. 



Do the sick need visiting or assistance? 
These stand ready with consecrated time. Does 
the Lord's work require money? These stand 
ready with consecrated means. Does his work 
bring upon them the reproach of the world, and 
of a degenerate nominal church? These have 
also sacrificed reputation and all else to God. 

But, again, do you inquire, How shall we 
deal with one who walks disorderly in our 
midst? if we have no organization such as we 
see about us, how can we free ourselves from 
such, as the Lord requires us to do? We answer: 
Do just as the Scriptures direct. 

Now, as in the early Church, there are various 
degrees of advancement among the individual 
members, and, Paul says (1 Thes. 5:14), 
some are feeble-minded, comfort them; some 
are weak, support them; but, while you should 
be patient toward all, warn the disorderly 
(those who are drifting away from the true 
spirit of Christ). Don't mistake the disorderly 
for the weak, and comfort them, nor for the 
feeble-minded, and support them; but patiently, 
lovingly, warn the disorderly. Whom does 
he call disorderly? There are many ways of 
walking disorderly. In 2 Thes. 3: 1 1, he speaks 
of some who work not at all, but are busy-bodies, 
and says they should do as he did— work, that 
they be not chargeable to any; and if any will 
not work, neither should he eat. Thus he 
said he did, that he might be an example to 
others; and (verse 14), after you have warned 
such a one, if he "obey not,. ..note that 
man, and have no company with him, that he 
may be ashamed.... Yet count him not as 
an enemy, but admonish him as a brother." 
He warns us also against immoral and unjust 
persons, and those who wrest (twist) the Scriptures, 
and thus turn the truth of God into a lie. 
And the following citations clearly show that, 
in the Apostle's estimation, doctrinal disorders 
are among the chief.— 2 Thes. 3:6-14; 1 Cor. 5:11; 
Eph. 5:6-11; Rom. 16:17; 2 John 9-11; 
Gal. 1:8,9; Tit. 3:10. 

Our Lord gives explicit directions where 
there is a matter of offense between two brethren 
(Matt. 18:15,17): "If thy brother shall 
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault 
between thee and him alone. If he shall hear 
thee, thou hast gained thy brother; but if he 
will not hear thee, then take with thee one or 
two more, that in the mouth of two or three 
witnesses every word may be established. And 
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto 
the Church [the company of brethren who assemble 
together]; but if he neglect to hear the 



Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen 
man and a publican." If, under the captaincy 
of our Head, we heed his commands, which 
we will do if we love him, how few will be the 
misunderstandings and difficulties among the 
brethren. And if the true brotherhood in 
Christ is in any degree realized, the admonition 
of the Apostle will be gladly heeded— "Not 
forsaking the assembling of yourselves together, 
and so much the more, as ye see the day drawing 
on."-Heb. 10:25. 

And if new converts be properly begotten 
by the Word of Truth, they will be far more 
eager to meet with two or three possessed of 
the right spirit and seeking to understand the 
Word of the Lord, than they would be to mingle 
with those whose religion consists chiefly 
of forms of godliness. And here will be the 
opportunity for those who are strong [in the 
faith and love of God] to bear the infirmities 
of the weak and not to please themselves 
merely— in the choice of subjects, studies, etc. 

Should the newly enlightened one know none 
with whom he can meet personally and regularly, 
let him not forget his privilege of communion 

R1575 : page 270 

with the Father and the Son in prayer, 
and with the WATCH TOWER by mail; and let 
him seek for others of the truth-hungry among 
his neighbors— "holding forth the Word of 
life," the Truth. 

This association has its evangelists, pastors 
and teachers, appointed and directed by the 
Lord. (1 Cor. 12:28.) They need no laying 
on of hands by the so-called "apostolic succession;" 
for the "Spirit of the Lord hath 
anointed" all the members of the body "to 
preach," etc. (Isa. 61:1), and it is the duty 
of every member of the body to exercise his 
office for the edification of the other members. 
All the true Church are priests, an association 
of priests, and not an association under the 
control of a clerical or priestly class. (1 Pet. 2:9.) 
There is one great Bishop or overseer, 
who, from time to time, raises up and sends 
his own special messengers to uncover truths, 
overthrow errors, etc.— Luther seems to have 
been one of these, and Wesley another. But 
our Lord retains the Bishopric himself. (1 Pet. 2:25.) 
How complete is the voluntary union 
of the Church of Christ, with its heaven-written, 
love-bound, Spirit-ruled membership, and 
how sad the error of mistaking the nominal for 
the real Church! 



The importance of our fourth proposition 
need not be urged. It would, indeed, be a 
dreadful calamity to lose our membership in 
the true Church or body of Christ. And no 
member is out of danger except when keeping 
a vigilant watch over the old nature, counted 
dead, lest it come to life again, and assert itself 
in the form of pride, selfishness, envy, 
evil-speaking— or what not? But, filled with 
love (the love that prompts to sacrifice), and 
clothed with humility, and under cover of the 
redeeming blood, we are safe in the Church 
(the body), having the assurance that it is our 
"Father's good pleasure to give us the 
Kingdom." 

Yes, the Kingdom is the glorious destiny of 
the true Church— the "little flock"— now treading 
the pathway of humiliation, and drinking 
the bitter cup of death. The glory that shall 
be revealed in us does not yet appear, except 
to the eye of faith, but the temptations and 
trials are very apparent on every hand. "Let 
us, therefore, fear lest, a promise being left us 
of entering into his rest, any of you should 
seem to come short of it."— Heb. 4:1. 

Thus Paul warned others, and thus he feared, 
lest even after having preached to others, he 
himself should be a castaway. (1 Cor. 9:27.) 
We may have our names cast out as evil by 
those of the nominal church, and yet "rejoice 
and be exceeding glad because our names are 
written in heaven." They may frown upon us 
and despitefully use us and say all manner of 
evil against us falsely, or they may seek to win 
us back by flattery, saying they cannot afford 
to lose our influence, we could do so much 
good by remaining among them, etc.; but we 
must let none of these things move us; but, 
rather, rejoice that we are counted worthy to 
suffer (Acts 5:41,42) for his name's sake. Oh, 
how necessary in this "evil day" is the faith 
"That bears unmoved the world's dark frown, 

Nor heeds its flattering smile; 
That seas of trouble cannot drown, 
Nor Satan's arts beguile." 

Dearly beloved, let us again repeat the 
warning: "Stand fast in the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made you free, and be not again 
entangled with the yoke of bondage." 

CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP. 



Humanity longs for fellowship; and, of recent 
years, the morally inclined have very 



generally found this in the nominal, Protestant 

churches— in their committees, socials, prayer-meetings, 

etc. Such fellowship and such influences 

have done much to elevate the tone 

and moral and respectable standard of the 

world; but such fellowships are seldom worthy 

of the name Christian fellowship; because, 

not Christ and his Word, but worldly ambitions, 

pride, dress, show and social gossip are 

generally the grounds and subjects of fellowship. 

Hence, while disapproving church organizations 

as churches, we do esteem them as 

R1576 : page 270 

the highest order of worldly diversion. For, 
although they are often schools in which pride, 
envy, hatred and scandals are cultivated, these 
evils are less gross than the many vices which 
flourish outside these schools of morality. 

R1576 : page 271 

But, however beneficial these social clubs, 
called churches, may be to the world, as tending 
to tone down murder to malice and envy, 
and to moderate theft to slander— the really 
consecrated believer, who has passed from 
death unto life, finds in them but little real 
fellowship, except as he discovers here and 
there a kindred spirit, similarly begotten to 
newness of life,— to new motives, thoughts, 
words and deeds. Nevertheless, custom draws 
them together, and the very thought of disturbing 
that social union is dreadful, because, 
poor as it is, it is all they have. 

Then, to many, there comes the thought of 
influence— upon wife or husband or child or 
sister or brother or friend. What if their withdrawal 
and the admission that their church 
and all others are really worldly and unsatisfying 
should hinder some one from joining 
some church, and thus, outwardly at least, from 
confessing Christ? What then? Perhaps next 
winter their social club will get up a revival of 
religion, and, by dint of an imported revivalist, 
and hymns, and prayers, and sermons, hot 
with descriptions or inferences of the everlasting 
torment awaiting all who do not join some 
sect, some might be induced to assume the 
outward forms of godliness without the power; 
and, by withdrawing now you would be debarred 
from helping them in this work.— What 
then? 

So much the better, we answer. If we have 
found that God's name and character are dishonored 



and misrepresented by every denomination 

of Christendom, why should we want 

our children and friends to join a society under 

those dishonoring confessions of mis-belief? 

Why should we want to join in such work— so 

contrary to all that our Lord and the apostles 

taught and practiced?— which so seriously misrepresents, 

to the seeker after God, the real way 

to find him, and which so deceives the penitent 

as to what is the real "Church of the living 

God"— "whose names are written in heaven?" 

Why should not every one who finds the truth, 

or, rather, who is found by the truth, in this 

time of harvest, be glad to use every atom of 

his influence for the truth, and against those 

errors which bind so many of God's dear saints? 

Surely the more conscientious we are the 
more we must regret the influence already given 
in years past toward error, to God's dishonor 
and to the enslavement of his children; and 
the more must be our anxiety to reverse our 
influence as rapidly as possible, in order that 
our future influence for the truth may as far as 
possible counteract past influence given to error. 
And, if we find the bonds of sectarianism difficult 
and painful to burst, we should the more 
jealously seek to spare our children similar 
pain. An outward confession of full consecration 
to Christ, not lived up to, and of faith 
in a creed not really believed, is an injury to 
whoever makes it. Better far teach your children 
to be honest with themselves, with others, 
and above all with God, than teach them to 
stultify themselves by dishonest professions. 
It will be to their advantage now, as well as in 
the purgatory of the future. See TRACT NO. 
17— Purgatory. 

But, still, we will need fellowship. And the 
scarcity of the proper sort in the nominal 
churches should lead us nearer to the Lord, 
that we may the more appreciate and value his 
love, his Word, his fellowship, and the love 
and fellowship of all who are of his true family 
and spirit. Soon you will learn to appreciate 
the words of our Master— as true respecting 
the worldly church to-day, as in his day— 
"Marvel not, if the world hate you; ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you;" "for 
the friendship of the world is enmity against 
God." Thus, separated more and more from 
the worldly-spirited, you will learn what the 
Apostle meant when he said, "Hereby we 
know that we have passed from death unto life, 
because we love the brethren." Your love for 
Jesus, our Elder Brother, will grow more intense, 
affecting your every thought, word and 



deed, and begetting a love for all who bear his 
likeness; and this love will not depend upon 
wealth or personal beauty or social conditions. 
But only those somewhat grown in the spirit 
and likeness of our Redeemer can appreciate 
such counsel or such fellowship. Others love 
the worldly because the love of the Father has 
not been developed in them, and because they 
do not hate every evil way. 

R1576 : page 272 

THE TRUE CHURCH NOT A SECT. 



The Church of Christ is neither a sect nor 
an aggregation of sects: it is one and indivisible. 
It is Christ and all who are united to him; 
—joined by a living faith in his redemptive 
work for them, and in a full consecration to 
him, his will and his work, even unto death. 
This true Church is represented by our Lord 
himself under the simile of a vine, of which 
and in which all truly his are, individually, 
branches. 

Webster's Dictionary defines the word "sect" 
to mean,— "A part cut off,. ..hence a body 
of persons who have separated from others by 
virtue of some special doctrine, or set of doctrines, 
which they hold in common." 

This description fits all the various denominations 
of Christendom. All separate themselves 
from other Christians; all do so by virtue 
of some doctrine or set of doctrines which they 
hold in common. But the members of the true 
Church are each individually united to Christ, 
and not to each other. As the spokes of a 
wheel are each separately fastened in the hub, 
so each member of the body of Christ is, in 
his inner or spiritual life, bound only to Christ. 
And as the tire steadies and gives unity of operation 
to the spokes at their extremities, so 
love, the bond of perfectness, is the only bond 
that should be permitted between those whose 
wills are buried into Christ's. 

Our Lord declared that he did not come to 
put a patch or amendment upon Judaism, nor 
to put the new wine of his teaching into the 
old bottles of Judaism. It follows that Christianity 
is not a schism or sect or split off from 
Judaism. It is, on the contrary, a new system 
of religious teaching, based upon a New Covenant 
made between God and man by Christ 
the Mediator, whose blood sealed that new 
covenant and made it operative. 



The only test of fellowship therefore is,— to 
be a Christian; one truly united to Christ by 
faith and consecration;— not without a real 
consecration, nor without the true faith. But 
the meaning of a full consecration of thought, 
word and deed is readily understood by some 
who doubt and question what is the true faith 
necessary to the true membership in Christ— 
the faith at first delivered unto the saints by 
our Lord and his apostles. This true faith is 
—that all were sinners, justly under God's condemnation 
to death through the fall; that Christ 
Jesus our Lord died for OUR SINS according to 
the Scriptures, and that he was raised from the 
dead by the Father, who thus gave assurance 
to all that Christ's sin-offering on our behalf 
was complete and fully satisfactory, the signing 
and sealing of the New Covenant under which 
all of Adam's race who are sick of sin and desirous 
of harmony with God can be justified 
and return to his love, favor and blessing. 
(1 Cor. 15:3,4; Rom. 5:1,6,12,18.) Whoever 
holds this simple faith is a believer, a 
member of "the household of faith." Whoever 
with this faith fully consecrates himself 
to the Lord's service is a baptized believer, a 
probationary member of the one, true Church 
whose names are written in heaven. If he 
run the Christian race as he has covenanted to 
do, he will win the prize, and be one of the 
elect Church in glory, granted a place with 
the Lord in his throne. 

This is the basis of our hope: the only foundation 
—the one which no man ever could lay, 
but which God laid for us (1 Cor. 3:11); for, 
"while we were yet sinners, Christ died for 
us" (Rom. 5:8), the "just for the unjust, that 
he might bring us to God." (1 Pet. 3:18.) 
Realizing ourselves as sinners under condemnation 
to death, and that we may have peace 
with God and be justified to life by appropriating 
to ourselves the merits of his death, we 
gladly accept him as our Redeemer. "We 
have redemption through his blood, even the 
forgiveness of sins." (Eph. 1:7.) This is justification; 
and, being thus justified by faith, we 
have peace with God. Then, realizing, further, 
that those who are thus redeemed should not 
live the remainder of their lives to themselves 
and their own pleasure, but to him who died 
for them (2 Cor. 5:14,15), we consecrate ourselves 
to his service. 

Built upon this foundation are the minor 
doctrines and those principles which must be 
worked out in the life. Thus we are admonished 
by the Apostle (2 Pet. 1:5-8) to add to this 



R1576 : page 273 

faith various graces and further attainments— 

of virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, 

brotherly -kindness and charity (love). 

This was the faith of the early Church; and 
this is the faith of all who acceptably bear the 
name of Christ; and such only are properly 
termed Christians. True, the early Church 
progressed beyond these first principles, to the 
use of the "strong meat," and a comprehension, 
with all saints, of the deep things of God; but 
the "babes in Christ," and those "who, by 
reason of use, had their senses exercised," 
were together one family— "all one in Christ 
Jesus." They were not to leave these principles 
by displacing them by other theories, but 
by adding to them as above explained. The 
more advanced in grace and doctrine bore the 
infirmities of the weak, each and all seeking 

R1577 : page 273 

to grow in grace and knowledge, more and 
more. Where this apostolic rule was observed, 
there could be no sect, no division in this 
body. It was only when error began to develop 
in the congregations that Paul wrote to some: 
I hear that there are divisions (sects) among 
you, and I partly believe it; for it is evident 
from what I learn of the worldliness and error 
coming in among you, that there would of 
necessity be divisions; for those true to the 
Lord could not have fellowship with such unfruitful 
works of darkness, but must rather reprove 
them.-lCor. 11:18,19. 

Divisions were objected to in the one true 
Church, and all the apostles taught that there 
is one Lord, one faith and one baptism. There 
is one fold and one Shepherd. (1 Cor. 12:25.) 
Christians are a separated class— separate from 
the world, separate from sinners, separate from 
all others— in that they accept salvation through 
the redeeming blood of Christ. Their sympathy 
and co-operation are not of force, doctrinal 
or other, but merely of love and common 
interest, as fellow-pilgrims and fellow-heirs. 
The doctrine of the ransom serves to guard 
each one thus in Christ against all professing 
Christ's name but denying or ignoring this 
fundamental part of his work. Not collectively 
but individually the saints should have no fellowship 
with works of darkness.— Eph. 5:11. 

It is not remarkable that Satan should seek 
to divide and separate the sheep, and to put 



up fences, such as the denominational creeds 
prove to be, which would hinder some of the 
sheep from following the Shepherd into green 
pastures of fresh and living truth. This would 
be but wisdom on his part. But it is strange 
that he should be able to fetter the reason of 
so many, that they should think it a mark of 
spirituality to say, I am of Luther, a Lutheran; 
I of Calvin or Knox, a Presbyterian; I of 
Wesley, a Methodist, and so on. The Apostle 
Paul, on the contrary, said to some of his day, 
who were in danger of this spirit of sectarianism: 
While one saith, I am of Paul, and I of 
Apollos, and I of Peter, are ye not carnal? 
Is it not in direct opposition to the spirit of 
Christ to think or act thus? "Is Christ divided?" 
Did Paul or Peter or Knox or Calvin 
or Wesley or any one else than Christ die 
for your sins, and redeem you? They, as servants 
of Christ and the Church, should be 
esteemed very highly for their works' sake, but 
to name the Bride after any other than the 
Bridegroom is manifestly improper. 

Oh, that all could see that in God's sight 
there is but one Church— whose names are 
written in heaven— and that God cannot and 
does not sympathize with or recognize any 
split in the real Church. He does not recognize 
the narrow creeds in which so many of 
the sheep are confined and starving. As we 
have shown, he has placed but one fence 
around his fold. Inside of it there is plenty 
of room, for both the lambs and the fully 
matured sheep. 

A PARABLE OF FALSE SHEEP-FOLDS. 



Picture in your mind a fine, large pasture, 
surrounded by a strong and high fence (the 
Law of God), which keeps all the sheep within, 
but which recognizes no means of access to 
that fold (justified condition), except Christ, 
the door, faith in whose sacrifice for sin is the 
only way into the fold. All climbing into the 
fold by any other way are thieves and robbers. 
This is the pasture provided by the Good 
Shepherd for his sheep, for whom he once laid 
down his life. Into the true fold of Christ 
quite a flock of sheep have entered. They belong 

R1577 : page 274 

to the true Shepherd; but, as we look 

before us at the grassy slopes, only a few sheep, 



a little flock indeed, seem to be enjoying the 
liberty of the fold— the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made them free. Where are the others? 
We look, and see inside the door, on either 
side of the pathway, small enclosures. Over 
each is written a peculiar name— Presbyterian, 
Methodist, Baptist, Second Adventist, Roman 
Catholic, Greek Catholic, Episcopalian, Lutheran, 
etc. Looking at these pens we find 
they differ. Some are built like prisons with 
iron frames and bars and chains, others less 
strong, and some are merely marked out "dead 
lines," over which the sheep understand they 
must not go. 

These pens are full of sheep, but they are 
weak, delicate and sickly for lack of proper 
exercise and fresh, nourishing food. They are 
regularly fed, but only upon husks, with occasionally 
a little milk, but they eat without relish 
and get no good from it. Many of them 
are leaner and poorer than when they first entered 
the fold, and some have become blind. 
Strange to say, all seem to be perfectly satisfied, 
each with his own pen, and very seldom 
does one attempt to escape. 

We also noticed that under-shepherds had been 
appointed to help to pasture the sheep, and that 
they had constructed these pens, but apparently 
without the Chief Shepherd's permission. 

Perplexed to know why the sheep thus submitted 
to be penned, we watched to see how 
they were induced to enter the various enclosures. 
As they entered the fold through the 
only door (faith in Christ), each under-shepherd 
tried to impress upon them, as they passed, 
the necessity of getting into one of the many 
pens, and the desirability of the particular one 
he represented. As a consequence, nearly all 
the sheep which entered the fold got penned, 
for they trusted the under-shepherds and followed 
the majority; and only a few passed on 
to enjoy all the liberty of the fold. The under-shepherds 
sought continually to impress upon 
their sheep that the free sheep were heretics 
and en route to destruction. 

We watched to see the end of this matter, 
for we learned that the Chief Shepherd was expected 
by some, and we knew that his coming 
would soon demonstrate whether he approved 
this dividing and imprisoning of his flock. 
Nearly all the under-shepherds claimed that he 
would not come for a long time yet. 

Presently we heard great rejoicing among 
the free sheep. We looked, and found that 
the Chief Shepherd had come quietly, unobservedly 
("as a thief"), and was now recognized 



by some of the sheep; and hence the 
rejoicing. Some of those imprisoned heard 
the Shepherd's voice: they looked and listened, 
yet could scarce believe. It was indeed the 
voice of the Shepherd as he tended and ordered 
his flock. His true sheep seemed to hear his 
voice condemning the penning process, and 
saying to his sheep: "Come out!" 

Some leaped the fences and thus gained liberty 
and food from the Shepherd's hand, while 
others were so weak and faint for lack of nourishment 
that they trembled with anticipation, 
but did not come out through fear of the 
under-shepherds. We noticed, outside the 
fences, that some of the free sheep brought 
food to the bars, thus nourishing the weak ones 
until they were strong enough to leap the fence. 
The under-shepherds, meanwhile, were alert 
with redoubled vigilance, and by varying policies 
sought to keep control of their (?) flocks. 
Some denounced and scoffed at those without, 
and threatened the sheep within; and others 
redoubled the customary exercises— the "forms 
of godliness." 

We waited to see the outcome, and saw the 
unfaithful under-shepherds bound and beaten 
with stripes, the prison-pens all destroyed, and 
the fold used as designed— the flock one, its 
name one, and its head— the true Shepherd who 
gave his life for the sheep— Christ Jesus. 

"COME OUT OF HER, MY PEOPLE!" 



In Revelation 18:4-8, we have most emphatic 
instructions from our Lord, respecting our 
proper course at the present time. This advice 
was not always applicable: not until mystic 
Babylon's fall under divine condemnation, 
which prophecy shows was in A.D. 1878. As 
shown in the Scriptures, Babylon, the mother 
of abominations, had long misrepresented the 

R1577 : page 275 

truth and the true Church, which to a large 
extent was in her and in her daughter systems 
(See M. DAWN, VOL. II., pages 271-282, VOL. 
III., pages 135-197); but her sentence of rejection 
was reserved until the time of "harvest." 

The expression, "Come out of her, my people," 
indicates clearly that some of God's true saints 
have been in Babylon, and that, up to the 
time of her fall, God did not object to their 
being in the nominal church systems, and did 



not call on them to come out. Indeed the 
Lord himself sometimes spoke to and through 
Babylon up to the time when, having knocked 
at the door, declared his presence, and been 
unheeded by the self-conscious, but really blind 
and miserable Laodicea, he spewed her out of 
his mouth (to be no longer his mouth-piece) 
forever.— Rev. 3:14-22. 

But now the judgment of the great Millennial 
day has begun; and its beginning is with the 
Church— to separate the true from the false or 
nominal. 

To accomplish this separation, the truth— 
"the sword of the spirit"— sharper than any 
two-edged sword, is unsheathed. The conflict 
now in progress between truth and error, light 
and darkness, is for the very purpose of testing, 
sifting and separating the "children of light," 
who love the truth, from the children of darkness, 
who love the error. As heretofore shown, 
the second advent of our Lord is in this respect 
like his first advent; and his words, 
"Think not that I am come to send peace on 
earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword" 
(Luke 12:51), are applicable now;— until his 
Church has been gathered and glorified, and 
his Kingdom set up in glorious authority. 

The expression, "that ye be not partakers 
of her sins, and receive not of her plagues," 
implies that, in this time in which they are 

R1578 : page 275 

called out, God's people will be brought to a 

clear knowledge of the truth;— they will see 

clearly what constitute Babylon's sins— errors 

of doctrine and of life. And, when so enlightened, 

those who are God's people, having 

his spirit, his love for right and truth, will hate 

the error and darkness in which for so long 

they have been. Such will be ready and anxious 

to know their duty toward the nominal 

church. The effect of the light of truth upon 

their hearts will be such that they will instinctively 

feel and ask themselves, "What communion 

hath light with darkness?" and will 

be merely asking the Lord to indicate to them 

his wisdom and will. To such the Lord answers, 

through his Word, "Come out of her, 

my people." 

The expression, "that ye be not partakers 
of her sins," is in the nature of a reminder, 
as well as a threat. It is a reminder that, when 
in ignorance of the truth, they had no responsibility 
for the errors and the wrong course of 
Babylon, mother and daughters; but that now 



that they see those errors— those sins— they are 
responsible; and that if now they stay in these 
systems they, by intelligently assenting, are as 
responsible as those who formulated those errors, 
or more so, and will surely and justly 
partake of the consequences. 

But, for various reasons, some seem anxious 
to excuse themselves, and to stay in Babylon. 
Such indicate that they lack the proper spirit 
of the truth, or else that they have not yet 
digested a sufficiency of the "meat in due 
season" to give them the necessary perception 
of her sins, which in the Lord's estimation are 
piled up to heaven. Another confusing thing 
is that some of the daughters of the Roman 
Mother have put away many of the mother's 
outward marks and forms, while retaining much 
of her spirit and doctrines. 

For instance, Baptists, Congregationalists, 
Second Adventists, Disciples, and a few other 
denominations, claim to be without bondage: 
claim that the Bible is their creed and that 
each group or congregation has charge of its 
own affairs, and that the meetings in which 
these independent congregations of each denomination 
unite are merely voluntary associations, 
in which denominational supervision or 
bondage finds no recognition. Then, especially 
with the "Disciples," the confession demanded 
is very simple. But they mostly mention 
the doctrine of the trinity, or eternal torment, 
or both. And where these are not specified, 
they are understood, and if attention be called 
to these subjects, or to the manner of our Lord's 
second coming, or to "the times of restitution," 

R1578 : page 276 

there is always a strong current of opposition, 
and, whether written or unwritten, a creed will 
be found which admits no Biblical examination 
or criticism; and, unless you assent, you 
must either keep quiet or get out. 

The word "creed" comes from credo, and 
means I believe. It is entirely proper that 
every Christian have for himself a creed, a belief. 
And, if a number of Christians come to 
a unity of faith upon the lines of the Word of 
God, their assembling together for fellowship 
and communion is both proper and helpful, as 
the Bible declares. The general difficulty is 
that, when groups of Christians meet as brethren, 
they either make a written or an understood 
creed, which goes beyond the Word of 
God and includes human tradition; or else 
they ignore all faith, and make morality— good 



works— the only basis of fellowship. But, as 
the name indicates, Christians are believers in 
Christ, and not merely moralists. While, therefore, 
a creed is necessary, and he who has none 
has no belief, and would therefore be an unbeliever, 
and while in Christian fellowship harmony 
of faith is necessary to communion, all 
should see that the fellowship and faith of the 
early Church, under divine direction, were built 
upon the first principles of the doctrine of 
Christ; and nothing more nor less should be 
the basis of Christian fellowship here and now. 

We will suggest a safe way to judge whether 
your present associations in the name of Christ 
are part of Babylon or not, and whether, therefore, 
you are one of those called to "Come 
out." It is this: If there is no meeting of the 
congregation at which, either by calling up a 
passage of Scripture for discussion, in which 
discussion you, with others, can present your 
views of God's Word, there is something wrong. 
You cannot long have fellowship there. Your 
light is under a bushel, and will go out, unless 
you give it more liberty. You must come out 
of such condition or your light will become 
darkness. 

But if there be meetings at which you have 
an equal opportunity with others of calling up 
any portion of Scripture and expressing your 
view of its meaning on a par with others, you 
may conclude that you have found at least some 
evidence of Christian liberty; for no Christian 
has the right to refuse to give, when asked, a 
reason for the hope that is in him. And since 
the credo or belief of each Christian professes 
to be built upon God's Word, it follows that 
each should be not only willing but ready at 
all times to change his belief for one more 
Scriptural, if such can be pointed out to him. 

Having found those who follow Berean methods, 
rejoice— but with fear, until you have 
tested them further. Do not abuse their hospitality 
by attempting to monopolize the time: 
be content and thankful to get your proportion 
of it. And, when your choice of a subject 
comes up, see (1) that it is wisely chosen, 
one that will strengthen, and not strangle, your 
hearers. (2) Pray that, as a minister (servant) 
of the truth, you may be "a workman that 
needeth not to be ashamed." (3) Let nothing 
be done through strife, contention or vainglorious 
effort to display yourself or your 
knowledge of the Word; but (4) "speak the 
truth in love," while you speak it none the less 
clearly and forcibly. 

So long as you have such opportunities to 



hear others and to express yourself, you may 
conclude that you are in a safe place. As you 
progress, in hearing from others, and in expressing 
yourself to others freely and candidly, 
either you and they will come into harmony 
in the spirit of the truth, or, if you be Scriptural, 
and they tenacious of views for which 
there is no Scriptural support, they will come 
to hate you and the truth, and soon you will 
find no fellowship with them. 

But in a majority of cases no such proving 
of spirits will be necessary. Generally you 
will find that congregations have formulated a 
creed to which each member is obliged to subscribe; 
—if not in writing or by voice, at 
least by silent assent. In such a case, get 
such creed or confession, and see whether or 
not it fairly, frankly and truthfully represents 
your faith. If it does not, you should lose no 
time in repudiating it, however conscientiously 
ignorant of it you may have been for years 
past. Now you know, and now if you remain 
in, intelligently, you belie yourself, and thus 
prove yourself not a lover of the truth and a 

R1578 : page 277 

pleaser of God, but a lover of error and a 
pleaser of men. 

It does not matter at all that you may have 
told the minister and some or all of the elders 
of the church of your disagreement and disbelief. 
They have no authority with God or 
men to absolve you from your public confession. 
If, for instance, you are a Presbyterian: 
it is not the minister nor the Session nor the 
local congregation merely that you have joined, 
but as well the entire body of Presbyterians, 
everywhere. And so long as you are professedly 
a member, you are obligated in your belief 
and conduct to them all. And before the 
whole world you stand numbered as one of 
them, and as a partner in all that is professed 
by them all in common. If you do not believe 
as they do, it is your duty to them all, and to the 
world, to withdraw, and thus set yourself and 
others right before all. If by the Lord's mercy 
you are one of the few passed from darkness 
into his marvelous light, you will now feel 
ashamed of the doctrines you once delighted 
to confess, and will delight to reduce by one 
the number of errorists, and to add one to the 
number of the despised little flock— disowned, 
indeed, of men, but owned and loved and 
cherished of God. 

As you did not join the minister or Session 



merely, but the congregation and the entire 
denomination, your dissolution of your membership 
should, if possible, be as public as was 
your joining. And, in reply to many inquiries, 
we suggest below a general outline for a letter 
of withdrawal which such as desire are at liberty 
to copy and use. If possible, it should be 
read aloud at some general congregational 
meeting, at which general speaking, remarks, 
etc., are in order— such as a prayer meeting. 
After being read, it should be handed to the 
leader of the meeting as the representative of 
the congregation and officers. If by reason 
of sickness or from any other cause this course 
be not possible, then let it be addressed on the 
envelope to all the members of the official 
board which examines candidates for membership, 
or which represents the congregation in 
spiritual matters. 

The suggested letter follows:— 
Dear Brethren and Sisters, 

Members and Officers of the 

Church. The Lord has of late been teaching 
me some wonderful things out of his Word, 
whereof I am glad. The Bible has become a 
new book to me, so widely have the eyes of 
my understanding been opened. God is now 
my Father, Christ my Redeemer, and all believers 

R1579 : page 277 

my brethren, in a sense never before 
appreciated. 

I would not have you understand that I saw 
a vision or had a special revelation: I merely 
have God's Word, "written aforetime for our 
learning;" but God has recently made it clearer 
to my understanding, through some of his 
servants. Nor do those servants claim special 
inspirations or revelations, but merely that God's 
due time has now come to unseal and make 
known his glorious plan, wisely kept secret in 
the past, as the Scriptures themselves declare. 
-Dan. 12:9. 

Of these blessed things I might mention a 
few, very briefly: I find that the Scriptures do 
not teach the eternal torment of all except the 
saints. I there find that the full penalty of 
wilful sin against clear knowledge will, in the 
language of the Apostle, be "everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord." But, 
still better, if possible, I find that, while so 
many of our race (indeed by far the majority) 
have died in total or partial ignorance of God 
and his offer of life everlasting through Christ, 
God has graciously provided that during the 



Millennial age all such, of the families of the 
earth, shall be blessed with the needed knowledge, 
and granted opportunity for obedience 
unto eternal life. And, further, I find its 
teaching to be, that we, the Gospel Church, as 
joint-heirs with Christ our Lord, are to be 
God's agents in bestowing that great Millennial 
blessing. And, finally, it appears that 
this time of blessing for which God's people 
have so long prayed, saying, "Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as it is 
done in heaven," is very near at hand, and 
even now wheat and tares are being separated, 
and soon a great time of trouble will overthrow 
existing institutions and usher in Christ's 
Kingdom of peace and equity. 

R1579 : page 278 

I will be glad to furnish the Scriptural evidences 
of these things to any who may desire 
to search the Word, and to prove whether these 
things be so. 

But now, dear friends, comes an unpleasant 
duty. I find that many of these gems of truth 
are in direct conflict with our views as held 
and taught and confessed in our denominational 
literature; and hence, in honesty to you and, 
myself, I must withdraw from membership 
with you in this church. To remain would be 
to misrepresent your views, and to have you 
misrepresent my views— the doctrine of the 
eternal torment of nine-tenths of our race being 
now in my judgment horrible;— indeed a 
blasphemy against the God of love, whose Word, 
when understood, teaches quite the contrary. 

For nearly. ..years I have tried faithfully 
to keep my engagements with you as a fellow-member 
of this church, and have learned to 
love some of you very dearly— some for social 
qualities and some for saintliness— Christ-likeness. 
It is, therefore, with pain that I announce 
to you my withdrawal, and I owe you 
this explanation. Let me assure you that it is 
not because my love is less than formerly, for, 
by God's grace, I believe it is expanding toward 
him and his, and, sympathetically, toward 
all our race. This action, therefore, is 
not to be understood as a withdrawal from the 
Church of Christ, whose names are written in 
heaven, but merely a withdrawal from the 
...Church, whose names are written on 
earth. I withdraw in order that I may be more 
free in my conscience, toward God and men, 
and that I may most fully fellowship all who 
are heartily the Lord's people— not only such 



in this congregation and denomination, but in 
all others as well. I ask no letter of dismission, 
for I could not hope to be better suited 
elsewhere. So far as I am concerned, I wish 
to remove every barrier between myself and 
fellow pilgrims. So then, to all of you who 
are in Christ Jesus— members of his body— I 
still am a fellow member, a branch in the true 
vine (Christ), whom nothing can separate from 
the love of God in Christ, my Lord.— John 15:5; 
Rom. 8:38,39. 



R1579 : page 278 

THE EMBRYO KINGDOM OF GOD, 

AND ITS PRESENT PRIVILEGES. 

"For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but 
righteousness, and peace, and joy in a holy spirit." 
-Rom. 14:17.- 



THOSE who have studied the subject of the 
Kingdom of God, as presented in the Scriptures, 
and treated in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., 
have not only noticed its prominence in the 
Word of God, and that it constitutes the sum 
and substance of the gospel theme (Matt. 4:23; 
Matt. 10:7; Luke 9:60), but they have also 
marked the difference between the Kingdom 
established in glory and power, and the 
Kingdom in its incipient or formative stage— 
the Kingdom in its humiliation, as it at present 
exists. 

To the Kingdom established (at the second 
presence of Christ) belong all those precious 
promises of its glory. Its dominion shall be 
"from sea to sea, and from the river unto the 
ends of the earth;" its royal members shall 
shine forth as the sun in glory and majesty and 
power; its authority will go forth in righteousness; 
and its blessing of peace and joy and 
justice will be realized by all the families of the 
earth. But to this Kingdom in its humiliation 
belong those prophecies which tell how the 
Kingdom of heaven must suffer violence, how 
the violent should take it by force, and how its 
members would be despised and rejected of men 
and counted as the filth and offscouring of the 
world, and be hated of all men. 

It is easy to see that the one is yet future, 
while the other is present. And it is the 



privilege of the saints who now constitute the 
kingdom in its humiliation, to avail themselves 
of its present privileges, and to look forward in 
joyful anticipation to its future establishment 
and reign. In its future glory we see both its 

R1580 : page 278 

visible, earthly phase, in which Abraham and 
Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets shall sit 
down, and from which all the unworthy of the 

R1580 : page 279 

Jewish age shall be excluded (Luke 13:28; 
Matt. 8:11,12), and also a higher spiritual 
phase, whose royalty will be Christ and the 
apostles and all the faithful overcomers of the 
Gospel age. 

But while we dwell with special delight upon 
the glory and blessing of the established 
Kingdom of the near future, it is our present 
purpose to notice what are the privileges of 
being in the Kingdom now. In the Apostle's 
days, some Christians got the idea that its 
chief privilege consisted in their freedom from 
the ceremonies of the Jewish law, which formerly 
restricted them in eating and drinking 
and enjoined the keeping of sabbaths and holy 
days; and now they rejoiced that they were no 
longer under the Law, but under grace (Rom. 6:14): 
they could eat and drink what they 
pleased, so far as the Law was concerned, and 
might esteem every day alike, or set apart any 
day they might choose to be holy to the Lord. 
(Rom. 14:1-16.) And some, specially prizing 
this liberty, used it thoughtlessly to the 
injury of weaker brethren, who had not yet 
learned of this freedom from the yoke of the 
Law. 

The Apostle remonstrates with these, and 
urges them to more carefulness, lest their good 
be evil spoken of. Then he declares that 
the Kingdom blessings and privileges do not 
consist in a mere release from these requirements 
of the Law, and consequently a little 
more freedom in eating and drinking, etc., but, 
rather, that its privileges consist in "righteousness 
[the imputed righteousness of Christ, making 
us acceptable to God as his sons], and peace 
[there being now "no condemnation to them 
that are in Christ Jesus"], and joy in a holy 
spirit [in the joy that comes from the possession 
of the spirit or mind of Christ]." These 
blessings— of justification through faith in 
Christ, of peace with God, and of joy in the 



possession of a holy mind— are blessings which 
the world cannot give or take away. 

These present blessings are necessary to fit 
us for the inheritance of the Kingdom of God 
in glory and power. Without the blessing of 
justification, we would still be like the world, 
under condemnation, disowned of God and 
disinherited; nor could we be filled with the 
joys of righteousness or hope. But, having 
these, we are privileged to make our calling 
and election sure to the inheritance incorruptible, 
undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved 
in heaven for the called according to 
the divine purpose to be heirs of the established 
Kingdom. 

Being justified and fully consecrated to the 
Lord, how blessed is the further privilege of 
being filled with his holy spirit— a spirit of 
meekness, gentleness, patience, faith, love and 
joy. With such a spirit, the cares of this life 
set lightly in comparison with those not so 
supported, and the joys of hope and of the 
realized fellowship of the Lord, gladden the 
heart, even under the tribulation which the 
Kingdom of heaven now suffers because of the 
world's opposition to it. 

These precious privileges of the Kingdom, 
even in this time of its humiliation, are such as 
the world cannot appreciate. The world might 
appreciate the freedom from the law, which 
permits the eating of any thing which is wholesome 
and good, and which requires no holy 
days, etc.; but these, to the Christian who rightly 
views his privileges in Christ, are minor 
considerations in comparison with those which 
the Apostle enumerates. 

To-day, as well as well as in the days of the Apostle, 
it is occasionally manifest that some do not 
catch the real spirit of their liberty in Christ, 
and their use of it becomes an occasion of 
stumbling to others. If we have learned to 
esteem every day alike— holy unto the Lord, a 
sabbath or rest of faith (Rom. 14:5; Heb. 4:10) 
—shall we offend the conscience of other Christians, 
who regard the first day as holier than 
the rest, by devoting it to the common pursuits 
of life and causing many to stumble? No: 
we rather delight to have the special opportunities 
of such a day before us; and, if other men 
had not ordained such a day, we would feel 
like doing it ourselves, if possible, that we might 
have the privileges of spiritual communion with 
others of like precious faith. 

Our liberty in Christ is not to be made a 
mere occasion of ministering to the flesh in any 
way; but it should rather be accepted as an opportunity 



R1580 : page 280 

to manifest the loyalty of sons, which 
so enters into the spirit of the righteousness of 
the law as to require no special commands or 
prohibitions. The righteousness of the law is 
fulfilled in those who walk not after the flesh, 
but after the spirit. 



R1580 : page 280 

OUR CHICAGO CONVENTION. 



WE have been assured by letters since received, 
as well as by many of the friends 
while the meetings in Chicago were in progress, 
that many, if not all, who attended the 
Chicago Convention were greatly blessed and 
strengthened in the good way. 

The location was all that could be desired, 
facing Washington Park and near the lake 
front. Our meetings were held in a large 
pavilion. The number in attendance was 
about 360, of whom fully 300 came from a 
distance, California, Oregon, Washington, 
Texas, Florida, Ontario, Manitoba, New England 
and Nova Scotia, as well as the nearer 
states, being represented. 

The services of each day began with a prayer 
meeting followed by a short testimony meeting 
in which present experiences, only, were 
in order. There were special topics assigned 
to the prayer meetings for each day, and from 
these it will be seen that the absent ones were 
not forgotten. The topics were as follows: 

(1) The WATCH TOWER office and its 
laborers. 

(2) The Colporteurs, and all laborers in 
the general harvest field. 

(3) The Little Flock, walking in the light 
of present truth. 

(4) The Consecrated yet in the darkness 
of error. 

(5) Prayer for more laborers in the vineyard, 
and for greater wisdom, love and zeal 

for all engaged in it. 

Following these services came a discourse of 
about an hour and a half, then an adjournment 
for dinner, after which the afternoon, from 2 
until 5, was devoted to the public answering 
of questions. The last day was devoted to the 



interest of the Colporteur work; and on the 

day after the close of the Convention, some of 

the experienced Colporteurs remained with 

some of the less successful and the beginners, 

and held a school of colporteuring— giving instructions, 

pointing out good and bad methods, 

manners and expressions, etc. 

It was a happy looking gathering, and the 
soul present that received no blessing has good 
reason to feel that considerable of the fault 
lay in his own state of unpreparedness to share 
the blessing bestowed upon others. But we 
heard only of blessings; and, thanks to the 
Giver of every good and perfect gift, we trust 
and believe that as results of the meetings our 
Lord's honor was increased and a number of 
his saints refreshed and strengthened. And 
we hope that the influence of that Convention 
may extend to the families and neighborhoods 
of those present, whose lights we trust will 
shine brighter and brighter, hereafter, before 
their fellow-saints, before the nominal church 
and before the world. 

The Calvary Baptist Church of Chicago very 
kindly granted us the use of their baptistry; 
and, in all, seventy symbolized their baptism 
into Christ's death by immersion into water. 
The proportion of brethren and sisters was about 
equal, and their ages ranged from 17 to 70 years, 
the average being about 35 years. These who 
thus witnessed to their consecration had generally 
been Christians for a considerable time, 
although there were among them some new 
converts. 

Remaining for a few days after the Convention, 
to have private interviews with some, 
as well as to get a glimpse at the great Columbian 
Fair, the Editor's last public address 
was delivered on Sunday evening, August 27. 
About fifty, chiefly colporteurs, remained, 
and the subject was Prayer. He sought to 
show that it is a mistake to suppose that the 
Lord Jesus may not be addressed in prayer, as 
well as the Heavenly Father,— showed that 
our Lord's expression in John 16:23-27 did 
not mean that our Lord Jesus should no more 
be recognized in prayer, but rather that, as 
the disciples had freedom toward Christ, and 

R1580 : page 281 

confidence in approaching him, he was showing 
them that the time was coming when they 
could approach the Father direct, in his name, 
"because the Father himself loveth you," and 
that, as soon as the sacrifice of atonement 



would be completed and accepted, he could 
recognize these, because redeemed with the 
precious blood.— John 14:13. 

Prayer, it was shown, consists not merely of 
petition or request, but as a general term also 
includes invocation, adoration, communion 
and thanksgiving. It was pointed out that 
the prayers of "babes in Christ" are usually 
requests for earthly favors and blessings, 
whereas the advanced Christian rarely requests 
earthly favors. His prayers are usually thank 
offerings and communion seasons— telling the 
Lord (the Father or the Son, either or both, 
for the Father, as well as the Son, loves us;— 

R1581 : page 281 

John 16:27— and we have promise of communion 
with both;-John 14:23-both are to 
be worshiped and loved equally, for "all men 
should honor the Son even as they honor the Father; 
—John 5:23— but intercourse with the 
Father can be had by us only in the name and 
merit of his Son our Redeemer;— Heb. 10:19) 
of all his trials and troubles and temptations, 
and calling to mind the gracious promises of 
his Word, but not attempting to urge his will 
upon the Lord— fearful even to move the 
Almighty's arm, which, with his super-human 
wisdom, is pledged to cause all things to work 
together for good to them that love him, the 
called ones according to his purpose. Concerning 
earthly blessings our Lord remarked, 
After all these things the Gentiles seek- 
but your Father knoweth [better than you 
do] what things ye have need of. The requests 
of the advanced saints are for spiritual 
favors, concerning which our Lord said, 
Your heavenly Father is more willing to give 
the holy spirit to them that ask it, than earthly 
parents are to give good (earthly) gifts to their 
children.— Luke 11:13. 

One thought particularly impressed throughout 
the meetings was the necessity for a heart 
religion; and that any who have this should 
be and will be glad to get as much intellectual 
knowledge of the divine will and plan as 
possible; but that those who cultivate merely a 
head knowledge, and whose hearts and lives 
do not accord, will surely be permitted to follow 
their own or other people's false reasonings 
into the outer darkness and confusion in 
which the world and nominal Christians are 
at present groping. 



R1581 : page 281 

"THE SEA AND THE WAVES ROARING." 



THE financial pressure which has weighed 
heavily upon the whole world within the past 
few months is but another pang in the travail 
of the world, incident to the birth of a new 
order of society. As the Apostle predicted, so 
it is coming,— pang after pang, with increasing 
severity, with respites between, until the 
present order of society shall perish in a great 
time of trouble such as was not since there was 
a nation. 

Already there have been "bread riots" in 
the very city where the "Columbian Exposition" 
offers its testimony that we are living in 
the most enlightened era of this world's history 
—in the dawning of the great Millennial 
Day. The mutterings of the unemployed 
crowds in Chicago, and in Jersey City and 
elsewhere, are only premonitory suggestions 
of what may be expected if the present order 
of affairs were still more disturbed, and a larger 
proportion of the population thrown out of 
employment. 

The question comes from many quarters: 
"Brother Russell, are you not possibly mistaken 
by a few years in your calculations, since you 
expect, upon Scriptural authority, that the 
great trouble will all be over by A.D. 1915, 
and that in its severity it will probably not 
reach us before A.D. 1906 to 1908? Is it not 
possible that the present financial trouble is 
the beginning of the great trouble?" 

We answer, No; we think there is no mistake. 
The present trouble is not the start of 
the great calamity which is to involve the 
overthrow of all government, law and social 
order. As aforesaid, it is only another pang, 

R1581 : page 282 

and will pass off— perhaps speedily, perhaps 
slowly. We are sure of this, not merely because 
of our confidence in the Bible Chronology 
and the Dispensational Parallels, but also 
in another way. Before that trouble upon the 
world, the trials of faith amongst God's people 
will increase until many shall fall,— into doubt 
and skepticism. "A thousand shall fall at thy 
side, ten thousand at thy right hand." Hot 
and close as the battle between truth and error 



already is, it will grow more serious. Then, 
again, the Scriptures point out that all the 
great Protestant sects will yet unite, and attempt 
and accomplish a partial union with the 
civil governments of the world— and all this 
will be before the last great dying pang of the 
present social order. 

No, we are more than ever convinced of 
the harmony of the times and seasons presented 
to our attention in God's Word, with the other 
features of the great Plan of the Ages therein 
portrayed. 

"And when these things begin to come to 
pass, lift up your heads; for your redemption 
draweth nigh ! " 

Neglect not the assembling of yourselves 
together, and so much the more as ye see the 
day drawing on. 



page 282 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1581 : page 282 

PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY. 



III. QUAR., LESSON XII., SEPT. 17, ROM. 14:12-23. 

Golden Text— "It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to 
drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth. 
-Rom. 14:21. 

The special point in this lesson is found 
in verse 17, for treatment of which see article, 
The Embryo Kingdom of God, on page 
278 of this issue. The remainder of the 
lesson, as it relates to this central thought, 
is so plain as to require but little special 
comment. 

The faith mentioned in verse 22 refers 
specially to the confidence of the Jewish converts 



in the truths of the new dispensation, 
which enabled them to realize their release 
from the bondage of the Law covenant; but 
they were here counseled not to so parade 
their liberty before their weaker brethren 
as to make it an occasion of stumbling to 
them. "Happy is he that condemneth not 
himself in that thing which he alloweth 
[that does not violate his own conscience, 
whether that conscience be enlightened or 
not]. He that doubteth [that is unsettled 
as to what is right or wrong in any matter] 
is condemned if he eat [if in eating he does 
that which he believes to be wrong], because 
he eateth not of faith [because his 
eating, and thereby repudiating the claims 
of the law, is not on account of the newly 
received faith which sets him free from the 
law]." It is wrong to violate conscience in 
any case. But we should always seek to 
have it rightly informed, and then to follow 
its leading. 

R1581 : page 282 

REVIEW. 



III. QUAR., LESSON XIIL, SEPT. 24, ACTS- 
CHAPTERS 16-28. 

Golden Text— "So then faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God."— Rom. 10:17. 

A careful review of the instructive lessons 
of this quarter is earnestly commended to 
all, that they may bring before the mind 
again, and connectedly, the noble self-denial, 
the unwavering confidence in God, the 
implicit obedience, the loyalty and faithfulness 
and untiring zeal of the Lord's chosen 
Apostle to the Gentiles, affording a most 
noble example for study and imitation. 

In the divine direction of his course and 
supervision of his work, we see manifested 
the Lord's wonderful providence over his 
Church; and we rejoice to realize that though 
the apostles long since fell asleep in Jesus, 
the work which the Lord accomplished 
through them is as potent at this end of the 
age as at the beginning; and that his promise 
— "Lo, I am with you always, even to 
the end of the age," is verified to us as 
manifestly as to the early Church. 

The book entitled, "The Acts of the Apostles," 



might be more properly captioned, The 

R1581 : page 283 

beginning and early history of the Christian 
Church: it is a volume well worthy of 
study and meditation. As we pursue the 
divinely guided course and mark the inspiration, 
zeal and faithfulness of the apostles 
in accomplishing their mission, as set forth 
in the The Acts of the Apostles, we come 
with deeper interest and with the profoundest 
reverence to the study of their inspired 
Epistles, prescribed for the next quarter. 
The Golden Text of this lesson is very 
suggestive— "So then faith cometh by hearing 
[we must hear "this gospel of the Kingdom" 
before we can have faith in it: it 
must enter into our ears and commend itself 
to our judgment; and only on its reasonable 
testimony can true faith be predicated], 
and hearing by the Word of God [the testimony 
of these good tidings originates with 
God only: it is, as the Apostle here states, 
"the Word of God," no matter if modern 
critics do affirm that it is not the Word of 
God. This gospel could never have originated 
with men: it bears the unmistakable 
stamp of divinity]. 

R1581 : page 283 

THE POWER OF THE GOSPEL. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON I., OCT. 1, Rom. 1:8-17. 

Golden Text— "I am not ashamed of the gospel of 
Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation to every 
one that believeth."— Rom. 1:16. 

R1582 : page 283 

We now come to the study of one of the 
most notable of all the Pauline epistles, the 
epistle to the Romans. Apparently this 
noble production, like the other epistles, was 
the result of merely accidental circumstances: 
Paul, while in Corinth, saw an opportunity 
to send his greetings and counsel 
to the Church at Rome by the hand of 
Phoebe, who was about to sail thither; and, 
in consideration of their condition and circumstances, 
he wrote this letter. The Church 
at Rome was composed of both Jews and 



Gentiles, and naturally there were among 
them some unsettled questions incidental to 
the transition from Judaism to Christianity, 
which the Apostle in this epistle endeavors 
to adjust. The full settlement of these questions, 
however, was to be found only in a 
clear explanation of the principles of the 
gospel, which the Apostle, therefore, so ably 
set forth in this writing. 

Its preservation to us is due, humanly 
speaking, to the high esteem in which it 
was held by them and others of the early 
Christians. Recognized by them as a logical 
presentation of the gospel of Christ, 
penned by a divinely inspired Apostle, they 
carefully cherished it, as did the other 
churches the various apostolic epistles written 
to them; and later these important letters 
began to circulate among the churches 
that all might receive their valued instructions. 
But when we consider further, how 
these writings have been preserved from 
generation to generation, sometimes in the 
hands of those who devotedly appreciated 
them, but for a long time— all through "the 
dark ages"— in the possession of Antichrist, 
hidden away under the sack-cloth of 
dead languages, and again brought forth to 
bear their testimony even to us at the end 
of the age, we recognize in this gift to us 
also the beneficent hand of divine providence. 
Some in these days point derisively 
to the human agencies through which 
God's truth has been handed down to us, 
forgetting that back of these has been the 
Lord's almighty hand making use of these 
agents as his honored instruments. We are 
not at all surprised when, with the Apostle, 
we are enabled to see the deep philosophy 
of the divine plan, as sketched in this epistle, 
that he is not ashamed of the gospel of 
Christ; for with him we see that it is indeed 
the power of God unto salvation to every 
one that believeth.— Verse 16. 

This epistle was sent from Corinth. It 
was dictated by Paul and written by Tertius, 
at the house of one of the Corinthian Christians 
-Gaius. (Rom. 16:22,23; 1 Cor. 1:14.) 
Up to the date of its writing Paul had never 
been in Rome. It is not known how the 
Church at Rome started, though there were 
Christians there who had been in the way 
for many years. It was probably one of the 
results of the outpouring of the holy spirit 
on the day of Pentecost; for on that occasion 
there were present "strangers from 



Rome." (Acts 2:10.) These probably returned 
to Rome with the blessings of the 
gospel, and began to live Christian lives and 
to preach the truth to others; and a company 
of believers, even in the midst of that corrupt 
city, was the result. It seems difficult 
to understand how, in the midst of such 
conditions as the city of Rome presented, 
a people could be found to give an ear to 
the Word of the Lord, and to submit themselves 
to his training and discipline. It was 
the capital city of a great and powerful 
empire, presenting all the contrasts of wealth 
and poverty and all the hideous deformities 

R1582 : page 284 

of sin. Yet God could work even there, 
and his Word was quick and powerful. 

VERSES 1-7. Paul introduces his epistle 
by first declaring his apostleship, and his 
divine call to preach the gospel of Jesus 
Christ among all nations; second, by acknowledging 
the Christians at Rome as also 
called of God (but not as apostles); and 
third, by expressing his Christian greetings 
—"Grace to you, and peace, from God our 
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ." 

VERSES 8-13. Here we see how the spirit 
of God had been at work in Rome; for 
they were widely known as men and women 
of great faith. Paul rejoiced over their spiritual 
prosperity, prayed for them continually, 
and longed and prayed for the opportunity 
of meeting them personally, to the end 
that he might impart to them some spiritual 
gift (such as the gifts of tongues and of interpretation, 
etc., some of which were given 
to all of the early Christians by laying on 
of the apostles' hands, and never in any other 
way), that so they might be established and 
able to progress more rapidly in the knowledge 
and work of the Lord. Thus their 
mutual faith would be a mutual comfort. 

VERSE 14. "I am debtor [I am under 
obligation] both to the Greeks and to the 
Barbarians; both to the wise and to the unwise." 
Why? Because they had done something 
for him? No: but because God through 
Christ had done something for them, and 
Paul, as the servant of God, was charged 
with the commission to preach the gospel— 
to be his witness unto all nations. 

VERSES 15-17. "So, as much as in me is 
[to the extent of my ability], I am ready to 
preach the gospel to you that are at Rome 



also. For I am not ashamed of the gospel 
of Christ [Paul was not ashamed to bring 
it into contrast and competition with all the 
philosophies of men then extant]; for it is 
the power of God unto salvation [it is the 
instrument of God for salvation— to every 
one? No: but] to every one that believeth 
[God works through instrumentalities, and 
his truth is the instrument for human salvation. 
As Paul subsequently shows— Chap. 10:17 
—"Faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God." And there is 
not the slightest intimation in the Scriptures 
that there is salvation to any without 
faith in the promises of God's Word]— to 
the Jew first [out of respect to the covenant 
made with their father Abraham], and also 
to the Greek"— the Gentiles. 

VERSE 17. "For therein [in the gospel] 
is the righteousness of God revealed [the 
deep philosophy of his plan makes manifest 
his righteous character, as the Apostle shows 
in this epistle. It is revealed] from faith 
to faith [i.e., in coming to the study of the 
divine plan, we must come with faith begotten 
of reverence for its all-wise Author, 
expecting to find in it a wisdom superior to 
all human philosophies. And from this 
starting point faith will progress to higher 
and higher altitudes], as it is written, "The 
just by faith shall live"— those justified by 
faith must continue to live by faith until 
faith is lost in full fruition of the glorious 
promises of God. 

R1582 : page 284 

REDEMPTION IN CHRIST. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON II., OCT. 8, ROM. 3:19-26. 

Golden Text— "Being justified freely by his grace 
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus."— 
Rom. 3:24. 

The theme of this lesson is the foundation 
doctrine of Christianity, which in these days 
of worldly wisdom is rapidly falling into 
disrepute. In innumerable ways the enemies 
of the cross of Christ are twisting and 
whittling the Scriptures and resorting to 
every form of subtle sophistry in order to 
show men how to climb up into the fold of 
God in some other than his appointed way. 



All such are thieves and robbers (John 10:1) 
seeking to steal away the faith and hope 
of God's people. 

The Apostle is here showing the immense 
importance and value of the death of Christ, 
to both Jews and Gentiles, both of whom 
are alike under the dominion of sin and condemned 
to death: the Jews in that they 
were unable to keep the Law of Moses, the 
Gentiles in that they were unable to live up 
to the law of their own conscience; so that 
every mouth is stopped from self-justification, 
and all the world stands guilty before 
God. The Jews had vainly hoped to justify 
themselves before God by keeping his Law; 
but this the Apostle shows they did not, and 
could not, do; for the Law uttered only condemnation 
to all that were under it, its only 
office to them being to convince them of sin, 
and to show them how far short they had 
come.— Verses 19,20. 

But though salvation could never come 
by the Law, Paul shows that God had a way 
provided, apart from the Law, whereby men 
could be saved— not merely Jews, but all 

R1582 : page 285 

men who would come unto him in his appointed 

way— by faith in Christ Jesus, "whom 

God hath set forth to be a propitiation 

[place of satisfaction], through faith in his 

blood, to declare his righteousness for the 

remission of sins that are past, through the 

forbearance of God." The one condition of 

this salvation is a grateful acceptance of it, 

by faith, as the free unmerited gift of God 

through Jesus Christ, which also implies an 

acknowledgment that we all have sinned 

and come short of the glory of God, that 

we are under just condemnation to death, 

and that we need a redeemer. (Verses 20,22-25.) 

Thus this Bible plan of salvation 

requires on our part (1) the acknowledgment 

of the Bible account of the fall of 

man, and of his just condemnation to death; 

(2) our dependence upon the grace of God 
to rescue us from that condemnation, and 

(3) faith in his appointed means of doing 

it, with a grateful, humble acceptance of the 
favor. But this Bible plan of salvation is 
antagonistic at every point to the evolution 
theory, now being thrust forward by 
many, which denies the fall of man; claims 
salvation as a natural consequence of an evolution 
of the human race from low to higher 



conditions, by the destruction of the carnal 

or sinful propensities in each sinner by himself; 

R1583 : page 285 

repudiates all necessity for a ransom; 
and thus rejects the favor of God through 
the atoning blood of Christ. 

VERSES 21,22,26 declare that in the plan 
of God set forth in the Law and the Prophets, 
and fulfilled in Christ, the righteousness 
of God is clearly manifested: that he is 
shown to be just, and yet the justifier of 
those whom he formerly condemned. If 
this fact is witnessed to by the Law and the 
Prophets, the suggestion is that we look to 
the Law and the Prophets and see how they 
thus vindicate God's character. 

The simple account, as foretold by the 
prophets, and as historically related by the 
apostles, is (1) that the only begotten Son 
of God, who was with God from the beginning 
of creation, gave up his former 
glory and took our human nature; (2) that 
the object of this was that he might become 
a substitute, a ransom, for the man Adam 
(and all his posterity) whose life was forfeited 
by sin; (3) that he might be raised 
again by the Father and highly exalted to 
the divine nature, with all power in heaven 
and in earth to accomplish the complete deliverance 
of all those whom he purchased 
by the sacrifice of his humanity.— John 1:1; 
Col. 1:15-17; 1 Tim. 2:6; Rom. 11:32; 
Isa. 53:3-5; Phil. 2:9; Isa. 11:10. 

The Law, in its typical features, also prefigured 
the same truths. See Tabernacle 
Shadows of Better Sacrifices. 

VERSE 26. God, having justly condemned 
Adam and all his race as unworthy of everlasting 
life, could not justly reverse his own 
sentence, without a cause. By his own arrangement, 
however, Christ was that cause, 
for the removal of that original sentence of 
death— in that Christ died for our sins. 
Thus seen, the preaching, through faith in 
Christ, of divine favor to sinners, once under 
divine sentence, is not preaching a violation 
of justice on God's part, but quite the 
reverse. The very fact that God provided 
so expensive a ransom-sacrifice for sinners 
proves that his justice is inviolable and unbending. 
It was because divine justice could 
no deviate, that divine love and mercy were 
brought into action; thus revealing to us that 
side of the divine character. Those who thus 



see the divine plan of mercy and forgiveness 
through a sin-offering, a corresponding price, 
and none others, can see God to be just in 
justifying sinners whom he had once justly 
sentenced to death. 

The doctrine of the ransom is thus shown 
by the Apostle to be fundamental to a 
proper conception and appreciation of God's 
character. 



page 285 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 

We desire to convey to you how deep an 
impression is made on our spiritual being 
by the Chicago Convention. I want to 
speak particularly of Brother Rogers also, 
and his wisdom and patience in the 
canvassing school. I thank the dear Lord 
for Brother Rogers. I also found how 
much some have grown in the last year. 
Like myself, they have been advanced, and 
received strength for a more vigorous and 
patient warfare, as well as spiritual growth. 
I think a very general expression of benefit 
received will come to your ears. For myself, 
I am not only stimulated, but subdued, 
under the mighty hand of God, seen not 

page 286 

alone in the mighty events of this, Jehovah's 
Day, and in the force and clearness in which 
the truth in purity can now be seen (as well as 
"how great is that darkness" now opposing 
truth), but also in the force and powerfulness 
of the "weak things" of this world, 
that God is using to confound the mighty. 

Among others, Brother Nordlung asked me 
to tell you how much the Convention benefited 
him, and also that he expects to "lose 
something" when the Swedish Dawn is ready. 

With love to God, and to you as his messengers, 
MR. & MRS. J. B. ADAMSON. 



BELOVED BROTHER & SISTER RUSSELL:- 
Having returned from our Convention, I 
feel it a duty I owe both to my Master and 



to you, to tell you of the great benefits 
vouchsafed to me, a very weak servant, 
while in attendance. Had there been time 
for each to have related his or her experience, 
all I could say is that "God's 
grace is sufficient for me," and that "The 
life I now live, I live by the faith of the 
Son of God." I feel like writing a long 
letter from a heart overflowing with joy 
and gratitude, but I realize more now than 
ever that your time is exceedingly precious. 
Yours in much love, A. M. RUSSELL. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is with a 
very grateful heart that I write these few 
lines, to express my appreciation of being 
so privileged as to attend the meeting at 
Chicago, and there to meet so many whose 
sole desire is to serve their Lord and Master 
in all things and at all times. I was very 
much blest to hear so many kind and loving 
words of exhortation and counsel. May 
the Lord continue to bless and give an 
abundance of his Spirit to all those who 
truly love the truth, that they may each be 
able to speak as an oracle of God. 

I have done very well in the colporteur 
work since the meeting. I sold and delivered 
ninety-nine DAWNS in four days. One 
day I took orders for fifty-four. I hope 
my success will continue. 

May the Lord bless his co-laborers, Yours 
in the Redeemer, WM. McALPINE. 



DEAR BRETHREN:-I enclose you an order 
for DAWNS, which I would like hurried 
forward. I have finished the canvass of 
four small towns having a combined population 
of about 1800, and have taken orders 
for eighty -eight books. I found only three 
or four who were interested to any extent 
in truth, but many who were strongly bound 
in Babylon by the fetters of man's wisdom(?). 
"Gross darkness [certainly] covers 
the people." I must say that I felt rather 
lonely traveling so far, meeting so many, 
and finding so little concern expressed 
about God's plan and Church. Assist me 
with your prayers, that I may properly and 
fearlessly present the truth, and not become 
weary in well doing, knowing that I shall 
reap, if I faint not. 



With Christian love and prayers to and 
for you all I remain, 
Yours in the harvest work, N. F. SEARS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose 
Express Order for $3.50, as a free-will offering 
to the Lord, which I wish the Tower 
Bible and Tract Society to use in any way 
most advantageous to God's service. As 
I have benefited myself so much from the 
reading of the DAWNS and TOWER, I wish 
to help to carry the same message of God's 
wondrous love and favor to others. I was 
trying to walk a middle path between Christ 
and the world, but the reading of DAWN 
brought to my view the uselessness of such 
an effort, and gave me a determination to 
make my sacrifice complete. Hoping you 
may be spared and strengthened to carry 
on the work through the harvest, 

Your brother in Christ, WM. VASSIE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just 
returned from a three weeks' trip, and found 
last TOWER waiting for me— into which I 
plunged and found so good. I had thought 
it very strange, regarding the religious parliament 
to be held in Chicago, that Christians 
should be dragged into listening to the 
claims of Judaism, even when Christ spoke 
against its teachers and then finished the 
law, to say nothing about listening to the 
claims of heathens. Surely we should be 
thankful for a solid rock on which our feet 
may stand. 

We have just heard from some friends in 
Iowa. The lady gave DAWN to her sister 
who is delighted with it. 

With much love to you all I remain, in 
Him, F. B.UTLEY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write to 
let you know that I am still in the race, 
and that the last three TOWERS have given 
my soul much joy. "Baptism and its Import" 

page 287 

has settled a great difficulty with me 

and several others, and the many rich truths 



in the double number of July are a perfect 
feast to my soul. They give me strength 
and courage to press on for the Master's 
cause. 

I know several men who say that the 
reading of MILLENNIAL DAWN has not 
only given them knowledge, but that it has 
made better men of them. 

In regard to the Chicago Convention: 
It grieves me to think that I cannot be there; 
but I will be in your midst in spirit. My 
heart and my prayers are with you. 

Your Brother, ANDREW J. FREEMAN. 



R1583 : page 287 

DEAR FRIENDS:-Please change TOWER 
to present address. I miss it, and would not 
do without it. I shall never drop this welcome 
visitor; rather would I do my work 
on one meal a day. It is food to the truth-hungry 
soul, I need it to sustain my spiritual 
being, just as I need food to sustain me 
physically. I hope all subscribers read and 
digest its precious truths as I do. How it 
opens up the Word of God and throws light 
where darkness reigned before! We cannot 
all uncover these hidden truths, but we 
can see and accept them when the due time 
comes for them to be known and pointed 
out by the Lord's servants. 

I close with every kind wish to all in the 
TOWER office and all the readers of this priceless 
seed sower. I hand you a letter from 
my friend May, to whom I had the pleasure 
of introducing these precious truths. 

Yours in the Lord's service, 
J. A. BOHNET. 



MR. J. A. BOHNET.-My dear Sir:~ 
I have not only read but studied the DAWN, 
which you recommended me to secure, and 
I want you to consider yourself thanked a 
thousand times for the priceless favor. It 
is the most wonderful explanation of the 
old Book that I have found in all of forty 
years reading and study of its teaching. I 
assume some acquaintance with Addison, 
Sherlock, Locke, Scott, and others of less 
note; besides I have owned every commentary 
on the Bible that I have ever heard 
of as having been published in the English 



language during the last twenty-five years, 
and nothing that I have ever read seems even 
to point in the direction of the straight and 
narrow path opened up and made plain by 
those three volumes. In its pages I find 
there is a perfect and complete system, to 
understand which one must read from 
Genesis to Revelation. 

But I will not write what you well know. 
Last but not least: They are full of comfort. 
Faithfully, J. J. MAY. 



BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL:-Your answer 
in a recent TOWER about voting, etc., seems 
right; and yet if not right now for Christians 
to take part in politics, I do not see 
that it could ever have been; but if the best 
part of mankind had always kept out, it 
seems to me we would have had a much 
worse government than we have. [You 
will find few saints' names amongst those 
of politicians. We make a distinction, you 
see, between good people and consecrated 
saints.— Editor.] 

You say a good deal about the "fully 
consecrated." I often wonder just what 
you mean by that expression. Of course I 
have read something of your meaning here 
and there in your writings, but I would like 
right well to see a connected, full statement 
of it. Before I knew anything at all of the 
DAWN teachings, I had given myself to our 
Maker and to our Redeemer in every way 
of which I could think; and I have never 
taken anything back, so far as I know, nor 
do I have any thought of so doing. My 
determination is, and long had been, to 
cling to him, come what may, in the strength 
that he gives. Is this "consecration"?— 

In His name, O. B.M'CURDY. 

[Yes, dear Brother, you have the correct 
idea. Our wills, then all our powers and 
influence, given to God, is entire consecration. 
Your query relative to reckoned and 
actual holiness was, I trust, answered in 
the August 15th TOWER-"Christ in You 
the Hope of Glory."— Editor.] 



page 287 



DEAR BRETHRENr-Although I can do 
but little, I am so grateful that Christ has 



chosen me to be a co-worker with him in 
his "harvest work," and I often think what 
great opportunities the colporteurs have 
for spreading the truth. I am constantly 
looking for a chance to speak for the truth, 
but it is only occasionally that I find one 
who will listen; and when I do, the 
Spirit enables me to pour out the truth in 
great measures. How clearly I see that he 
will use us, if we are but willing. That 
seems to be the trouble with most people 
that profess him: they are not willing to 

page 288 

be used except in their own way. How 

sorry I am that no one told me before that 

it was necessary to give up the human will 

to be able to see the deep things of God. 

I had been praying for sixteen years for a 

love of God's Word, but could not get interested 

in the study, until I grasped the plan 

of the ages in the DAWN, and for the last 

year it has been my greatest delight to 

search the Word. 

The food is very sweet, though the effect 
of standing for it is bitter; but I count it 
all joy to be able and chosen to suffer for 
the truth's sake; for "I reckon that the sufferings 
of the present time are not worthy 
to be compared with the glory that shall be 
revealed in us." My mind is kept constantly 
on the future and the crown, and I 
try not to be puffed up because of the 
knowledge of the Word that I have, because 
I see that God will not use us if we 
are so. Oh, the joy and peace of being in 
Christ! People think I am very queer because 
I do not enjoy the things of this 
world, but I look upon them with pity, because 
I have that which satisfies. 

I receive great spiritual good from the 
TOWERS, and great strength from the letters 
of others that have come into the marvelous 
light. I believe that the letters that I 
have read in the back numbers have been 
used of God to strengthen many of his little 
flock, and I write to tell you of the effect 
they have upon me. 

Believe me, dear ones in the faith, 
Your Brother, M. T. LEWIS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have it in 
my mind now to make a vigorous campaign 



next fall, beginning about October 

1st, so you may count me in the colporteur 

work again about that time. 

I put the TOWER literature into the hands 
of a Baptist brother a short time since, and 
he has put me to shame. "Why," said he, 
"did you not tell me about this a year ago? 
You saw me then." I replied, "I did give 
you some of the tracts a year ago." "Yes, 
but you did not talk about the subjects 
enough to get me interested." This brother 
is not able, physically, to enter the colporteur 
service. If he were, he would gladly do so. 
Truly the harvest is ripe. Yours in hope of 
the Kingdom, M.M.PHILLIPS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-There has 
been such prejudice in the western part of 
this city, that some who have purchased 
DAWNS of me, after finding that others object 
to them, have spoken openly against 
them in church, and advised all not to purchase 
them. And then, too, I have been 
told that the ministers have preached against 
it. I think, however, that it is a case of 
"little fire and much smoke." 

One young man, who had given me an 
order, told me his friend took them and 
threw them into the street. I waited a few 
days, and then called on that one, and 
learned from him that he had not thrown 
them away, but had felt called upon to speak 
against them in meeting, and had done so. 
I spent three profitable hours with him and 
wife, and parted friends. He promised to 
ask God to show him if he should read them 
carefully. He wished me God's blessing, 
and asked me to call as often as possible. 

I called on another: a young man who opposed 
the truth. When he tried to show 
me where it was "way off," behold, it had 
vanished, and a second reading showed him 
he had read too hastily. So, though I am 
making at present but few sales, I think I 
will succeed in overcoming the prejudice of 
many. Yours in the Lord, J. O. MURPHY. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL: 
I am using the improved method in canvassing, 
learned at the Convention, and am 
greatly pleased with it. This is a very dull 
place, but I took sixteen orders Friday, and 



fifteen yesterday. The introduction on entering 
is a great help. I never knew, till I 
used it, that introducing myself as "Miss 
Way— a representative of the Tower Bible 
& Tract Society," would do so much to gain 
me an attentive hearing. 

How we thank the Lord for the meeting 
in Chicago, and the joy of meeting yourselves 
and so many of the dear brothers and 
sisters in Christ, enabling us to realize more 
fully the joy set before us and that happy 
everlasting meeting beyond the vail! We 
learned many lessons, too, that I trust will 
bear fruit all through our lives. We feel 
encouraged to press on, more desire to be 
proficient in our work and more submissive 
to him who moulds us according to his 
will. Pray for us— as we do for you ail- 
that we may be kept from every seducing 
error, and may overcome through the blood 
of the Lamb. 

Yours in the Redeemer, 

FRANCES A. WAY. 



page 290 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL CLOTH DAWNS. 



We still have plenty of the gilt-stamped, 
cloth edition of MILLENNIAL DAWN, with slight 
mismatch in color, stamping and paper, but 
otherwise perfect. As previously announced, 
we will close these out at twenty-five cents per 
volume by express, or the set of three volumes 
for one dollar postage paid by us. 

A LARGE CIRCULATION. 



In order to permit the friends of the truth 
to circulate them freely, we supply the DAWNS 
in paper binding in packs of 5, 10 or 20 of any 
one volume to one address at the rate of fifteen 



cents per volume, including postage. Less 

than five copies of any one volume we supply 

at twenty-five cents per volume. Colporteurs 

are authorized to sell these at thirty-five cents 

per volume. No books of the kind were ever 

supplied on such liberal terms. What opportunities 

are thus afforded to all who have a 

heart for harvest work! And that many are 

improving the opportunity is evidenced by 

the fact that the four hundredth thousand of 

the first volume is now in course of publication. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 



Many new readers do not know about our 
gospel envelopes, which have the gospel message 
printed on their face, leaving room for 
stamps and addressing, and on the back mention 
VOL. I. of MILLENNIAL DAWN. There is 
no better way than this to call to the attention 
of your friends the glad tidings of great joy, 
and the book which will make the gospel so 
plain that a wayfaring and unlearned reader 
need not err therein. 

These are supplied by mail, postpaid, at the 
following rates: 

100 envelopes 25 cents; 500 envelopes $1.00. 

Is this one of the ways in which you can 
serve God and your friends?— "holding forth 
the Word of life." 

Friends who are in business, and who send 
out circulars and bills, and who could use 
these envelopes (with their business address 
printed at the corner) in lots of five or ten 
thousand at a time will be supplied, regardless 
of cost, at the rate of one dollar a thousand. 
—We want these to go everywhere, preaching 
the Word. 

R1585 : page 290 

BLESSED ASSURANCES. 



Do you need a counselor? "Thou shalt 
guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive 
me to glory." Psa. 73:24. 

Do you want a friend? "There is a friend that 
sticketh closer than a brother." Prov. 18:24. 

Are you discouraged? "Be of good courage 
and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that 
hope in the Lord." Psa. 31:24. 

Have you been wronged? "But I say unto 



you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse 
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray 
for them which despitefully use you and persecute 
you." Matt. 5:44. 

Do you suffer for well doing? "But if, when 
ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, 
this is acceptable with God." 1 Pet. 2:20. 

Are you heavy laden? "Come unto me all 
ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will 
give you rest." Matt. 1 1:28. 

Are you ignorant? "If any of you lack wisdom, 
let him ask of God, who giveth to all 
men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall 
be given him." James 1:5. 

Are you tempted to do wrong? "If sinners 
entice thee, consent thou not." Prov. 1:10. 

Do you hunger after righteousness? "Blessed 
are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, 
for they shall be filled." Matt. 5:6. 

Are you fearful? "O Israel, trust thou in the 
Lord: he is their help and their shield. Psa. 1 15:9. 

Do you want sympathy? "Like as a father 
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them 
that reverence him." Psa. 103:13. 



R1583 : page 291 

VOL. XIV. OCTOBER 1, 1893. NO. 19. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



"WHERE are we?" is the significant question 
now troubling the thinking portion 
of Christendom, and occasionally propounded 
through the religious and secular press. The 
question has been suggested by the manifest 
absurdities of the old creeds and the clash of 
new speculative philosophies, producing such 
confusion that it is impossible for many to determine 
just where they stand. 

The perplexity of the situation is very manifest 
from the following remarks which appeared 
recently in the New York Sun:— 

"And so the drift goes on, until little by 
little the question: 'Where are we?' becomes 
a pregnant religious one. Professors sit in the 
chairs of seminaries teaching doctrines far 
enough removed from the originals to make 
the ancient benefactors turn in their graves; 
clergymen sign pledges on ordination which 
they probably know the administrator does 
not believe himself; the standards are in many 



cases only the buoys which show how far the 
ships of the churches have got away from the 
mapped-out channels. It is the age of go as 
you please, of every man for himself, and all 
that. Nobody knows where it is all to end, 
and those who are interested most seem to 
care least." 

This may be regarded by some as merely a 
pessimistic view of the case; but it is not. 
The writer has not expressed it nearly so strong 
as the facts would warrant. Within the past 
three years the tendency toward open infidelity 
has been amazingly on the increase in both 
the pulpits and pews of Christendom; and 
now the boldest strike is being made, not only 
against the doctrines of the Bible, and 
against the doctrines set forth in the various 
creeds, but against the Bible itself as a divinely 
inspired revelation. 

Failing to see in it God's plan of the ages 
and all its varied corroborative testimony as 
one harmonious whole, and seeing its inharmony 
on every other line of interpretation, 
the conclusion is rapidly being reached, and 
that by eminent clergymen, too, that the Bible 
is not a divinely inspired book; and with great 
boldness they are so openly declaring it that 
thinking people in amazement are inquiring, 
Whither are we drifting? 

The recent controversy in the case of Dr. 
Briggs has done much to accelerate the movement 
toward infidelity: for, though the Presbyterian 
General Assembly has declared against 
him, he is regarded by many as a very martyr 
for truth. The Rev. Lyman Abbott, successor 
to Henry Ward Beecher, ranks him as a 
prophet, and a worthy successor of the prophets 
of old. But for this it is not at all necessary 
in his estimation that he should be in 
harmony with the prophets of the Bible; for 
Dr. Abbott has no more respect for the Bible 
than for many other books. Quoting the common 

R1584: page 291 

belief --"The Bible is the Word of God!" 
he replies, "Oh, I beg your pardon, the Bible 
is not the Word of God. I challenge any 
man who calls the Bible the Word of God to 
find that phrase, the Word of God, ever used 
in the Bible." "The Bible [he says] is itself 
the product of the church, and the church 
is the product of the individual experience. 

R1584: page 292 



First comes the individual consciousness of 

God, and then out of all the gathered consciousness 

of God there comes the institution 

of religion, the church; and then out of the 

life of the church and its ministry comes the 

literature of religion, the Bible." His order 

of authority would therefore be (1) the individual 

consciousness of God, (2) the church, 

and (3) the Bible. 

Of course, then, Dr. Briggs and Dr. Abbott 
and many other eminent divines (?) are quite 
on a par with all the Old Testament prophets 
and the New Testament apostles, according to 
this theory. 

But Dr. Abbott is not the only one who thus 
boldly repudiates the Word of God: others, 
too, are gaining courage by such examples, 
and these sentiments bid fair to be the popular 
ones in a very short time. The Rev. Dr. Campbell, 
a professor in the Presbyterian college of 
Montreal, Canada, recently delivered a lecture 
before the students on "The perfect book, or 
the perfect Father," in which he boldly assailed 
the Bible as a mass of contradictions, 
not fairly or truthfully representing the character 
and plan of God, and consequently not 
an infallible rule of faith. And now this gentleman's 
course is likely to raise as stiff a 
breeze in Canada as that of Dr. Briggs has 
raised in this country, the matter having 
been already referred to the General Assembly 
there. 

Another reverend (?) gentleman, Mr. Horton, 
who has written a volume on "The Inspiration 
of the Bible," and another on 
"Revelation and the Bible," said recently, in 
a lecture to the divinity students of Yale College, 
that he objected to the current practice 
of preachers calling the Bible the Word of 
God. He had no toleration for what he termed 
a strange birth of time, "the cult of Bibliolatry." 
He said it was due to truth and honesty 
for preachers "to deliver the church from the 
confusion and mischief and error which have 
been incurred by this one baseless notion, that 
a book written by human pens and handed down 
by human methods, transcribed, translated and 
compiled by fallible human minds, is, or can 
be as such, the Word of God." 

It matters little how presbyteries, synods and 
assemblies deal with these men and their views: 
they cannot silence them. The rising generation 
of theological students is under their influence, 
and many who have quietly held such 
views are now encouraged to give expression 
to them. But the most notable outgrowth of 



these sentiments is what is called The New 
American Bible, now in course of preparation 
under the direction of Prof. Haupt of the Johns 
Hopkins University, the contributors (Prof. 
Briggs being among them) all representing the 
school of the so-called higher criticism, which 
repudiates the commonly accepted view of 
divine inspiration; and the attempt is to reconstruct 
the Scriptures from their standpoint. 

Thus the authority of the Scriptures is assailed 
in high places, and the question, 
Whither are we drifting? is indeed a pregnant 
one in Christendom. The drift is unmistakable. 
The rapids of skepticism are fast hurrying 
on toward the final plunge into open 
infidelity; and "who shall be able to stand?" 
This is the day when "the fire shall try every 
man's work, of what sort it is;" and it behooves 
every child of God to fortify his faith 
with all the evidences which the Lord has 
graciously supplied to enable us to stand in this 
evil day. 

We would therefore commend to our readers 
a careful review of the first three chapters 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., and the articles 
in the TOWER on "The Law of God" (Nov. 
1, '92) and "The Calling, Office and Authority 
of the Twelve Apostles" (May 1, '93). And 
let us notice further that the Scriptures do 
claim to be the Word of God, though their 
authority by no means depends upon the finding 
of that expression in the Scriptures, as Dr. 
Abbott seems to intimate. See Luke 4:4; 
5:1; 8:21; Acts 4:31; 8:14; 11:1; 13:44; 
Rom. 9:6; 10:17; 2 Cor. 2:17; 4:2; Eph. 6:17; 
2 Tim. 2:9; Titus 2:5; Heb. 4:12; 6:5; 
13:7; Rev. 1:2; 11:3. 

It is a great mistake to affirm that the Bible 
is the product of the Church; and those who 
make this claim do not know where to look 
for the Church. The Scriptures declare that 
Jesus Christ was the head and forerunner of 

R1584 : page 293 

the Church; and if he was the forerunner it is 
plain that none of the members of the Church 
preceded him, and, therefore, that the Old 
Testament Scriptures— which Paul says "were 
written aforetime (before Christ's advent) for 
our instruction that we through patience and 
the consolation of the Scriptures might possess 
the hope" (of the gospel— Rom. 15:4)— were 
not the product of the Church. And if, as we 
have shown, the writings of the Apostles were 
divinely inspired, then the New Testament 



Scriptures are not the product of the Church. 
But consecrated human agencies were used in 
both cases as God's honored instruments. The 
word of the Lord through the Apostles is not 
the product of the Church, but of divine revelation. 
And never since those inspired apostles 
fell asleep has the church been able to 
add one iota to the heavenly wisdom revealed 
through them; and to whatever extent she has 
wandered from their teachings, she has manifested 
her folly by vain philosophies which expose 
her ignorance and egotism. 

Nor is the Church, as Dr. Abbott claims, the 
product of individual experience or consciousness 
of God; for, apart from the Word of God, 
we have no acquaintance with him. We are 
sanctified by the truth of God's Word, is the 
way the Lord expresses it (John 17:17), not 
that the Word of God is the product of our 
previous sanctification without the truth. The 
Word of God, therefore, is the only real authority 
of divine truth; and neither the Church 
collectively, nor church councils, nor the individual 
members of it, except the twelve divinely 
inspired ones, are any authorities. 

It is claimed by some that the Church has 
exercised the authority of deciding and declaring 
which of the various ancient writings 
properly belong to the sacred code as we now 
possess it. But the claim is utterly fallacious. 
Concerning this claim let us observe how the 
facts stand, and note how manifestly the great 
Head of the Church has supervised this matter. 
The same divine providence which communicated 
the truth to the prophets, both by natural 
and supernatural means, was just as capable of 
preserving and, later, of compiling those documents; 
and in both cases the human agents 
were only the instruments in his hands, whether 
knowingly and willingly or not. 

The Old Testament Scriptures were all carefully 
and religiously preserved by the Jews down 
to the inauguration of the Christian dispensation, 
and then their testimony was carefully 
interwoven by Christ and his inspired apostles 
with the further developments of divine truth 
due in the new dispensation of the Gospel age. 
And they are freely quoted and referred to by 
them as of divine authority, while the New 
Testament writings are presented as supplemental 
to them and of equal authority and 
divine inspiration; and all bear the one harmonious 
testimony. 

The various books being thus linked together, 
so that if one were lost others would indicate the 
loss, and if a false one were supplied it would 



lack such indorsements and its inharmony would 

be manifest, it is easily seen that no human 

authority was necessary to make up the canon 

of Scripture. It is divinely indicated; and we 

would be very obtuse not to be able to recognize 

it, even if those writings were lying around 

loosely and separately. Those who compiled 

the Scriptures merely did what we could do 

to-day without their aid: they read the mutual 

indorsements of the Lord and the apostles and 

prophets. But while we do not accord to 

them any authority or special wisdom in the 

matter, we do gratefully accept the compilation 

as a providential aid to our study of the 

complete Scriptures, in the same way that we 

also accept the still more recent helps of concordances, 

etc. 

And all of these providential helps have 
aided in the discovery in the Scriptures of the 
divine plan of the ages, which links them all together 
as parts of one harmonious whole which 
cannot be broken. Without the aid of the 
compilation of the Scriptures and its systematic 
division into chapters and verses for convenience 
of reference, and the valuable aid of complete 
concordances in the comparison of scripture 
with scripture, humanly speaking, we would 
at least be at great disadvantage, if indeed we 
could at all have arrived at an exact knowledge 
of the plan of God. God, who works by 
means, and who uses human instrumentalities 

R1584 : page 294 

when adapted to his service, wisely and graciously 

had all this preparatory work done for 

us before the due time came for the full discovery 

and understanding of his plan of the 

ages. And we rejoice and give thanks to God, 

and highly esteem every consecrated and honored 

human instrumentality which has facilitated 

our progress in the knowledge of the 

truth, though we recognize them merely as the 

instruments of a wise over-ruling providence 

which carefully comprehended, and carefully 

adjusted, all the various means to the accomplishment 

of his purpose in the full enlightenment 

of his elect "in due time," "the time 

of the end."-Dan. 12:10. 

Those who lack the evidence of the plan of 
the ages to the inspiration of the Bible lack 
the strongest testimony of all, and the time is 
very near when none will be able to stand the 
searching tests of this day of the Lord who are 
not amply supported by its strength. Praise 
the Lord for his keeping power: "his truth is 



our shield and buckler:" it is a network of 
testimony that cannot be broken. 



R1585 : page 294 

THOUGH YE BE ESTABLISHED. 



"I will not be negligent to put you always in 
remembrance of these things, though ye know 
them, and be established in the 
present truth."— 2 Pet. 1:12. 

WHAT things? Why, of the necessity of giving 
all diligence to add to our faith virtue; 
and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, 
temperance; and to temperance, patience; and 
to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly 
kindness, charity:... For if ye do these 
things ye shall never fall; for so an entrance 
shall be ministered unto you abundantly into 
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ.— Verses 5-11. 

To be established in the truth signifies that 
we have carefully studied and thoroughly proved 
it by "the law and the testimony" (Isa. 8:20), 
and that as a consequence we are convinced of 
its verity, so that our faith is steadfast and immovable: 
we know in whom we have believed; 
we have tasted and seen that the Lord is good; 
we have partaken of the sweets of fellowship 
with him; we have partaken of his spirit of 
meekness, faith and godliness to such an extent 
as to be led into a joyful realization of the 
fulness of his grace as manifested in the wonderful 
divine plan of the ages; and we have 
been permitted to see, not only the various 
features of that plan, but also the necessity and 
reasonableness of all its various measures in 
order to the full accomplishment of its glorious 
outcome in the fulness of the appointed times. 
This is what it is to be "established in the 
present truth." It is indeed a most blessed condition, 
bringing with it such peace and joy as 
the world can neither give nor take away. 

But though we be thus established in the 
present truth, we need to bear in mind that our 
election to the high position to which we are 
called is not yet made sure. The race for the 
prize of our high calling is still before us, and 
we are yet in the enemy's country, surrounded 
by many subtle and powerful foes, so that if we 
would be successful we must "fight the good 



fight of faith," remembering, too, that "the 
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but 
[God's Truth is] mighty to the pulling down 
of the strong-holds" of error and superstition 
and of inbred sin; and remembering, also, that 
"we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but against 
principalities, against powers, against the rulers 
of the darkness of this world, against spiritual 
wickedness in high places."— 2 Cor. 10:4; 
Eph. 6:12. 

It is in view of these facts— of the warfare 
before us, of the subtlety of our temptations and 
of the weaknesses of the flesh— that the faithful 
Apostle Peter urges all diligence in the cultivation 
of the Christian graces and a continual 
calling to remembrance of the precious truths 
we have learned, that we may be strengthened 
thereby to make our calling and election sure. 
Faith is a good thing; but faith without virtuous 
works is dead; and to hold the truth in 
unrighteousness is worse than never to have 
received it. The truth is given to us for its 
sanctifying effect upon our hearts and lives. 
Therefore let it have free course and be glorified. 

R1585 : page 295 

Let its precious fruits appear more and 
more from day to day. Add to your faith virtue 
—true excellence of character, such excellence 
of character as will mark you as separate 
from the world and its spirit. In all such the 
world will see those moral qualities which they 
must approve, however they may oppose our 
faith. Add sterling honesty, truth and fair dealing 
in all business relations; moral integrity, 
in all social relations; manifestly clean hands 
and a pure heart, and a bridled tongue that works 
no ill to a neighbor. All of these the world has 
a right to expect from those who call themselves 
Christians; and all of these are indispensable 
features of that virtuous character which 
must be added to our faith. The clean hands 
will not dabble in anything that is not virtuous: 
they will have nothing to do with unrighteous 
schemes or projects in business. The pure heart 
will not devise evil things, or harbor evil 
thoughts, or plot mischief. And the bridled 
tongue will not be given to evil speaking, but 
will hold its peace when it cannot speak well 
and wisely. But the promptings of virtue go 
further than merely these negative features 
which refuse to do anything which would work 
ill to a neighbor; they incite not only to passive, 
but also to active, goodness— in benevolent 
charity which seeks to alleviate suffering, to 



sympathize with sorrow, to comfort those in 
distress and to elevate and bless others— to 
assist "all men as we have opportunity." 

To such a virtuous character we are counseled 
to add knowledge— the knowledge of God's 
character, that we may the more thoroughly 
imitate it, and of his truth, that we may more 
fully conform to its teachings: And to knowledge, 
temperance— moderation, self-restraint, 
in all things. "Let your moderation be known 
unto all men." We are not to be hasty and 
hot-tempered, or rash and thoughtless. But we 
should strive to be evenly balanced, thoughtful 
and considerate: our whole manner should be 
characterized by that carefulness which would 
indicate that we are ever mindful of the Lord's 
pleasure, of our responsibility to him as his 
representatives, and of our influence upon our 
fellow-men, to see that it always be for good, 
never for evil. 

"And to temperance, patience." "Let 
patience have her perfect work, that ye may 
be perfect and entire, wanting nothing." Yes, 
this grace smooths the way for every other, because 
all must be acquired under the process of 
patient and continuous self-discipline. Not a 
step of progress can be gained without the exercise 
of this grace of patience; and not one of 
the graces more beautifully adorns the Christian 
character, or wins the approval of the world's 
conscience, or glorifies the God of all grace 
whose truth inspires it. It is long-suffering 
meekness earnestly striving to stem the tide of 
human imperfection and weakness, and endeavoring 
with pains-taking care to regain the 
divine likeness. It is slow to wrath and plenteous 
in mercy: it is quick to perceive the paths 
of truth and righteousness, and prompt to walk 
in them: it is mindful of its own imperfections 
and sympathetic with the imperfections and 
shortcomings of others. 

"And to patience, godliness"— a careful 
study and imitation of the divine character as 
presented in the divine Word. 

"And to godliness, brotherly kindness"— 
an exercise and manifestation of the principles 
of the divine character toward our fellow-men. 

"And to brotherly kindness, charity"— love. 
Kindness may be manifested where but little 
love exists toward the subject of such kindness; 
but we cannot long persevere in such acts of 
kindness before a sympathetic interest is awakened; 
and by and by that interest, continually 
exercised, deepens into love. And even though 
the subject may be unlovely in character, the 
love of sympathy for the fallen and degraded 



grows, until it becomes tender and solicitous 
and akin to that of a parent for an erring son. 

Peter indeed describes a most amiable character, 
but who can consider it without feeling 
that to attain it will be a life-work. It cannot 
be accomplished in a day, nor a year, but 
the whole life must be devoted to it; and day 
by day, if we are faithful, we should realize a 
measure of growth in grace and of development 
of Christian character. It is not enough that 
we know the truth, nor to be contented to 
hold it in unrighteousness. We must see to it 
that the truth is having its legitimate and designed 

R1585 : page 296 

effect upon the character. And if the 
truth is thus received into good and honest 
hearts, we have the assurance of the Apostle 
that we shall never fall, and that in due time 
we shall be received into the Kingdom of our 
Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. 

Hence we see the necessity of ever keeping 
the instructions and precepts of the Lord fresh 
in our minds, and of drinking deep into its 
inspiring spirit, although we are already established 
in the faith. To be established in the 
faith is one thing, but to be established in 
Christian character and in all the graces of the 
spirit is quite another. 

A PRACTICAL SUGGESTION. 



Feeling as we do the necessity of a deeper 
work of grace, both in our own hearts and in 
the hearts of all of the dear household of faith, 
the thought has occurred to us that more special 
effort in this particular direction on the part of 
us all would probably be of great benefit. We 
do not know through what discipline of faith 
and patience we may yet be called to pass in 
the approaching dark night of which we are 
forewarned, but "sufficient unto the day is the 
evil thereof," and also, thank God, sufficient 
unto the day is the grace thereof, if we earnestly 
lay hold of it and patiently continue in 
it. As each day brings its trials, so, if we have 
been rightly exercised by the trials, each day 
should bring its victories— thus leaving us 
strengthened and more firmly established in 
character, as well as in faith. 

With the end in view of specially promoting 
the growth of Christian character, our suggestion, 
which has already been made and adopted 



by the congregation in Allegheny, is that 

wherever a few of the consecrated can arrange 

to meet together, it would be well to appoint 

a mid-week meeting for this special purpose. 

Such a meeting should be devoted to worship, 

prayer and praise, and to brotherly exhortation, 

conference and counsel, but not to Bible study 

or controversy. All discussions of doctrinal 

matters should be eliminated from such a meeting, 

and such subjects as would elicit controversy 

avoided, leaving such matters for another 

meeting, at an appropriate hour on the Lord's 

day, when all meet together; the object being, 

not to ignore doctrine, nor to discourage Bible-study; 

but, while meeting this necessity at the 

one meeting (on the Lord's day), to devote the 

other (the mid-week meeting) to the other 

equal necessity, without distraction. 

Our arrangement here in Allegheny and Pittsburg 
is as follows: As our congregation is much 
scattered, we have them parcelled into as many 
neighborhood gatherings as is necessary for the 
accommodation of all desiring to attend; and a 
leader is appointed for each meeting, discretion 
being observed as to capability. They should 
be brethren established in the faith— sound in 
doctrine, faithful and pious. These meetings 
are held on Wednesday evening at the residence 
of some member of each little group. The 
meeting is opened with a hymn and prayer, the 
reading by the leader of an appropriate passage 
of Scripture, bearing on the subject of practical 
piety; then each one is asked to give his or her 
personal experience as to progress in the narrow 
way— as to how he or she is growing in grace 
and striving to overcome the world, the flesh and 
the devil. Here they may humbly tell of their 
victories, or speak of their trials, or ask for 
Christian counsel and sympathy in hard places, 
speaking more freely in such little gatherings 
than would be possible or proper in larger assemblies. 
Here they can hear each other's petitions 
for each other, and Christian love and 
sympathy flow the more freely from heart to 
heart. 

The object kept in mind at these meetings 
is a fresh, living, weekly and daily experience 
with the Lord and in his service, and not 
merely a stale experience of the remote past. 
A clear past experience is good, but a clear 
present experience is better;— much more vitally 
important. Doctrine is ignored at these 
meetings except as the word doctrine applies 
to all Scripture teachings, including hope, trust, 
obedience, godliness, prayer, etc. Too many, 
we find, have been contenting themselves with 



knowing the truth, without making special efforts 
to live it, daily and hourly. As honesty 
of heart and faith in the Redeemer's finished 
work and consecration to his service are necessary 
to a full entrance into the "holy," 

R1585 : page 297 

where the deeper features of the divine plan 
can be discerned and fully appreciated, so 
these qualities must remain, must abide, or the 
light will become darkness— you will be cast 
out of the light into the outer darkness in 
which the world and the nominal church grope 
after the phosphorescent glimmerings of error 
—Spiritism, Christian Science, Theosophy and 
Universalism. 

The leader of such a meeting should study to 
adapt his counsel, correction or encouragement 
to the special needs of each of the little group 
over which he is placed, and his reverent 
piety and personal interest in each should inspire 
the confidence of all. We believe that 
such mid-week meetings would indeed prove 
steppingstones to higher attainments in the divine 
life, and that thus all may be greatly blessed 
and profited; and the whole body will be able 
the more effectually to minister to one another 
in spiritual things. At a monthly general 
meeting of the same character, we hear of the 
spiritual progress of the various little groups 
both from the leaders and the various attendants, 
and quarterly the leaders are transferred 
to other groups. 

May the blessing of the Lord go with the suggestion, 
and may the outcome be a strengthening 
of the bond of Christian love and mutual 
sympathy and fellowship everywhere. 



R1585 : page 297 

"WHO IS SUFFICIENT FOR THESE THINGS?" 



"For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that 
are saved, and in them that perish. To the one we are 
the savor of death unto death; and to the other the 
savor of life unto life. And who is sufficient for 
these things? For we are not as many, which 
corrupt the Word of God, but as of sincerity, 
but as of God, in the sight of God 
speak we in Christ."— 2 Cor. 2:15-17. 



THIS ministry, which all the consecrated, as 

ambassadors for Christ, have received, is 

one of tremendous import. It greatly influences 

the final destiny of those to whom we 

preach this gospel of the Kingdom, the tendency 

being either to life or to death. The 

Apostle's language here is another of the solemn 

warnings of the inspired Word against the 

danger of the second death, and should wake 

up any who have been deluded into the idea 

that there is no such possibility, to a sense of 

their danger in permitting the great adversary 

to thus deceive them. There is an equal responsibility 

on the part both of those who undertake 

to preach the gospel and of those who 

hear it. The truth is God's truth, and the responsibility 

both of speaking and of hearing it 

is very great. 

The Apostle's words show that many in his 
day, as in ours, failed to realize this responsibility, 
and, to answer their own selfish ends, 
corrupted the Word of God. To wilfully or 
recklessly corrupt the Word of God— to vitiate 
its pure and holy doctrines; to add to it 
the vain philosophies of ambitious men and 
seek to support their theories by perverting its 
truths; to underrate its exceeding great and 
precious promises and mystify the conditions 
upon which they may be realized; or to minimize 
or make void the solemn warnings of the 
Word of God— is indeed dangerous business, 
in which the faithful saints will never engage, 
but in which those who fall away from the faith 
are usually most active— deceiving and being 
deceived. 

To be faithful ambassadors for Christ— faithful 
representatives of the truth and faithful 
proclaimers of it— requires great humility and 
simplicity of heart. It necessitates the complete 
ignoring of all worldly ambitions and 
aims, and the cultivation of a brave spirit of 
endurance which will not shrink from any reproach 
which fidelity to the truth may bring. 
And such service, the Apostle here shows, is 
acceptable to God as sweet incense, no matter 
what may be the effect upon those to whom we 
minister, whether they accept or reject the 
message of divine grace. What God is looking 
for in us is loyalty to him and devotion to 
his cause; and this condition of heart he appreciates, 
regardless of our success or failure 
to secure large results. What a comfort it is 
amidst all discouragements to know that under 
all circumstances the spirit of Christ in us is as 

R1585 : page 298 



sweet incense to God. And the reward of his 
constant approval is richer than all the unwholesome 
sweets of ambition gained by corrupting 
the Word of God. 

To the hearer of this gospel, the message 
must prove either a savor of life unto (or tending 
to) life, or a savor of death unto (or tending 
to) death. His responsibility is great: there 
is no neutral ground; he either receives it or 
rejects it. But observe that the statement is 
not that the rejection of any item of truth inevitably 
dooms the rejector to death, and vice 
versa, but that the tendency of such a course is 
to death, and of the opposite course to life, unless 
interrupted— changed. 

Thus, for instance, the Lord, in reproving 
the Scribes and Pharisees, who rejected the 
gospel and yet claimed to be the children of 
God and leaders and examples of godliness to 
others, significantly inquired, "How can ye 
escape the condemnation of gehenna"— the 
everlasting destruction, the second death? 
(Matt. 23:33.) In rejecting the truth so plainly 
brought to their attention, and in pursuing the 
hypocritical course of claiming to be faithful and 
devoted children of God, they were forming and 
establishing such characters that, ere long, repentance 
would be impossible to them. Few, 
perhaps, clearly realize how serious a thing it is 
to be making character, and that every act and 
every thought leaves its impress upon the soul. 
Every right thought and act tends to establish 
the character in righteousness, while every 
wrong thought and act, and every self-deception 
tends to confirm and establish an unrighteous 
character. And when a wrong course is 
adopted and persistently followed— when conscience 
is stifled, and when reason and Scripture 
are perverted to selfish ends, until the heart 
is deceived and the judgment is overcome— 
who can predict the repentance of such a one? 

Such construct characters or wills so out of 
harmony with God and righteousness as to be 
fit only for destruction. (Heb. 6:4-6.) How 
can such "escape the condemnation of Gehenna"? 
for God will not permit any one to live 
whose will is confirmed in unrighteousness. 
How responsible then is the position of those 
who are building character in themselves and 
in others! Remember that our characters are 
manifested by our habits of life; and each act, 
even the smallest, tends to form some new 
habit, or to confirm one already established. 
How important, then, that our thoughts and 
actions should not be aimless, but with a purpose 



(1 Cor. 10:31); and, above all, that our 

lives should be "transformed [re-formed] by 

the renewing of our minds;" that, putting 

aside the evil, and all influences which tend 

toward evil, we should receive of the Lord, 

through his Word, the "spirit of a sound 

mind," the "mind of Christ." In this view 

of the case, it is indeed a solemn thing to live, 

a solemn thing to think, and to act; and it behooves 

us to guard well our words, our thoughts 

and our actions, and to ever bear in mind our 

responsibility to God, both for ourselves and 

for others as ambassadors for Christ. 

"And who is sufficient for these things?" 
Surely none of us in our own strength. We 
need first of all to give ourselves to the Lord 
without reserve, and then daily to drink in 
more and more of his spirit by communion 
with him through his Word and in prayer; and 
constantly to watch and pray lest we enter into 
temptation. 

Let all the consecrated endeavor more and 
more to realize their responsibility, both in the 
matter of their own character-building and also 
in that of building up others in the most holy 
faith and in the character which is the legitimate 
result of that faith. The issues of eternal 
life and eternal death are before us, and before 
those to whom we present this gospel; and 
therefore it behooves us carefully and prayerfully 
to present the pure truth of God in all 
sincerity and in the spirit of Christ before God, 
ever bearing in mind that it is a savor either 
of life unto life or of death unto death. 

"Grant skill each sacred theme to trace, 
With loving voice and glowing tongue, 

As when upon thy words of grace 

The wondering crowds enraptured hung. 

"Give strength, blest Savior, in thy might; 

Illuminate our hearts, and we, 
Transformed into thine image bright, 

Shall teach, and love, and live, like thee." 



page 299 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 



LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1585 : page 299 
JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON III., OCT. 15, ROM. 5:1-11. 

Golden Text— "While we were yet sinners, Christ died 
for us."— Rom. 5:8. 

Thus far this epistle has established (1) 
the necessity of justification to salvation 
from sin and death; (2) that the terms of 
this salvation are alike for both Jews and 
Gentiles; (3) that faith in the precious blood 
of Christ as the payment of our ransom, implying 
a humble, grateful reliance upon the 
same for salvation, is the one divinely appointed 
condition of justification and salvation; 
and (4) in Abraham's case, he has 
illustrated the nature and promptings of such 
a true and saving faith. In this lesson the 
Apostle refers to the blessed influence of faith 
upon the character, and to its bearings upon 
the future prospects of those exercising it. 

Verse 1 shows that the immediate effect 
of faith is a blessed realization of peace with 
God; not through personal worthiness of 
his favor, but through our Lord Jesus 
Christ," by whom we have received the 
atonement, his righteousness being imputed 
to us by faith. In thus accepting him whom 
God has appointed for our salvation, as our 
redeemer and Lord, we thereby acknowledge 
our own imperfections and sins and the necessity 
of redemption by the payment of a 
ransom, a substitute, an equivalent price, for 
that which was lost through sin. 

This first step of faith restores the believer 
to all the privileges and blessings 
originally bestowed upon the human son of 
God, Adam, and afterward forfeited by him, 
though their full realization does not belong 
to the present age, viz.— everlasting 
life, uninterrupted peace and communion 
with God, and all the blessings of his fatherly 
providence. But, until the appointed 
time of Christ's reign, the experiences of 
the believer are the joys of faith and hope, 
and of present peace and communion with 



God in consequence of that faith and hope. 

In other words he holds a check for full restitution, 

to be honored and cashed in the 

due time of God's appointment. 

VERSE 2 has reference to a second privileged 
step of faith, an access by faith into 
a still higher grace, or position of favor, 
wherein also we stand by faith and rejoice 
in hope of the glory of God. Elsewhere we 
have been shown that this higher grace is 
the privilege of being "transformed" to a 
higher nature, of being made "partakers of 
the divine nature," "heirs of God, and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ, if so be that we 
suffer with him," and of being made like 
him and seeing him "as he is"— "the express 
image of the Father's person." (Rom. 12:2; 
2 Pet. 1:4; Rom. 8:17; 1 John 3:2; 
Heb. 1:3.) This is the "high calling" (Phil. 3:14) 
of those who, being justified by faith, 
have enough faith to go still further and accept 
and appreciate this great privilege of 
our high calling and enough of the spirit of 
Christ to follow in his footsteps of self-sacrifice 
faithfully, even unto death. The access 
into this higher grace cannot be obtained 
except from the standpoint of the 
previous grace of justification. 

This is clearly manifest from the exhortation 
of the Apostle in Rom. 12:1. "I 
beseech you therefore, brethren,... that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, 
holy, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable 
service." Those addressed are 
"brethren" of the household of faith, justified 
believers, before they are invited to 
accept this higher grace. Otherwise, being 
still under condemnation to death, they 
would have nothing to offer in sacrifice to 
God, and certainly nothing which would be 
holy and acceptable. Of this we have assurance 
also in the typical sacrifices of the 
Mosaic law. The sacrifices of the day of 
atonement which foreshadowed the "better 
sacrifices" (Heb. 9:23) of Christ Jesus and 
his body, the Church, must be without blemish 
(Lev. 1:3; 3:1-6; 4:3,23,28; 22:21-25), 
and so must the "better sacrifices" be. 
Christ Jesus, our Head, "the High Priest 
of our profession," was "holy, harmless, undefiled, 
and separate from sinners;" "he 
knew no sin;" and in him, therefore, the 
Father was well pleased. (Heb. 7:26; 1 John 3:5; 
Matt. 3:17.) We, however, have no 
such actual perfection; but, clothed in his 



R1585 : page 300 

imputed righteousness by faith in his blood 
shed for the remission of sins— justified— 
we also are acceptable to God in the Beloved. 
(Eph. 1:6.) And thus, being called, 
we are eligible to the higher grace of sonship 
on the plane of the divine nature, and 
to joint-heirship with Christ Jesus of the 
Father's love and bounty; and to us belong 
the "exceeding great and precious promises" 
ofGod.-2Pet. 1:4. 

VERSES 3,4. In this confident and glorious 
hope we rejoice, even in the midst of 
tribulations, knowing that they constitute 
the discipline necessary to fit us for our future 
exalted station. If rightly exercised by 
these, by a spirit of humility and submission, 
they will work in us the beautiful grace of 
patience. And patience in submitting to 
trial will lead to large and valuable experience 
—experience of God's love and wisdom 
and grace and comfort. And this experience 
will brighten hope and strengthen our 
confidence in God. 

VERSE 5. "And hope maketh not ashamed, 
because," etc. Those inspired by this hope 
experience no sense of shame under the discipline 
and trials they must endure. The 
world, and merely nominal Christians, may 
despise and reject and persecute them, as 
they did their Lord; but, having the love of 
God shed abroad in their hearts, they glory 
in tribulations and rejoice to be counted 
worthy to suffer for his name's sake. And 
in the glorious message they bear there is 
nothing to be ashamed of; for it is the power 
of God unto salvation to every one that believeth. 
It tells of an election now of a 
"peculiar people," for an exalted position 
of service, and of the abounding free grace 
to all the families of the earth when, in due 
time" (1 Tim. 2:6), the elect "little flock," 
the "royal priesthood," the "peculiar people," 
have been exalted to reign with Christ 
in his Kingdom. 

VERSES 6-8 return to the subject of justification 
to point out the great love of God 
in providing for the redemption of sinners 
at such cost to himself. Rarely, indeed, 
would human love sacrifice life for another, 
even for a righteous person; but God commended 
his love to us, in that while we 
were yet sinners, he gave his only begotten 
Son to die for us— a gift which fond parents 
of an only and dutiful child can perhaps 



most fully appreciate. 

The Apostle also points out our helpless 
condition— that we were without any 
strength to help ourselves, and that our salvation 
is therefore the free gift of God, 
through Christ, and hence a manifestation 
of his great love. He further indicates that 
the time of the payment of our ransom price 
was definitely prearranged— "In due time, 
Christ died for the ungodly." This is a 
marked reference to the fact that time is a 
special feature in God's great plan of the 
ages. There was a particular appointed 
time for the payment of our ransom, as well 

R1586 : page 300 

as for every other feature of the wondrous 
plan. Those who wish to consider this important 
time element, will do well to study 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., The Time is 
at Hand. 

VERSES 9,10 teach us to build upon this 
manifestation of God's love in the gift of 
his Son, and our justification through faith 
in his blood, the reasonable, as well as 
Scriptural, hope of final complete salvation 
through him. When we were enemies, God, 
by the death of his Son, manifested his sympathy 
for us by paying our penalty for us; 
and "much more, being reconciled [being 
justified and recognized as sons of God], we 
shall be saved from wrath [restored to the 
proper condition of sons— liberated from sin 
and death, the manifestation of God's wrath] 
through him." 

Thus, as long as we continue to trust in 
the merit of our Redeemer, gratefully accepting 
the free gift of God's love, we have 
the fullest reasonable and Scriptural assurance 
of salvation. 

VERSE 1 1 points out a further cause for 
rejoicing in the fact that we who believe 
have now received the atonement— that we 
are now reckoned of God as perfect through 
Christ, and as worthy to be called his sons, 
and to receive the favors of sons. Having 
this reckoned standing now, we are in position 
to receive the additional favor of our 
high calling to be the bride and joint-heir 
of his dear Son. May all the consecrated 
duly appreciate their high calling, and strive 
to make their calling and election sure. 
"This is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even your faith."— 1 John 5:4. 



R1586 : page 300 
CHRISTIAN LIVING. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON IV., OCT. 22, ROM. 12:1-15. 

Golden Text— "Be not overcome of evil, but overcome 
evil with good."— Rom. 12:21. 

Having in previous chapters called attention 
to the marvelous depths of divine wisdom 

R1586 : page 301 

and grace manifested in the plan of 

the ages, and having pointed out its strong 

foundation and its ultimate glorious purpose, 

the Apostle now (in chapters 12-15) proceeds 

to draw some very practical lessons, 

and to exhort the household of faith to fully 

appreciate and accept the grace of God 

through Christ, and to be faithful and worthy 

sons and heirs of God. 

VERSE 1 is an exhortation to those already 
justified by faith in Christ as the Redeemer, 
and who are therefore "brethren" 
of the household of faith, to enter into the 
higher grace of sons of God on the spiritual 
plane and become joint-heirs with his 
dear Son and partakers with him of the divine 
nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) The way to this 
exalted position is pointed out as a way of 
sacrifice— "Present your bodies a living sacrifice." 
To do so is to do just what our 
Lord Jesus did, who said, "I came not to 
do mine own will, but the will of him that 
sent me." It is to ignore the will of the 
flesh with all its ambitions, hopes and aims, 
however proper they may be in themselves, 
henceforth to devote all our time, our energies 
and our talents, be they many or few, to 
the doing of the Master's work, so that we 
can say with Christ Jesus, it is my meat to 
do his will and to finish his work. (John 4:34.) 
And this consecration is even unto 
death, when, the course being finished, the 
reward is sure. 

Such a sacrifice on the part of justified 
believers is reckoned of God as "holy," because 
the merit of our Redeemer is imputed 
to us through faith; and it is therefore acceptable 
to God, and is but our reasonable 
service, and would be so even if no such reward 
were promised. 



VERSE 2. "And be not conformed to 
[patterned after] this world [its ideas, hopes 
and aims]; but be ye transformed [remodeled, 
changed] by the renewing of your 
mind [by taking the mind of Christ— by endeavoring 
to think as he thought and to do 
as he did or would do in your circumstances], 
that ye may prove what is that good and 
acceptable and perfect will of God"— for 
only by coming into such an attitude of mind 
can we fully know the will of God. Any 
other attitude is more or less biased by prejudice, 
making our discernment of the will 
of God more or less indistinct. 

VERSE 3. Through the grace given unto 
him Paul foresaw that one of the greatest 
temptations among Christians would be ambition 
to be great and highly esteemed, if 
not by the world, at least among those in 
the faith, and to do some great thing that 
would attract attention, rather than the common 
things that constitute the bulk of actual 
service. And therefore he counsels every 
man to take a sober estimate of his talents, 
neither overrating nor underrating them, so 
that he may make the best use of them as 
a wise and faithful steward. 

VERSES 4,5 assure us of the important 
and honorable place of every member of the 
body of Christ, though all have not the 
same office. All are useful and needful one 
to another, and each should seek to know 
his place and to do his part in it for the 
edification of the body. 

VERSES 6-8 urge faithfulness in the use 
of our talents in accordance with a sober 
and just estimate of them. Thus, if we have 
no talent for public speaking or teaching, 
we should not waste our energies and misrepresent 
the truth by poor attempts to use 
a talent not possessed; but, having found 
that capacity in which we can do most effectual 
service for the truth, let us spend our 
energies along that line with diligence and 
carefulness. "Having, then, gifts differing," 
let us use them with diligence, patience, 
simplicity and cheerfulness, contented to be 
very humble in the estimation of others that 
our humble talents may increase the more 
to the Master's glory. 

VERSES 9,10. "Let love be unfeigned" 
—not hypocritical. And let it always be 
pure— not a sickly sentimentalism which 
forgets or ignores the proper bounds of propriety 
between brethren and sisters in 
Christ, which even the world recognizes, 



and which all the saints should the more 
firmly establish. The pure love of Christ in 
our hearts knows no man after the flesh, and 
puts no confidence in the flesh; it recognizes 
the inherent depravity of the old nature and 
keeps the flesh under the heel of the new 
nature. Consequently, its disposition is the 
very reverse of undue familiarity: it is dignified, 
simple, pure, and maintains always 
that proper reserve with the opposite sex 
which is approved even by the world, and 
which much more becometh saints. The 
manifestations of love among the saints 
should rather be after the manner indicated 
in verse 10— by "in honor preferring one 
another," and by such kindness as is entirely 
consistent with the most refined modesty 
and purity. In such a state of mind and 

R1586 : page 302 

heart, sisters will prefer to exchange their 
confidences and intimacies with their husbands 
or with sisters, and brethren; with 
their wives or with fellow brethren; thus 
no reproach will be brought upon the cause 
of Christ. 

The Apostle again indicates the disposition 
of this pure love among the saints in 
his letter to Timothy (1 Tim. 5:1,3,5), saying, 
"Rebuke not an elder [an aged brother, 
even if he has erred; have respect to his 
years], but entreat him as a father; and the 
younger men as brethren; the elder women 
as mothers; the younger women as sisters, 
with all purity [with no semblance of undue 
familiarity]. Honor widows that are 
widows indeed"— whose trust is in God, 
and whose conduct is consistent with that 
trust. 

"Abhor that which is evil and cleave to 
that which is good;" "abstain from all appearance 
of evil," and "let not your good 
be evil spoken of" through any careless 
or imprudent conduct; and, "finally, whatsoever 
things are true, whatsoever things 
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever 
things are pure, whatsoever things 
are lovely, whatsoever things are of good 
report: if there be any virtue, and if there 
be any praise, think on these things," and 
acton them.— 1 Thes. 5:22; Rom. 14:16; 
Phil. 4:8. 

VERSES 11-15 need no comment, but are 
worthy of careful pondering by all those 
who are earnestly striving to develop in 



themselves the likeness of Christ. 

R1586 : page 302 

ABSTINENCE FOR THE SAKE OF OTHERS. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON V., OCT. 29, 1 COR. 8:1-13. 

Golden Text— "We then that are strong ought to bear 
the infirmities of the weak."— Rom. 15:1. 

The Corinthian Christians were in the 
midst of an idolatrous people, and had come 
out from them. They had heard and accepted 
the gospel of Christ, and now desired 
to be entirely separate from idolaters. To 
such an extent was idolatry practiced in 
Corinth that most of the meat offered for 
sale in the markets was first offered to idols, 
and it was not always easy to learn which 
had and which had not been offered in sacrifice 
to some heathen deity. Some of the 
Christians were conscientiously opposed to 
having anything to do with such meats, 
while others felt that it made no difference 
whether they partook of it or not, since the 
meat suffered no change, and since they had 
no sympathy with the idolatrous worship. 
The question was referred to the Apostle 
Paul, who replied:— 

R1587 : page 302 

VERSES 1,4,7. "Now, concerning the 
idol sacrifices, we know that an image is 
nothing in the world [that it is only an imaginary 
god], and that no one is God but 
one. For though there be that are called 
gods, whether in heaven or in earth (as 
there be gods many and lords many), yet to 
us there is but one god, the Father, of whom 
are all things, and we in him; and one Lord 
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and 
we by him. But this knowledge is not in 
all." (The intervening lines are parenthetic. 
See Diaglott). All men were not enlightened 
by the gospel and so relieved from 
superstition; and, consequently, the eating 
of such meats in their presence might seem 
to them to be an indorsement of the idol-worship; 
and thus they might be misled 
into a partial indorsement of idolatry. Or at 
least the influence of such Christians might 
be greatly weakened. 



Therefore, while he admits that there 
would be nothing wrong— no sacrifice of 
any principle— in the eating of such meat 
(verse 8), he advises that these Christians 
forego the use of their liberty in this matter 
out of deference to the conscience of weaker 
brethren who might otherwise be made to 
stumble. 

And so clearly did the Apostle realize his 
responsibility for the weaker brethren, that 
he said that if his eating of meat would 
cause his brother to stumble he would never 
eat meat.— Verse 13. 

Nor was he inclined to glory over his 
weaker brother because of his fuller knowledge 
and consequent freedom from superstition. 
Mere knowledge, he said, puffs up, 
but love builds up. (Verses 1-4.) Therefore 
he preferred in love to seek to build up 
the weaker brother's faith and to avoid 
placing any stumbling block in his way, 
rather than to boast of his superior knowledge 
and liberty and to cause his brother 
for whom Christ died to stumble. The latter 
course he shows to be sinful (verse 12), 
while the former is the only one consistent 
with true Christian love. 

The Golden Text from the Apostle's letter 
to the Romans, with the two succeeding verses, 
further enforces this same sentiment, 
which all would do well to consider in every 
matter. While with us at this day this principle 

R1587 : page 303 

does not involve the eating of meats, it 
does touch many other things which should 
be considered in the light of our responsibilities 
for our brother's keeping in the faith. 
It should regulate our general conduct, our 
conversation, our manners, our dress, our 
conduct and habits of life, that all may be 
to the glory of God, to the edification of our 
brethren, and that our light may shine before 
the world. 



page 303 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I cannot refrain 
from writing you, for my heart is full 



of joy and thanksgiving to our Heavenly 
Father for this great and glorious knowledge 
which he has been pleased to give me, 
and I wish to render unto you my heartfelt 
thanks for so many encouraging words. I 
find that many are very ready to receive 
the truth, and I explain it to the best of my 
ability; but I cannot lend one book to the 
many that wish it, and I expect soon to 
order more. I believe I could sell many. 
I cannot express in words the enjoyment 
the TOWER gives us. May God bless it as 
the means of placing many upon the sure 
foundation, which is Christ Jesus. 

How wonderful is God in his love to us! 
It seems almost too good to be true, only 
that it is sealed with his own name and 
with the blood of his only begotten Son. 
God will be with you and he will greatly 
bless you, for he has many hungry souls 
crying out for the Bread of Life. 

Yours in the Lord, T. H. LLOYD. 



R1587 : page 303 

DEAR SIR:— In the good providence of God, 
your three volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN 
were placed in my hands by one of the Lord's 
"little ones." They have been read carefully 
and prayerfully, over and over again; 
and for them I render unceasing praise to 
our blessed Lord. 

I am one of those "who love his appearing," 
and I am watching the "signs of the 
times" with unbounded interest. Enclosed 
find subscription to the WATCH TOWER. 

Yours in his love, MRS. M. E. MORRILL. 



KIND SIRS:-"He that desireth knowledge, 
let him ask of God." I have realized 
untold blessings from VOL. I. of the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series; and, desiring to know 
more of the truth of God, I send my order 
for the other two volumes. Find enclosed 
fifty cents. 

May God bless you in the work you are 
now advancing. Yours with respect, 
REV. W. H. PRATHES. 



GENTLEMEN: -About two years ago I 



read the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
and am well pleased with it. It sheds new 
light on God's Word. After critical examination 
I am convinced that it presents the 
truth. I now desire volumes two and three 
of the DAWN series. 

I joined the Missionary Baptists when 
about 17 years old, and was a zealous member 
until about ten years ago, when I began 
to investigate their teachings. To my great 
astonishment I discovered they were teaching 
and following their creed and the 
doctrines and traditions of men. So about 
three years ago I earnestly requested them 
to drop my name from their membership. 
I almost became an avowed infidel. 

After reading The Plan of the Ages 
(bought of a colporteur) and skimming 
through volumes two and three (borrowed 
on short time), I lost that proclivity to infidelity, 
and again enlisted as a soldier of 
the cross. I am an earnest seeker after 
truth. I have had a strong desire to preach 
the gospel of Christ ever since my youth, 
and I earnestly hope and pray that the day 
is fast approaching when, by the grace of 
God, and careful study, I shall know what 
I believe, and why I believe it, and shall 
bear to many the precious news of "good 
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all 
people." Your prayers are earnestly desired. 

Yours fraternally, O. H. PUREFOY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I praise God 
for the truth as I now see it. For seventeen 
years I wandered in darkness, groping, 
expecting something, I knew not what, and 
believing all the time that those who did 
not repent and accept Christ in this life 
would be lost; but I do thank God that this 
truth has dawned upon me in its beauty 
and holiness: that I can see a God of justice, 
love, mercy and power, and that in Jesus 
Christ, to whom I hope to be united as one 
of the Bride, I see that which is altogether 
lovely. To him may all honor and praise be 
given. Amen. G. W. LACY. 

R1587 : page 304 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-When out 
collecting for a banquet in the Salvation 
Army about the first of April, I was introduced 
to DAWN. Words cannot express 



the joy and delight which that book and the 
TOWER lent me by a friend have given me. 
I acted at once on my honest conviction, 
gave in my resignation and commenced to 
spread the truth. A great number have 
since commenced to read DAWN, but the 
officer in charge here is shocked at my 
course. He called a special meeting and 
denounced me as a heretic, infidel, traitor 
to the Army and a person to be generally 
shunned— I suppose to prevent the soldiers 
visiting me as I was widely known here. 
He said he did not care what we believed, 
if we did not teach it. However, I told 
him I would teach it: that I should, to do 
my duty to God and my fellow men, proclaim 
the truth as loudly as I had the 
falsehood. I ask the prayers of all the 
faithful that I may be strengthened for my 
work. As Father Chiniquy says with regard 
to Rome, you have to live in the Army 
to understand it. Looking from the outside, 
one would think it real, and I believe 
at first it was; but selfish ambition, 
self-aggrandizement and vain-glory have so 
crept in that it will overthrow itself. 
Your new-found sister, 

MRS. E. WILLIAMSON. 



DEAR SIR:— I have just finished reading 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, and I am charmed and 
delighted beyond all expression. I want to 
thank you for the real joy and heart-gladness 
the work has afforded me. Everything is 
so plain and reasonable that I want the 
whole world to read this work; and if others 
would receive one hundredth part the light 
and joy that have come into my life, they 
would be amply repaid for time and trouble. 

With what system and order our Heavenly 
Father has worked for man's benefit 
had crossed my mind to a certain extent 
before; but you have made him more than 
ever the All-wise. What can I do to help 
on this glorious work? J. TUFFORD. 



EDITOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER:-The 

papers sent are at hand. I have been greatly 

interested in the subject of baptism, and 

have studied considerably the different doctrines 

taught concerning it, and my mind 

has been very much unsettled regarding it. 



I want to say now that your article on 
"Baptism and its Import," in TOWER of 
June 15th, is to me the plainest and most 
convincing exegesis of the subject that I 
have ever read. That number of the 
WATCH TOWER alone is worth the year's 
subscription. 
Yours in Christ, J. M. ALEXANDER. 



page 304 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have 
been studying The Plan of the Ages, and 
desire to say that I am fully with you, heart 
and head. I know these things are true. 
The dear Lord is blessing me with the light 
of truth. Oh, how I rejoice to be thus 
favored of the dear, loving Master. I cannot 
keep it. I desire to let these truths go 
unto others; for I know many are hungering 
for relief from sectarian thralldom, and 
would love to be planted on the Rock 
rather than on shifting sand. 

Any tracts you have to spare at any time 
we will be glad to receive. I am not able 
to travel, but I can mail quite a number to 
others and thus help to spread the light. 

May the dear Lord continue your life 
and health, and bless you both, is my prayer. 
F. WORLEY. 



R1587 : page 304 

DEAR BROTHER:-I have given up all 
for the Master's work, and I am all alone. 
I have had to stand as a witness against the 
entire city. For the last week my stand 
was taken in accordance with our Master's 
teachings as shown me through the WATCH 
TOWER. I did not force my views on any 
one, but, when it became necessary, I withstood 
the entire town. They threatened to 
boycott me, and many of them have done so; 
but the Master has quadrupled my business 
in spite of their opposition. What difference 
to me how many are against me, when 
he is for me. The only thing that troubles 
me is that I cannot do more for him. 

I have placed the DAWN before almost 
every one in this city. Dear brother, pray 
for me, that I may stand fast and that he 
may open a way of usefulness for me. It 



is a great honor to be able to work for our 
Master. Yours in his love, 

G. L. FRANKLIN. 



page 304 

DEAR SIR:— Received of your Colporteur 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., which has been 
carefully read. Never was a book read with 
more interest and never was such a flood of 
light let in by so few pages. I am glad to 
congratulate you on having, by God's grace, 
discovered the truth. J. O. HEATER. 



page 306 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1589 : page 306 



NEWS FROM FOREIGN FIELDS. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is to me 

a great pleasure to inform you that the Lord, 
the Keeper of Israel, brought me back home 
safely, and that I found all my family well. 
On Saturday the 19th inst, I was, by the grace 
of God, able again to bear the name of our 
precious Lord Jesus before a multitude of Jews, 
who were very glad to see me again among them 
at our meeting-house. Blessed be God, which 
hath not turned away his mercy from me. 

I feel very much obliged to you and dear 
Sister Russell for the Christian love and kindness 
shown to me by you both during the two 
days of my stay with you at your house. I 
am thankful to the Lord for that pleasure, 
which I never thought to obtain. I believe 
that our sudden meeting and talking about the 
Kingdom and the harvest truth shall have a 
good reward for us both. (Prov. 24:14.) Now, 
just after all what the Lord gave me to see, to 
hear and to comprehend in your country, I 
am holding my peace, to wit, whether the 
Lord had made my journey prosperous or not; 
but I can tell you, that the best place of 
America, and the time when my lungs breathed 
good fresh Christian air, was the two days of 
my stay in Allegheny. There I was surrounded 
by good earnest men, who are happy indeed 
in their blessed hope to sit down soon with 
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom 
of Heaven. There I was strengthened about 
the hope of the promise made of God unto our 
fathers, the hope of Israel, much more than in 
other places. Oh! Our Father which art in 
heaven, thy Kingdom come. Amen. 

John is preparing an answer to your kind 
letter to him. I, jointly with my wife and 
children, send to yourself and to your dear wife 
our Christian love and best wishes. We are 
every evening praying for you both, that the 
Lord may preserve you for a long time to serve 
for his Kingdom and glory. 

Remember me to all our dear brothers and 
sisters in the Lord, who belong to your honorable 
congregation, especially to brother Wm. L. 
Campbell, who bestowed much labor on me. 

Believe me, I am yours truly in Jesus Christ, 
JOSEPH RABINOWITZ. 



page 306 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I arrived in Liverpool 
on the 4th inst. Had a pleasant voyage; 
no trouble with seasickness. On the steamer, 
I formed a little Bible class, and succeeded in 
stirring up quite an interest on the line of present 
truth. Sold some DAWNS, and gave out tracts. 

When I arrived in Liverpool I found a place 
for baggage and lodging. In the afternoon 
called to see a sister and two brethren who 
seem very noble and zealous for the truth. 
They each pray earnestly and constantly for you 
and Sister Russell (and all saints), and have 
been praying for my coming and the success 
of the work here. Yesterday noon, I came out 
to a town of about 30,000 population, and in 
a day and a half I have taken orders for fifty 
volumes. Will not say much of the general 
prospects yet, as I do not know very much but 
will write you more fully, later. Hope to get 
Sister G started the first of next week. 

With kind greetings in our dear Redeemer, 
S. D. ROGERS. 



R1589 : page 306 

There is now a great railway system in the 
course of construction, which will girdle the 
Holy Land from one end to the other. A 
French company has secured a concession for 
a line from Beyrout to Damascus, and has 
already commenced work on a narrow-gauge 
road. An English syndicate is now building 
a railway from Haifa to Damascus, which will 
be about 140 miles long. The road will border 
on the southern shore of Galilee, and almost 
without a curve along the famous wheat region, 
biblically known as the plains of Bashan. This 
road will undoubtedly prove of the greatest interest 
to Syria in an agricultural and commercial 
way, finding a means for placing upon the 
eastern market the rich products in which that 
section abounds. —Selected. 



R1588 : page 307 

VOL. XIV. OCTOBER 15, 1893. NO. 20. 

UNEQUALLY YOKED. 



"Be not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for 
what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? 
and what communion hath light with darkness? And 
what concord hath Christ with Belial [Deut. 13:13]? or 
what part hath he that believeth with an infidel? And 
what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? 
for ye are the temple of the living God.... Wherefore 
come out from among them, and be ye separate, 
saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean; 
and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto 
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, 
saith the Lord Almighty. "-2 Cor. 6:14-18. 

THIS command, not to be unequally yoked 

with unbelievers, is very generally quoted 

with reference to the subject of marriage. And 

it is properly so applied, being a general principle 

applicable in a variety of cases. But the 

Apostle is not here referring to the marriage 

bond, but to the bonds of friendship and communion, 

which should be sacred among the 

saints, and which should not exist between believers 

and unbelievers. Through this and 

the preceeding chapter he has been discoursing 

about the doctrine of Christ. He has been 

preaching the gospel of redemption and resurrection, 

and of the privilege of being new 

creatures in Christ, and showing that, having 

by faith received the blessed gospel, we are 

ambassadors for Christ and co-workers together 

with him in making it known to others; and 

that as such we should be faithful to our commission, 

and under no circumstances allow the 

truth to be mixed with error. The idea is not 

that the saints should be unkind or unneighborly 

to the unbelieving: on the contrary, they 

are to be kind to all men, to the thankful and 

to the unthankful, to the believing and to the 

unbelieving (Luke 6:35; Gal. 6:10); but it is 

that they should not be friends in the sense 

of having communion and fellowship. 

To be "yoked" together with another signifies 
more than a mere passing friendliness or 
neighborly kindness. It signifies an intimacy, 
a companionship, a fellowship of spirit. If two 
are bound together with the same yoke, they 
must of necessity walk together; and if they 
cannot agree to walk together, they must sever 
the yoke, whether it be a literal wooden yoke, 
or a yoke of friendship. Friendship is more 
than a passing kindness, and never exists without 
some bonds of fellowship. With a loyal 
and faithful Christian the bonds of fellowship 
or friendship can be none other than those of 
a common faith and hope. He has renounced 
the world with its ambitions and aims, has lost 



its spirit, and has received instead the spirit of 
Christ with all its new and heavenly aspirations 
and hopes; consequently, if he be true 
to his profession, those earthly things can no 
longer constitute bonds of fellowship with him: 
he cannot submit to be yoked with those who 
are of the world. He has also renounced all 
the vain philosophies of human invention and 
has taken for his guide, and has found his delight 
in, the infallible Word of divine truth; 
consequently, if he remain true to his profession, 
the theories and speculations of men can 
constitute no bond of fellowship with him; for 
he has no sympathy with them. And, further, 
his commission as an ambassador for Christ 
(2 Cor. 5:20) not only precludes the possibility 
of fellowship on those terms, but it also arrays 

R1588 : page 308 

him, as a defender of the faith once delivered 
to the saints by the Lord and the Apostles, in 
opposition to every other form of doctrine. 

The Apostle's questions are therefore significant: 
"What fellowship hath righteousness 
with unrighteousness?" None whatever: the 
man who is righteous cannot approve or agree 
with the unrighteous; they cannot walk together, 
either under the one yoke or the other, 
and they naturally drift apart, because there 
is nothing to hold them together. "And what 
communion hath light with darkness?" Can 
the natural light and darkness abide together? 
No more can the light of truth in one heart 
and the darkness of error in another draw them 
together in fellowship and sympathy. They 
are repellant and not attractive forces. They 
cannot assimilate. The light may come where 
darkness reigns and chase it away, and then 
there can be communion in light; but when 
the darkness opposes the light, and instead of 
giving place to it, seeks to overwhelm it, there 
can be no communion except the light suffer 
an eclipse and go out in darkness. 

And "what concord [what harmony] hath 
Christ [the body of Christ, the true Church] 
with Belial [with those who say, "Let us go 
and serve other gods"— See Deut. 13:13]?" 
Those who agree with and fellowship such, have 
not the spirit of Christ, and are none of his, 
no matter how loudly they profess to be. "Or 
what part hath he that believeth with an infidel," 
an unbeliever? Is there any bond of 
fellowship there? "And what agreement hath 
the temple of God [the Church, the body of 
Christ] with idols?" Can the spirit of God 



and the spirit of idolatry dwell in the same 
heart? God will not share his temple with 
another. We must be wholly devoted to him, 
or we are not acceptable to him. Therefore, 
every other idol must be banished from our 
hearts, Christ alone enthroned, and only his 
true and loyal subjects fellowshipped. 

"Wherefore, come out from among them, 
and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch 
not the unclean, and I will receive you, and 
will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my 
sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." 

How explicit and positive is the command, 
and how blessed the promise to the obedient. 
Every word of the command is full of 
significance:— 

The first word— "Wherefore"— calls up the 
forceful argument preceding; i.e., in view of 
the fact that it is impossible to serve two 
masters or to have the spirit of Christ, and 
still have fellowship with the opponents of 
Christ; in view of the fact that we must either 
be true and loyal to him, or else be none of 
his— "Wherefore, come out from among them 
[from among the enemies of Christ, whether 
the avowed or the deceitfully cloaked, who, although 
professing to be light-bringers and truth-seekers, 
love darkness better than light, because 
their hearts are not right; whose conduct 
shows that they do not love the Lord and the 
truth, and who only seek to entice the faithful 
away from the narrow path which God has 
marked out]; and be ye separate, saith the 
Lord, and touch not the unclean." 

To be separate does not mean to be friends 
and companions, or to be in fellowship on any 
grounds. It means that we are to make a 
clean-cut division between ourselves and all 
the unclean, the impure in heart, as manifested 
by their disloyalty to the truth, and thereby 
to God, its great Author; and that this separation 
is to be so marked that the disfellowshipped 
one will be sure to know it, and that 
none can mistake our obedience and loyalty 
to the Lord and his truth. There is to be no 
trifling or half-way obedience in this matter; 
for we are not only to be separate in spirit 
from the enemies of the Lord, but we are not 
to touch the unclean. As the Apostle elsewhere 
says, we are to "avoid them"— to have no 
part or lot with them. 

It is only on these conditions that we have 
the Lord's promise— "And I will receive you, 
and will be a Father unto you; and ye shall 
be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." 
We are thus brought face to face 



with the alternative of making a definite choice 
between the Lord and his truth on the one 
hand, and the enemies of the Lord, whether 
open or covert, on the other. The command 
is, "Choose ye this day whom ye will serve." 
There is no neutral ground; and no half-way 

R1588 : page 309 

compliance can realize the blessed promise— 
"And I will receive you," etc. 

It is the spirit of the world, and not the 
spirit of Christ, which considers such a separation 
from the ungodly and the apostate a 
hard service. The loyal heart cannot admit 
to its communion and fellowship those who 
have not the same loyal disposition. What 
would be the natural conclusion of a husband, 
if he saw his wife, who professed loyalty and 
devotion to him, making a special friend or 
companion of his enemy, either secret or open? 
or of the wife whose husband found pleasure 
in fellowship and communion with one who is 
an enemy to her, or who in any way treats 
her with discourtesy or disrespect? And should 
we not be equally loyal to our heavenly Bridegroom 
and our heavenly Father? and equally 
sensitive and quick to discern the opposing 
spirit which seeks to undermine and destroy 
the faith and loyalty of God's elect? Would 
not true loyalty and devotion count the injury 
or the blessing done to a friend as done 
unto us? So the Lord views the matter when 
he says, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto 
one of the least of these my brethren, ye have 
done it unto me." (Matt. 25:40.) And so also 
the Psalmist teaches, saying, "Do not I 
hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am 
not I grieved with those that rise up against 
thee? I hate them with perfect hatred: I 
count them mine enemies."— Psa. 139:21,22. 

To thus come out from among the unclean, 
and to be separate from all the deceitful, as 
well as from the open, workers of iniquity, 
may often leave us quite alone in the world; 
but the truly loyal heart will prefer to be alone 
with God, rather than to have the friendship 
of those who are untrue to him. Even if the 
Scriptures had nothing to say on the subject, 
such would be natural to a devoted heart. 

It is therefore all in vain that some testify of 
their love to God while they keep company 
with his opponents. Their actions speak louder 
than their words. It is in vain also that they 
urge the plea of charity when the Lord says, 
"Be ye separate, and touch not the unclean." 



R1589 : page 309 

Many, and very plain and positive, are the 
warnings of the Word of God against the 
"evil communications" that "corrupt good 
manners." (1 Cor. 15:33.) The Apostle Paul's 
counsel (Acts 20:28-30) to all the elders of 
the Church was, "Take heed, therefore, unto 
yourselves, and to all the flock, over which the 
holy Spirit hath made you overseers, to feed 
the Church of God, which he hath purchased 
with his own blood: for I know this, that after 
my departing shall grievous wolves enter in 
among you, not sparing the flock. Also of 
your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse 
things, to draw away disciples after 
them." And Jude said, "Beloved, remember 
ye the words which were spoken before of the 
apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that 
they told you there should be mockers in the 
last time, who should walk after their own desires. 
These be they who separate themselves 
[from the truth and its spirit], sensual [minding 
earthly things, and gratifying the ambitions 
and tastes of the old nature], having not the 
spirit. But ye, beloved, building up yourselves 
on your most holy faith, praying with a 
holy spirit [a spirit of loyalty and devotion to 
God], keep yourselves in the love of God, 
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ 
unto eternal life."— Jude 17-21. 

Thus we are put on guard against the enemies 
of the truth, and it is made obligatory 
upon all the faithful to be on the alert against 
them, and to be prompt in discerning and in 
dealing with them, so that the flock of Christ 
may be spared. The Apostle Paul grows very 
earnest in urging this matter, saying, "Now 
I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause 
divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine 
which ye have learned, and avoid them: for 
they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus 
Christ, but their own desires; and by good 
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of 
the simple [of those not on the alert for the 
encroachment of error]." (Rom. 16:17,18.) 
Again, says the same Apostle (2 Tim. 2:16), 
"Shun profane and vain babblings; for they 
will increase unto more ungodliness." 

No, says the ungodly policy of this evil day 
of compromises and of disloyalty to "the 
faith once delivered to the saints," we cannot 
walk by this strict rule: we dare not recognize 

R1589 : page 310 



and admit the real character of a wolf in the 

sheep-fold, if the wolf be attired in sheep's 

clothing; we must accept his professions, notwithstanding 

his words and his actions to the 

contrary. We cannot believe that of our own 

selves— right in the midst of the company of 

the consecrated— any will arise to "pervert the 

truth" and to "draw disciples after them;" 

and we dare not "mark" any as such, and 

"avoid them," or "shun their profane and 

vain babblings," as the Apostle suggests, for 

it would be uncharitable, unloving. 

Of late we hear a great deal in favor of a 
broad-minded charity which gives loose rein 
to the enemies of the doctrines of Christ— a 
charity which can affiliate with every form of 
belief or unbelief; that makes no claims of superiority 
for one religion over another, be it 
heathen or Christian or antichristian; and that 
freely fellowships all and bids all God speed, 
utterly heedless of the Word of the Lord which 
says, "Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth 
not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God," 
and "If there come any unto you and bring 
not this doctrine, receive him not into your 
house, neither bid him God speed; for he that 
biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil 
deeds."-2 John 9-11. 

The warning here is not against those who 
never knew the truth, but against those who 
have known it and have been blessed by it, 
and who have afterward turned away from it; 
of whom the Apostle Peter speaks, saying, 
"If, after they escaped the pollutions of the 
world through the knowledge of the Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled 
therein and overcome, the latter end is worse 
with them than the beginning [they are worse 
than those who have always been of the world]. 
For it had been better for them not to have 
known the way of righteousness, than, after they 
have known it, to turn from the holy commandment 
delivered unto them. But it is happened 
unto them according the true proverb, "The dog 
is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow 
that was washed to her wallowing in the mire." 
Why do they do so? Because the dog and the 
sow nature and disposition are there still, and 
only wait for opportunities and circumstances 
to prove it. So also says John: they that go 
out from us— who desert the truth and its interests 
—do so because they were not of us 
(2 Pet. 2:20-22; 1 John 2:19), because the old 
fleshly mind and disposition are still there. 

The love or charity which goes out toward 



the enemies of the cross of Christ— those who 
have been once enlightened by the truth and 
have turned away from it— is not the right 
kind of love. We are commanded to "Love 
not the world, neither the things that are in 
the world," and told that "If any man love 
the world, the love of the Father is not in 
him" (1 John 2:15); and, again, "This is 
love, that we walk after his commandments." 
—2 John 6. 

"And as many as walk according to this rule, 
peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the 
Israel of God."— Gal. 6:16. 



R1589 : page 310 

THE TRUE FOLD NOT A PEN. 



IN our September issue we pointed out that 

many of the Lord's sheep are penned in behind 

various creeds of men and thus hindered 

from obtaining the food and exercising the 

liberty which Christ, the great Shepherd of the 

sheep, intended they should have. We did not 

deem it necessary in that article to show that 

while it is contrary to the will of the great Chief 

Shepherd that his sheep should be separated 

from each other by pens, and hindered from 

the proper liberties of the fold, there is, nevertheless, 

one general enclosure behind which 

all the true sheep will be found, and to which 

the Lord specially informs us that there is but 

the one door— himself. 

We assumed that all knew something about 
this one fold and its one door; but in this it 
seems we were mistaken. Some "wolves" are 
disappointed to find that the Good Shepherd 
who gave his life for the "sheep" has provided 
for them certain limitations beyond 
which they cannot go if they obey his voice 
(his Word), and beyond which they do not 
desire to go if they are truly his sheep. 

R1589 : page 311 

Let those who like call this true fold, with 
its well-defined walls, a man-made pen;— 
those who enjoy its security, enjoy also its 
liberty. It has one and only one wall, great 
and high, which so far has kept out the 
"wolves," except such as pretend to be sheep 
—who come arrayed in sheep's clothing. This 



wall is faith in Christ's sacrifice of himself as 
man's ransom-sacrifice— finished at Calvary. 

All whom that fence excludes are not 
"sheep." And behind that simple, yet strong, 
creed-fence there is all the liberty proper for 
the Lord's "sheep;"— though probably not 
nearly enough for the "goats." 

Further, while it is wrong for under-shepherds 
or anyone else to erect denominational fences 
inside this true fold, or to entice the "sheep" 
into these, and thus to restrain their liberties 
within the fold,— it is not only proper, but a 
part of the true under-shepherd's duty to protect 
the flock within the true enclosure, the true 
fold, from the "wolves in sheep's clothing" 
wherever found. No doubt it was a type of the 
true shepherd of the Lord's flock, that David 
[i.e., the Beloved], while defending his flocks, 
slew a lion, and a bear, and delivered the 
sheep of his charge. 

Our Lord, the great Chief Shepherd, set an 
example to the under-shepherds; and all true 
ones of his appointment must needs have the 
same spirit or soon lose their office. It was 
he who forewarned the true sheep, saying, 
"Beware of false prophets [teachers], which 
come to you in sheep's clothing [professing to 
be of the Lord's flock, but in reality not such, 
because they do not trust in the great sacrifice 
offered once for all for their sins], but inwardly 
they are ravening wolves [who would destroy 
your faith in the ransom, and thus destroy you 
as "sheep"]. But he that is a hireling and 
not the shepherd,. ..seeth the wolf [the 
false teacher] coming, and leaveth the sheep, 
and fleeth; and the wolf [the false teacher] 
catcheth them and scattereth the sheep.... 
I lay down my life for the sheep."— Matt. 7:15; 
John 10:12-15. 

It is not the approval of the "wolves" in 
sheep's clothing, or without it, that is to be 
courted by the true under-shepherd. He will, 
however, have the approval of the Chief Shepherd, 
and of all the developed sheep who have 
their senses exercised by reason of use. The 
Apostle Paul battled hard against such false 
teachers, who affected to be believers, "sheep," 
while they were not such. Speaking on this 
subject he said to the Elders (under-shepherds) 
of the Church at Ephesus:— 

"I take you to record this day that I am 
pure from the blood of all. ...Take heed, 
therefore, unto yourselves, and to all the flock, 
over which the holy Spirit hath made you 
overseers [shepherds], to feed the Church of 
God, which he hath purchased with his own 



blood [—faith in which purchase constitutes 
them 'sheep']. For I know this, that after 
my departing grievous wolves shall enter in 
among you [in sheep's clothing, of course, 
otherwise they would not be received], not 
sparing the flock. Also of your own selves 
shall men arise speaking contrary things 
[things different from what I, Paul, have taught] 
to draw away disciples [followers] after themselves. 
THEREFORE WATCH, and remember 
that by the space of three years I ceased not to 
warn every one night and day with tears."— 
Acts 20:26-31. 

The Apostle Peter, too, made a similar appeal 
to the under-shepherds, saying, "The elders 
which are among you I exhort.... Feed 
the flock of God, as much as in you is, taking 
oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; 
not for filthy lucre, but of a willing 
mind." "But as there were false prophets [in 
the past— 'wolves in sheep's clothing'] even 
so there shall be false teachers among you, who 
privily [deceptively, covering the real purport 
of their teachings] shall bring in [to the fold] 
damnable heresies [errors leading to condemnation 
and rejection] even denying that the 
Lord bought them.... And many shall follow 
their pernicious ways; by reason of whom 
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of." 
-1 Pet. 5:1-4; 2 Pet. 2:1,2. 

The Apostle John also cautions us, saying: 
"Look to yourselves, that we lose not those 
things which we have wrought, but that we receive 
a full reward. ...He that abideth in 
the doctrine of Christ [that the Son of Man 

R1589 : page 312 

came to give himself a ransom for all.— Matt. 20:28; 
1 Tim. 2:6] he hath both the Father 
and the Son. If there come any unto you [as 
a would-be teacher of the 'sheep'] and bring 
not this doctrine [of the ransom, taught by 
Christ], receive him not into your house, neither 
bid him God speed; for he that biddeth him 
God-speed [or who even indirectly helps to 
spread the 'damnable heresy' that we were 
not bought by the Lord] is partaker of the evil 
work [of him who publicly and openly does 
so]. "-2 John 8-11. 

Thus we see that the duty of under-shepherds 
to protect the flock from deceptive wolves, as 
well as to feed them meat in due season, has 
been recognized from the start;— because from 
the start there have been such wolves. And 
since the holy Spirit gave special warnings 



that in the end of the age "evil men and leaders 

astray" would wax more and more bold, 

and that through their instrumentality Satan 

would propagate error, and affect to be a messenger 

of light, is it not due time for all the 

sheep to recognize these facts, and not to be deceived 

by "feigned words" and "fair speeches"? 

The true sheep must not judge of fellow 

sheep by the pelt, for a wolf can wear a sheep's 

pelt: they must learn to note the Shepherd's 

voice and manner— directly through his Word, 

and indirectly through those whom he shall use 

as his representatives to "feed the flock over 

which the holy Spirit hath made them overseers 

[shepherds]." 

Not only did the Apostle Paul thus direct 
the under-shepherds, but he points out the advisability 
of this to the flock, since it is thus 
that the Chief Shepherd leads and feeds and 
keeps his flock.-Heb. 13:17; Eph. 4:11-16; 
ICor. 12:27-31; Psa. 91:11,12. 

Let us stand fast therefore, in that liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made us free;— allowing 
no one to pen us up by human creeds;— 
neither allowing any to lead us out beyond the 
bounds fixed for us by the Chief-Shepherd, into 
liberties, licenses and speculations that he 
never authorized. Let us abide in Him, keeping 
ourselves in the love of God, as saith the 
Apostle. 



R1589 : page 312 

A QUESTION CONCERNING THE RANSOM. 



"SUPPOSE that some one held, as a doctrine, 
that Christ during the Gospel age is giving 
the ransom for the Church and expiating 
her sins; and that during the Millennial age 
he will give a ransom for the world and expiate 
its sins: Would it be right or truthful if I, 
in speaking of such a teaching, were to say of 
it— 'It claims that our Lord is now making 
the ransom, that ever since his ascension he 
has been expiating the sins of the world in 
heaven, and that the work of ransoming will 
not be finished until the end of the Millennial 
age?'— Please answer in the TOWER, as it is 
claimed that I thus misrepresented this latest 
no-ransom theory." 

In reply: It is our judgment that you stated 
the matter most fairly: more reasonably than 



the party you mention stated himself. What 
nonsense it is to talk about ransoming the 

R1590 : page 312 

Church and expiating her sins during the Gospel 
age. After we are accepted of God, in 
Christ, to be his Church, we need no ransoming, 
having no sins to expiate. It was while we 
were yet sinners [children of wrath, even as 
others,— parts of the world] that Christ died 
for us, and by the one sacrifice of himself once 
for all, expiated the sins of all the ungodly. 
(Rom. 5:6,8; Heb. 10:12.) He is a propitiation 
[satisfaction] for our sins, and not for ours 
only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 
— 1 John 2:2. 

The suggestion that Christ will be a satisfaction 
for the sins of the Church during this age, 
and will be such for the world during the Millennial 
age is a portion of outer darkness, so 
thick and dense that it is not likely to mislead 
any who give ear to the voice of the Shepherd 
in the Word. He is our propitiation, 
and the propitiation for all the world besides, 
ever since the great sacrifice was ended and 
the Ransomer cried, "IT IS FINISHED." 

To this the Apostle also attests, saying: By 
one sacrifice he hath perfected forever them that 
are sanctified,— all; and this will include all 

R1590 : page 313 

that ever will come unto God by him,— whether 
they come during this age or during the next 
age.-Heb. 10:14. 

But such nonsense is not worthy of the name 
of "teaching:" it violates logic, contradicts 
reason, and wrests the Scriptures. Reason and 
logic would ask, What is Christ doing, during 
the Gospel age or what will he do throughout 
the Millennial age to expiate sin? What is he 
now giving and what will he give during the 
Millennial age as a ransom for mankind? The 
Bible answers that it knows of nothing that remains 
to do, or to be given, to meet man's penalty; 
—that all has been done;— that the man 
Christ Jesus [more than eighteen centuries ago] 
gave himself a RANSOM [a corresponding price, 
a substitute] for ALL.— 1 Tim. 2:6. 

But this correct reasoning will not convince 
those to whom you refer; because, to suit a 
theory, they have attached a new meaning to 
the words ransom and expiate. They use these 
words, improperly, to mean deliver or release. 
But only those thoroughly blinded to the commonest 



kind of common sense, or thoroughly 
ignorant of the common words of the English 
language could make such a blunder. 

That neither ransom nor expiate means release 
or deliver can be easily proved. We 
quote from Webster's Dictionary: 

"Ransom. To redeem from captivity, punishment 
or forfeit, by paying an equivalent; to 
buy out of servitude or penalty; to rescue [by 
giving a ransom]; to deliver [by giving a ransom] 
as, to ransom prisoners from an enemy. 

"Expiation. The act of making satisfaction 
for an offence; atonement; satisfaction." 

The party to whose teachings you refer 
claims to be a believer in the ransom; but from 
this you see he does not believe in it. He is 
therefore not a Christian Brother— not one of 
the sheep, in any sense, because it is this faith 
in Christ's death as our ransom sacrifice, and 
naught else, that justifies sinners, renders them, 
at consecration, acceptable as the Lord's sheep. 
To believe a stone to be bread will not render 
it nutritious and life-giving: neither will believing 
deliverance to be the ransom, the expiation 
of our guilt justify such a believer. God 
will not be mocked by any such miserable 
twisting of language; neither will any of the 
sheep who heed the Shepherd's words and prove 
all that they receive as truth and hold fast only 
that which stands the proof. And this subject 
of the ransom is most important of all, because 
it is the standard by which all faith and all 
doctrines are to be proved true or false. 

The grand results or effects of the ransom 
given, once for all, eighteen centuries ago, 
will be DELIVERANCE: partial deliverance to 
God's saints, now, from Sin, the great enslaver, 
—full deliverance to the faithful of the same 
class at the end of this Gospel age. Its grand 
results or effects will ultimately be extended to 
all the families of the earth, in that it will secure 
to all a full opportunity for deliverance 
from Sin and Death, upon similar conditions 
to ours (faith and obedience), but under the 
more favorable circumstances of the Millennial 
age. But to have faith in a deliverance and 
to call it the ransom is not a proper or saving 
faith: it proves on the contrary that those who 
so hold do not believe in the real ransom sacrifice 
finished at Calvary. 

Our advice to all readers is that when once 
they have proved any teacher (or journal, or 
book) to be wrong on this important doctrine, 
the foundation of all Christian faith, they need 
do no more proving there; for if the foundation 
is bad, the entire structure built thereupon must 



be pernicious,— dangerous. Have nothing more 
to do with such teacher (or book or journal). 
You may be sure that God did not send him to 
you as his mouth-piece, else he would have seen 
to it, first, that he had the correct foundation. 



R1590 : page 313 

OPINIONS OF BAPTISTS NOT BAPTIST DOCTRINES. 



EXCEPTION has been taken by several of 
our friends (who are or were connected 
with the Baptists) to our statement of 
Baptist doctrine relative to water immersion. 
They hold that we are in error in supposing 
that Baptists lay stress upon water immersion 

R1590 : page 314 

as essential to salvation. They claim that they 
never did so believe, even before getting the 
fuller light of present truth upon this and other 
subjects; that many able writers amongst the 
Baptists have held, and clearly stated, that it 
is not essential; that intelligent Baptists everywhere 
so hold; and that merely amongst the 
ignorant does the view prevail that only those 
immersed in water will be saved;— thus dissenting 
from other Christians, who hold that 
it is necessary, and who therefore give attention 
to the matter with infants. 

We are glad to make this statement public. 
Before doing so we verified it by having a representative 
interview with five Baptist ministers 
(three whites and two blacks). The colored 
ministers understood that salvation and the new 
birth were secure to those only who, after 
reaching years of accountability, have been immersed 
in water;— interpreting thus the statement, 
"He that believeth and is baptized 
shall be saved." The other three ministers 
denied that water-immersion is essential to 
salvation. Two of these declared that it attests 
that the mind, the heart, is submissive to 
the will of the Lord, and is the outward answer 
of a good conscience toward God. The other 
one held substantially the views presented in 
the WATCH TOWER publications -that a full 
consecration of the will is the true immersion 
into Christ,— into death with him to self and 
the world, which is symbolized by the water-immersion. 
And this one confessed that he 



had recently read MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

These ministers were also sounded as to their 
faith in Christ, not merely as an Exemplar or 
model, but also as man's ransom-price before 
God's law; as the one "who gave himself a 
ransom [a corresponding price] for all." Two 
of them (one white and one colored) were 
clear and strong upon both features of our 
Lord's work— the ransom and the example;— 
and both of these had read MILLENNIAL DAWN; 
two others (one white and one colored) confessed 
faith only in our Lord's example as his 
saving power or influence over sinners, and 
ignored the ransom without specially opposing 
it. The fifth utterly repudiated the ransom, 
declaring that to him it was absurd to think 
of Christ's death paying man's debts in any 
sense. He scoffed at the sentiment of that 
precious and Scriptural hymn:— 
"Jesus died and paid it all, 
Yes, all the debt I owed." 

Christ to him was a noble example of how 
to live. He did not say if he considered that 
he or others had ever lived or could live according 
to that example, and thus be justified 
before God by their own right-doing. When 
asked, Do not the Scriptures declare that 
"Christ died for us?" he answered, Yes; but 
so also did the heroes of the Revolutionary war 
die for our liberty. But he did not and could 
not explain how it came (if Christ died for us 
in the same sense that the Revolutionary heroes 
died for us) that the death of the latter affected 
only the present life and welfare, while the 
Bible clearly states that Christ's death was for 
our sins and that it affects the future life; and 
that by his stripes we are healed and have access 
to God, being no longer reckoned and 
treated as enemies under wrath and condemnation, 
but received to God's favor as sons. 
Surely it does not require a very astute mind 
to see that Christ died for us in a very different 
sense from what the Revolutionary heroes died 
for us. 



Strictly speaking, there is no such thing as 
"Baptist doctrine," because there is at present 
no such thing as a Baptist Denomination. 
There are hundreds of congregations calling 
themselves Baptists, but they profess to be 
thoroughly independent of each other. Each 
congregation decides what it believes and what 
it will require in faith and practice from its 
members and its minister. As a consequence, 



for one to tell you that he is a Baptist assures 
you of nothing respecting his faith, except that 
he is a believer in water-immersion. 

Nevertheless, we have much sympathy with 
this spirit of independence. But we would 
carry it farther, and insist that the different 
congregations should not make doctrines and 
practices (including water-immersion) tests of 
membership— except those practices of morality 
enjoined by our Lord and the apostles, and 

R1591 : page 314 

the doctrine of faith in Christ as the ransomer 

R1591 : page 315 

of sinners, and consecration to his will as expressed 

in the teachings of the Scriptures. But 

such congregations would have no further use 

for the name Baptist; for baptism would no 

longer be the standard and test of fellowship 

among them. The name Christian would then 

be preferable; and faith in Christ as the sin-bearer, 

and full consecration to his service, 

being the only tests, would be implied by the 

profession of that only name. Such was and 

is the Lord's will on this subject, and such is 

the practice of many WATCH TOWER readers. 



While Baptist congregations have for centuries 
maintained their independence of each 
other and of the Baptist Ministers' Association, 
evidence is not lacking that instead of the tendency 
being toward individual (as well as congregational) 
liberty of faith (which would be 
the proper thing, as above pointed out), it is 
gravitating (as with Congregationalists), year 
by year, toward denominationalism; and we 
shall not be surprised to find Baptists a united 
body before long. 

The spirit of the world is in the direction 
of union and combination. The world is always 
willing to compromise personal liberties 
and principles "a little" for the sake of prosperity; 
and this class is fast becoming the 
majority, and as such will rule: and the minority, 
instead of standing fast in the liberty of 
Christ, and withdrawing so as to preserve their 
individual freedom, will generally be persuaded 
that it is their duty to submit and not cause a 
disturbance. They falsely think that submission 
to the wrong of the worldly majority is 
part of the grace of patience enjoined by the 



Scriptures. 

The tendency toward denominationalism and 
a common confession of faith comes chiefly from 
the Baptist Ministers' Association, which wields 
a mighty influence and practically moulds the 
faith of the Baptist people. Through it Baptists 
are practically a denomination now; for 
it is Baptist usage that a congregation desiring 
a pastor, but unable to fully support him, 
shall apply to the Association; and, if not yet 
"ordained," have him "ordained" at the 
hands of its members. And this Association 
will not recommend, nor ordain as a pastor, 
any one not in harmony with its standard of 
faith,— one therefore who would co-operate 
with them in teaching the people according 
to the faith-standard of the Ministerial 
Association. 

These Associations are in themselves an evidence 
of the tendency toward denominationalism; 
for they are of recent institutions- 
beginning about fifteen years ago. Already 
they exercise great power— a money-power as 
well as a clerical-power. Their general secretaries 
collect monies for Home missions: these 
monies are at the disposal of the Associations. 
Any new Baptist congregation unable to raise 
a sufficient salary to support a minister can, by 
giving its allegiance to the Baptist Ministers' 
Associations, get a minister. The Association 
pays the minister, and the congregation contributes 
what it can to the Association funds. 
Thus both minister and flock are bound to the 
Association's rules, etc. Ministers are yet 
further bound to the Association, because the 
latter undertakes to care for the widows and 
orphans of its deceased members. 

Nevertheless, Baptists have much of the spirit 
of true Christian liberty; and generally they 
are not aware that they are so rapidly drifting 
into denominationalism, and already they are 
sectarian in that they make water-baptism a test 
of Christian fellowship;— that is, they refuse 
to admit to their communion table Christians 
who have not been immersed; and frequently 
they refuse also those who have been immersed, 
but not by a regularly ordained Baptist 
minister. As a class of people they are 
therefore better prepared than others to receive 
present truth, and should be a fruitful 
class amongst whom to do harvest work. Let 
all who have opportunity thrust in the sickle 
of Truth— and do it quickly, "while it is day: 
the night cometh, when no man can work." 
-John 9:4. 

"Saints of God, the dawn is brightening 



With the glory of the Lord; 
O'er the earth the field is whitening; 

Now recall the Master's word- 
Pray for reapers 

In the harvest of the Lord." 



page 316 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1591 : page 316 

THE RESURRECTION. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VI., NOV. 5, 1 COR. 15:12-26. 

Golden Text— "Thanks be to God, who giveth us the 
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ."— 1 Cor. 15:57. 

VERSES 12-19 call attention to the great 
importance of the doctrine of the resurrection, 
presenting it as the twin of the other 
great doctrine which the Apostle set forth 
"first of all" (verse 3)— "how that Christ 
DIED for our sins according to the Scriptures," 
to which fundamental doctrine it 
stands related as effect to cause. So important 
is this doctrine in the estimation of 
the inspired Apostle, that he emphatically 
declares that, if it be not true, then there 
is no hope for any man beyond the present 
life; the preaching of the gospel is in vain, 
and those who preach it are false witnesses; 
the death of Christ was for naught; the 
faith of Christians is vain, and their hope 
delusive; and their life of sacrifice, in view 
of the resurrection and its rewards, merely 
robs them of what little enjoyment and advantage 
they might gain in the present life, 
which is all they would ever have; and those 
who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished. 
Such indeed is our sad plight if 



there be no resurrection. If this, which 
Christ died to secure, is not guaranteed to 
us, to be realized in due time, we are yet in 
our sins and under the death penalty without 
a ray of hope. And more: if there be 
no resurrection, although the price was paid 
to secure it, then God is not fulfilling his 
part of the contract. 

While verses 12-19 declare the great importance 
of this twin doctrine of the ransom 
—the resurrection— verses 20-26 emphasize 
its truthfulness. The resurrection 
of Christ, attested by many infallible proofs 
(verses 5-8; Acts 1:3), is the guarantee that 
all those whom he redeemed by his precious 
blood shall have not only an awakening 
from death, but an opportunity to attain a 
complete resurrection to all the blessings 
and favors lost in the fall. That was 
the assurance which God gave to all men 
(Acts 17:3 1) that the ransom for the sins 
of the whole world given at Calvary was 
acceptable, a full satisfaction of the claims 
of Justice against our race, so that now he 
can be just, and the justifier of all that believe 
in Jesus.— Rom. 3:26. 

In verse 20 let Christians observe what 
the various creeds of Christendom ignore, 
and what is in direct antagonism to their 
teachings, viz., that the risen Christ was 
"the first-fruits of them that slept"— that 
he was the first one to experience a resurrection 
in the full sense of the term, viz., 
to perfection and everlasting life. True, 
some before him were temporarily awakened, 
again to relapse into death; for example, 
Lazarus, Jairus' daughter, the son of the 
widow of Nain, the Shunammite's son, etc., 
but those were only partial illustrations of 
resurrection, to assure men of the divine 
power to fully accomplish it in due time- 
in the day which God has appointed. 
(Acts 17:31.) Now mark the logic of this 
fact: If Christ was the first one resurrected, 
none were resurrected before him; and 
if, as shown in the preceding verses, those 
who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished, 
except they be restored to life by a 
resurrection; and if those who die in Christ, 
"sleep in Jesus," until Christ's second coming, 
it is plain that none of them went to 
heaven when they died. They were dead, 
they slept in Jesus, they rested in hope, they 
were destroyed, and must remain so until the 
time appointed for their resurrection— at the 
second advent of Christ when "all those that 



sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. 
(1 Thes. 4:14.) David hath not ascended 
into the heavens (Acts 2:34); Daniel must 
wait, and he shall stand in his lot at the 
end of the days (Dan. 12:13); Abraham 
must wait his time for the possession of the 
promised land of which he never yet owned 
so much as to set his foot upon (Acts 7:5); 
Job must tarry until the wrath of this evil 
day is overpast (Job 14:12-15,21); Stephen 
must wait the realization of his dying vision 
(Acts 7:56); and Paul, and with him all 
those that love the Lord's appearing, must 
wait the fulness of time when the reward 
of their faithfulness will be due.— 2 Tim. 4:8. 

All this Scripture teaching is in perfect 
accord; but it is in irreconcilable conflict 
with the current theology of so-called Christendom, 

R1591 : page 317 

in whose theories there is no place 
whatever for the doctrine of the resurrection, 
logically considered. If a man goes 
to heaven when he dies, and is glad to 
shuffle off this mortal coil which some call 
his prison, although he loves and cherishes it 
and stays in it as long as possible, why, in 
the name of reason, should he hope for a reunion 
with his body? The whole position 
is illogical, unscriptural and untenable. 

VERSE 21 antagonizes the current theology 
with equal force. It declares that since 
by man came death, by man— the man Christ 
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all- 
came also the resurrection of the dead. 
Current theology says that our redemption 
is secured by the sacrifice of a God, not a 
man; but the Scriptures are very explicit 
in pointing out an exact equivalent, a human 
substitute for the human head of our 
race, whose redemption secures the redemption 
of his posterity, on precisely the same 
principle that his fall and condemnation 
entailed sin and death upon us. It was the 
man Christ Jesus, who, after he had left the 
glory of his previous spiritual existence and 
was made in the likeness of sinful flesh, 
said, "a body hast thou prepared me for the 
suffering of death," that accomplished our 
redemption by the sacrifice of himself— his 

R1592: page 317 

flesh, his humanity, and that in consequence 
of that sacrifice has been highly exalted, 



even to the divine nature— "Wherefore, 
God also hath highly exalted him and given 
him a name which is above every name, 
that at the name of Jesus every knee should 
bow, of things in heaven and things in 
earth, and things under the earth."— 
Phil. 2:8-11. 

It was after the resurrection that he said, 
"All power in heaven and in earth is given 
unto me." And if this exaltation and power 
were granted to him as a reward for his 
sacrifice, then it is manifest that, however 
rich he was in spiritual glory and power 
before he became a man, he was still more 
bountifully endowed at his resurrection, 
after he had sacrificed his humanity, being 
made a partaker of the divine nature and 
the express image of his Father's person. 
(Heb. 1:3.) When the man Christ Jesus 
gave "his flesh [his humanity] for the life 
of the world" (John 6:51), he gave it up 
never to take it again; for it was the price 
paid for our redemption. And consequently, 
when he was raised again, his existence 
was in a new nature, that thus our benefits 
might not be interfered with, and also that 
the abundant power of the divine nature 
given unto him might be exercised in actually 
reclaiming from the thraldom of sin 
and death those whom he had legally rescued 
by his death. 

VERSES 22,23 show that all who are 
Christ's— by faith in his sacrifice— are to 
receive the benefits of his death in full resurrection 
to the perfection and lasting life 
forfeited in Eden. The order of resurrection 
is to be Christ the firstfruits, which includes 
not only Christ Jesus, the head and high-priest 
of our profession, but also all the members 
of his body— "Blessed and holy are all 
they that have part in the first resurrection." 
Then, after the resurrection of this glorious 
body, follows the resurrection of all that are 
his at [during] his [Christ's] presence"— 
Greek parousia, presence, not coming. 

The time of his presence is the entire 
thousand years of his reign. During that 
period all that are in their graves [good 
and bad, the just and the unjust] shall hear 
his voice and shall come forth: they that 
have done good, unto the resurrection of 
life, and they that have done evil, unto the 
resurrection of judgment"— Greek krisis, 
judgment, not damnation. (John 5:28,29.) 
The former class enter immediately upon 
their reward of full resurrection— human 



perfection, while the latter class awake to a 

judgment, or trial for everlasting life, which 

it will be their privilege to gain if they become 

Christ's by fully submitting themselves 

to his discipline and control. Otherwise 

their trial will be cut short at a hundred 

years and they will die the second 

death, from which there is no recovery. (Isa. 65:20.) 

None out of Christ will be made 

alive, fully resurrected, though all experience 

the awakening from death, which is the 

first step in the process of resurrection, and 

a trial to prove their worthiness or unworthiness 

of the fulness of resurrection, 

which is actual perfection and everlasting 

life. "He that hath the Son hath life, and 

he that hath not the Son of God hath not 

life." (1 John 5:12.) "He that believeth 

on the Son hath everlasting life, and he 

that believeth not the Son shall not see life, 

but the wrath of God abideth on him."— 

John 3:36. 

VERSES 24,25 assure us of the victory of 
Christ, and in what that victory will consist 
—that it will consist in the complete subjection 
of every opposing power and authority, 

R1592: page 318 

and in the putting of all the enemies 

of this, his purpose, under his feet, whether 

those enemies be evil conditions, principles, 

powers or individuals. He will banish all 

evil conditions by permitting first a great 

time of trouble (Dan. 12:1), and then by causing 

conditions of righteousness and peace 

to supplant them. He will forever banish 

the evil principles by flooding the world 

with his light and truth and by effectually 

renewing a right spirit in the hearts of all 

the willing and obedient. He will completely 

overcome every opposing power by 

the exercise of his own almighty power for 

their complete and final overthrow. And 

he will put down every opposing individual 

by cutting him off in the second death, from 

which there shall be no recovery. 

"He must reign till he hath put all enemies 
under his feet;" and the limited time 
of that reign is a thousand years (Rev. 20:6-10), 
at the expiration of which time all 
opposing individuals, and the devil who deceived 
and led them, are to be cast into the 
lake of fire, which is the second death. 
(Rev. 20:7-15.) The last enemy that shall 
be destroyed is death— not the second death 



into which the opposers have been cast, else 
the language would be contradictory, but 
the Adamic death, which Christ came to 
destroy by liberating all its subjects, which, 
to fully accomplish, will require all of his 
Millennial reign. 

In the words of our Golden Text, "Thanks 
be to God who giveth us the victory, through 
our Lord Jesus Christ." 



page 318 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I know a 
word of greeting from me will be appreciated 
by you, and in love and fellowship of 
the truth I send it to you, and to the household 
of faith with you. 

In these "perilous times," when popular 
religion is pointing, in a great Religious 
Congress, to its many ways into fellowship 
with God, how thankful I am, and we all 
can be, that God has been pleased to reveal 
his Son to us, and that we know him as 
"the way, the truth and the life;" the "only 
name given among men whereby we must 
be saved." Appreciating that all men attain 
their present measure of life through 
procreation from Adam, we also appreciate 
that re-generation is only in, or through 
Christ; and every man in his own order. 
"Their rock is not our Rock, even our enemies 
[opposers] themselves being judges." 
And we know, too, that our building, built 
upon our Rock— Christ Jesus— shall stand 
in the present storm. 

Lord increase our faith, that we may 
prove faithful to the end! 

Yours under the Ransom, W. E. PAGE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am going 
to write a few lines, for I know you will be 
glad to learn how the work is progressing 
here. I started last week, after taking some 
lessons from Brother Rogers. I have adopted 
his method entirely, and think it is so 
good. Last week I took orders for one 
hundred and twenty-three DAWNS, and this 
week for eighty-nine, though not able to 



work full time. 

I do enjoy the work so much, and have 
been wonderfully blessed in finding many 
interested ones. I must tell you of one 
family especially, who had read first volume 
of DAWN, and said they found it a feast 
of fat things. We had such a good talk— 
the lady and her husband and brother— and 
they were so thankful for my being led to 
them. They asked if we could have prayer 
before I left them; and they thanked God for 
sending his truth to them. They gave me 
an order for a full set, and I went forth rejoicing 
to have found some wheat. Two or 
three others I feel are going to appreciate 
the truth dearly. I can hardly keep from 
singing on the street: the "half was never 
told." Pray for me, dear brother, that I 
may be faithful, and able to continue in this 
glorious harvest work. At present I am 
working in a Jewish part of the city, so 
you may know I see mostly Jews; but I 
search out those who will listen. 

With kindest greeting to Sister Russell 
and yourself, God bless you both, 

In our Redeemer, yours, 

MRS. M. L. ROBSON. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I address you 
to let you know that I am still walking in 
the light. I have to report the truth growing 
here, and quite a number taking a 
stand for it. Although the "blind guides" 
are on the alert to hinder growth in grace 

page 319 

and knowledge, I notice that those of their 
flocks that are heartily seeking after righteousness 
and truth generally get filled. 
The truth is having a wonderful influence 
over us here, and some of us are still striving 
to shape our affairs in order to spend 
and be spent more fully in the service of 
our blessed Master. As you know, I thought 
that my expectations would be realized long 
ere this, but I believe the word that "all 
things work together for good to them that 
love God, to the called according to his 
purpose," and I am content to wait till the 
Lord shall open up the way. If I can not 
just now enter the general field, there is no 
cause for idleness; for I, together with them 
of like precious faith in this place, can 



grow in grace and in the knowledge of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 

We meet every Sunday for study and to 
talk over these good things, and I am sure 
that every meeting brings us into more 
heart union and oneness in Christ. We desire 
your prayers that we may be found 
faithful. Yours in Christ, 

D. W. PRESTON. 



DEAR BROTHER:— I have been quite encouraged 
in my work here, by meeting two 
German brethren who are very zealous for 
the truth. Have also met two or three 
others that are becoming quite interested. 

It seems that I have stirred up a little interest 
in the DAWN, as well as some opposition. 
I was much encouraged Saturday 
evening when a young man called at my 
room and told me that his mother had concluded 
to take the book. Before breakfast 
on Sunday morning I took a walk, and a 
lady on the opposite side of the street beckoned 
for me to come over, and told me she 
had concluded to take the book. About 
nine o'clock I went to the Post Office, 
where a gentleman asked me how I was 
succeeding, and said he had told his wife 
about the book, and she wanted it. I noticed 
in Wednesday's paper an advertisement: 
"Wanted.-Agent of MILLENNIAL DAWN 

to call at soon as possible." As a result 

I sold two sets in cloth binding. 

I think our success as colporteurs depends 
largely on the spirit we manifest in presenting 
the book to the people. First we should 
be careful that our hearts are full of love 
for the truth, and then we should manifest 
a very earnest zeal in presenting it— in a 
quiet way avoiding all strife or combativeness, 
yet not refraining to speak against error 
when it is brought up. And I find that 
it is very important to impress upon their 
minds the fact that it is meat in due season; 
that we are living in the "time of the end;" 
when increase of light is specially due and 
important; that we are in the "last days" 
spoken of in the Word, when men are lovers 
of pleasure more than lovers of God; 
that wicked men are waxing worse and 
worse; that many are now becoming skeptics 
or being led into delusions such as 
Evolution, Christian Science, Spiritualism, 
etc., all of which deny the Ransom, the only 



foundation for salvation; and that the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN presents the truth so 
harmoniously and clearly that it ought to 
be in every family. 

I am still doing fairly well: took eighteen 
orders to-day. Love to all. Remember me 
in your prayers. Yours in the Redeemer, 
O. W. DAILEY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Just a word 
to say we arrived back at our corner of the 
harvest field safe and well from the Convention. 
We have only begun to digest 
the many good things we heard while at 
the meeting, but truly it was good to be 
there and to meet so many of like precious 
faith. I hope and trust we shall still be 
kept humble and faithful, and be allowed to 
labor for the Master and his truth. I expect 
to begin the colporteuring again very 
soon. Find enclosed an order which kindly 
have filled. With much love to all, yours 
in Him, W.J.WEBB. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-You will 
please find enclosed One Dollar for renewal 
of WATCH TOWER subscription. I want 
to tell you for your encouragement and joy 
something of the good accomplished by the 
circulation of DAWN and TOWER in this 
place. A little company of eight believers 
meet as they have opportunity, to fellowship 
together in the precious truth now due 
to be understood. It is a source of joy to 
us all to realize as we do the nearness of 
the consummation of our joy. We thank 
God for using you as an instrument for the 
opening up of present truth, and we earnestly 
hope and pray he will keep you always 
right for service, "to the praise of his 
glory." I might add that much opposition 
is manifesting itself, especially from the 
religious teachers. One of the Methodist 

page 320 

ministers preached a special sermon against 
DAWN, in the course of which he said 
Christ would never come to earth again; 
and that Christ's coming means the removal 
of every Christian at death. One sect had 
a good-sized circular printed, and distributed 



it broadcast at the market and over the city. 

Knowing all this, we realize we are despised 
and rejected of men— for which we 
are thankful, because we are counted worthy 
thus to suffer with Christ. 

Yours in love, T. A. IVEY. 



DEAR BROTHER:-During the past week 
I have taken orders for nearly one hundred 
DAWNS. Would succeed much better, but 
for hard times; but I am thankful that I 
have done so well. I have met a few quite 
sincere people here, and gave a talk from 
the Chart of the Ages to a small number 
at the hotel. It was quite well received. 
Pray for me. In love, A. C. WISE. 



DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-Enclosed find 
One Dollar for my TOWER this year. 

Have been studying the truth, "through 
the light of MILLENNIAL DAWN" series 
and WATCH TOWER, for five years, and am 
as thoroughly convinced of the correctness 
of the views therein presented, as I am of 
the present wretched and undone condition 
of the world. 

May the good work of sealing the saints 
go on. Yours in the truth, 

J. W. ROUSE. 



R1604: page 320 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-Yours of recent 
date duly received, and again I thank you 
for your kindness in writing me. I have 
done more thinking on these matters since 
I read the TOWER, than ever in my life, and 
think with better understanding. 

I like the Diaglott, which was duly received, 
very much, and think it will be a 
great help. I enjoy the TOWER also. Think 
perhaps my great difficulty is to let go of 
self and trust Christ more. Am sure I 
want to live pleasing to him; but the flesh 
seems to be weak. I do indeed feel that 
there is great indifference and carelessness 
in the nominal church, and apparently more 
zeal for keeping the form than the spirit, 
and have been somewhat inclined that 
way myself; not that I so wished, but it 



seems to be the natural tendency of the 
church now. 

What spiritual idea can we get from the 
wonderful feats of the mind reader, Johnstone? 
I have witnessed his work, and know 
there is no humbug about it. 

It brings more clearly to my mind how 
God reads our inmost souls. If that power 
works between man and man, it is but a 
little indication of the power of Him who 
knoweth all. I should be glad if you would 
write on this subject in the TOWER. 

Trusting you will pray that I may be truly 
consecrated to God (I know this is my desire), 
I remain, very humbly yours, 



REPLY. I am glad that you can say that you 
desire to be consecrated to God; for (with 
those who are accepting the Lord Jesus as their 
Redeemer) the desire, the will, is acceptable 
to God. What remains, then, for you to do 
is to make a definite contract with God: in the 
same way that you would complete a business 
contract. If you had a deed or agreement before 
you, and a strong desire to sign it, the desire 
would result in action. Without the desire 
to sign it, the document would be of no value; 
—the desire and the action are both necessary 
to complete it. So in your covenant with 
God: you have the desire; now take upon you 
its obligations; tell him of your desire and of 
your intention, by his grace, of carrying it out, 
and ask him to accept you and to direct you 
in such a course as will be pleasing to himself. 
Thus, having given yourself away, and having 
no will of your own, save as you have taken 
his for yours, you may have confidence of his 
acceptance and that he will perform his part 
of the covenant. "Faithful is he who has 
called you, who also will do it." 

About mind-reading: I think the achievements 
of mind readers are of great interest to 
us, as illustrating the possibilities of a perfect 
human being. Lightning calculators, snake 
charmers, horse tamers, mind readers, musical 
geniuses, etc., are all freaks of nature which 
permit us to see powers, all of which belong 
to the perfect man. I would not be surprised 
if, after the new age has been opened and the 
capabilities of mankind have become exercised, 
people could communicate with each other without 
speech, just as dogs and others of the lower 
animals now do; though each person will also 
possess the power of resistance and be able to 
secrete his thoughts if he choose.— EDITOR. 



page 322 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1593 : page 322 
INTEREST IN GERMANY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Thinking it 
will be of interest to you, and perhaps also 
to the readers of the WATCH TOWER, to 
hear some items of interest from Germany, 
I give here the translation of part of a letter 
received by Brother Link, who had sent 
German DAWN, VOLS. I. and II., to some of 
his friends in Wurttemberg, Germany. 

Yours in our Lord, O. v. ZECH. 

The letter follows. 

"In our Lord Jesus, dear Brother:— True, 
our correspondence had rested a good while, 
but yet the old love continued to smoulder 
among us; and, where this is the case, the 



least little breath will ignite it again to full 
blaze. Our hearts rejoice that the light of 
the truth, which we for quite a long time 
enjoyed, has found you, viz., about the great 
purpose of salvation and plan of God to 
counteract and to repair the fall of Adam. 
The author of the noble work, MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, is a great scribe, instructed unto the 
Kingdom of Heaven; and, although we are 
already familiar with many of the truths he 
therein treats, we do rejoice none the less 
because thus we have an additional witness 
and authority for the grand doctrine of salvation. 
Some years since [The writer is a 
brother in his 80th year.] a proposition was 
made from England, to form a holy Alliance. 
To it all possible sects and parties were invited 
except those who teach and confess a 
"restitution of all things." Now there appears, 
from an Englishmen, the clearest 
evidence for this dear doctrine, yet educed. 

"Dear Brother, we will rejoice together, 
and thank God for the revelation of the 
mystery of godliness, which so long was 
covered like the rose in the bud, but which, 
as the light of the truth has shone out upon 
us, has developed into a most beautiful and 
fragrant rose. We now thank you most 
heartily for the valuable present [the DAWN]. 
May the Lord repay you a thousandfold. 
We remain your debtor in thankful love! 

We heartily participate in the cause of 
the communion here. In the neighborhood 
we count eight larger and smaller communions. 
It is our most agreeable business. 
Our house is a house of entertainment of 
brethren, and this brings many a blessed 
hour, while our neighbors pity us because 
of the heavy burden of such hospitality. 

Dear Brother, I wish that you could on 
a Sunday afternoon enter our gathering. 
How you would rejoice because of the goodly 
number of truth-loving souls! In the 
Summer the prepared hall is full; there is 
a nice organ, at the table sit four in their 
eightieth year. Now, hearty and thankful 
greetings from us all. We hope for a blessed 
meeting again in Paradise: there we shall 
rejoice together. Yours in brotherly love." 



Word from Brother and Sister Boehmer, 
in Germany, indicates that they are successful 
in finding more hearing ears there than 
we had at first expected. They are also 



meeting with considerable opposition: we 
trust that they are learning to endure hardness 
as good soldiers of the cross. 



page 322 

SPECIAL CLOTH DAWNS. 



We still have plenty of the gilt-stamped, 
cloth edition of MILLENNIAL DAWN, with slight 
mismatch in color, stamping and paper, but 
otherwise perfect. As previously announced, 
we will close these out at twenty-five cents per 
volume by express, or the set of three volumes 
for one dollar, postage paid by us. 

The new edition in cloth is silver-stamped, 
back and side. Price $1.00 per volume. TOWER 
subscribers supplied at wholesale rate, 50 cents. 



R1592: page 323 

VOL. XIV. NOVEMBER 1 & 15, 1893. NOS. 21 & 22. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

ECHOES FROM THE WORLD'S GREAT PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS. 



THE World's Parliament of Religions, recently 

convened in the city of Chicago, is justly 

regarded as one of the wonders of this remarkable 

time in which we live; and while all Christendom, 

and indeed the whole world, regard it, 

from their standpoint of observation, as a wonderful 

achievement for truth and righteousness, 

the questions in the minds of the Lord's consecrated 

"little flock" should be, How does 

it appear in the light of divine prophecy? has 

it a place in the divine plan of the ages? do 

the watchmen on the Towers of Zion view it 

in the same light as do those in the rank and 

file of the World's religions? 

It would indeed be strange if for this once 
the spirit of Christ and the spirit of the world 
should be in harmony, that those filled with 
the opposite spirits should see eye to eye. 
But such is not the case. It is still true that 
the spirit of the world is enmity to God (James 4:4); 
that its theories and philosophies are 



vain and foolish; and that the one divine revelation 
contained in the inspired Scriptures of 
the apostles and prophets is the only divinely 
inspired truth. 

Said the Chicago Herald, commenting favorably 
upon the proceedings of the Parliament, 

"Never since the confusion at Babel have so 
many religions, so many creeds, stood side by 
side, hand in hand, and almost heart to heart, 
as in that great amphitheater last night. 
Never since written history began has varied 
mankind been so bound about with Love's 
golden chain. The nations of the earth, the 
creeds of Christendom, Buddhist and Baptist, 
Mohammedan and Methodist, Catholic and 
Confucian, Brahmin and Unitarian, Shinto 
and Episcopalian, Presbyterian and Pantheist, 
Monotheist and Polytheist, representing all 
shades of thought and conditions of men, have 
at last met together in the common bonds of 
sympathy, humanity and respect." 

How significant to us is the fact that the 
mind of even this enthusiastic approver of the 
great Parliament should be carried away back 
to the memorable confusion of tongues at 
Babel! Was it not, indeed, that instinctively 
he recognized in the Parliament a remarkable 
antitype? 

One of the stated objects of the Parliament, 
according to its president, Mr. Bonney, was 
to bring together the world's religions in an 
assembly "in which their common aims and 
common grounds of union may be set forth, 
and the marvelous religious progress of the 
nineteenth century be reviewed." And the 
stated object of that review was, fraternization 
and religious union. The spirit of doubt and 
perplexity, and of compromise and general 
faithlessness, on the part of Protestant Christians, 
and a spirit of counsel and authority on 
the part of all other religions, were the most 
prominent features of the great Parliament. 
Its first session was opened with the prayer of 
a Roman Catholic— Cardinal Gibbons— and 
its last session was closed with the benediction 
of a Roman Catholic— Bishop Keane. And 
during the last session a Shinto priest of Japan 

R1592: page 324 

invoked upon the motley assembly the blessing 
of eight million deities. 

The leading spirit of the great assembly was 
the Rev. John Henry Barrows, D.D., of the 
Presbyterian church. For two years previous 
he had been in correspondence with the representative 



heathen of other lands, inviting them 
to come over and have a share in the work of 
the proposed Parliament. That the call should 
thus issue representatively from the Presbyterian 
church, which for three years past has 
been undergoing a fiery ordeal of judgment, 
is also a fact significant of the confusion and 
unrest which prevails in the denomination, but 
which has also spread to all Christendom. 
And therefore all Christendom was ready for 
the great convocation. 

For seventeen days representative Christians 
of every denomination sat together in counsel 
with the representatives of all the various 
heathen religions, who were repeatedly referred 
to in a complimentary way by the Christian 
orators as "wise men from the east"— borrowing 
the expression from the Scriptures, where 
it was applied to a very different class— to a 
few devout believers in the God of Israel and 
in the prophets of Israel who foretold the advent 
of the Lord's Anointed, and who were 
patiently waiting and watching for his coming, 
and giving no heed to the seducing spirits of 
worldly wisdom which knew not God. To 
such truly wise ones, humble-minded though 
they were, God revealed his blessed message 
of peace and hope. 

In viewing the proceedings of the great 
Parliament our attention was forcibly drawn 
to several remarkable features:— (1) To the 
doubting and compromising spirit and attitude 
of nominal Christianity, with the exceptions of 
the Roman and Greek Catholic churches. (2) 
To the confident and assertive attitude of all 
other religions. (3) To the clean cut distinctions 
observed by the heathen sages, between 
the Christianity taught in the Bible and that 
taught by the Christian missionaries of the 
various sects of Christendom, who, along with 
the Bible, carried their absurd and conflicting 
creeds to foreign lands. (4) To the heathen 
estimate of missionary effort and of its effects 
and its future prospects in foreign lands. (5) 
To the influence of the Bible upon many in 
foreign lands, notwithstanding its mis-interpretations 
by those who carried it abroad. (6) 
To the present influence and probable results 
of the great Parliament whose sessions have so 
recently terminated. And (7) to its general 
aspect as viewed from the prophetic standpoint. 

COMPROMISING THE TRUTH. 



The great religious Parliament was called 
together by Christians— Protestant Christians; 
was held in a professedly Protestant Christian 
land; and was under the leading and direction 
of Protestant Christians, so that Protestants 
may be considered as largely responsible 
for its proceedings. Be it observed, then, 
that the spirit of Protestantism is plainly that 
of compromise. This Parliament was willing 
to compromise Christ and his gospel for the 
sake of the friendship of antichrist and heathendom. 
It gave the honors of both opening 
and closing its deliberations to representatives 
of the great Papal system. Cardinal Gibbons 
opened the Congress on September 11, while 
the benediction with which its sessions closed 
on September 27th was pronounced by Bishop 
Keane. And it is a notable fact that, while 
the faiths of the various heathen nations were 
elaborately set forth by their representatives, 
there was no similar systematic presentation of 
Christianity in any of its phases, although various 
themes were discoursed upon by Christians. 
In these discourses Roman Catholics 
had by far the largest showing, being represented 
no less than sixteen times in the sessions 
of the Parliament. But how strange it 
seems that, in all the gathering of those whom 
we may well presume represented the most talented, 
learned and popular of the clergy of 
Christendom, not one attempted to set before 
the representative heathen there assembled an 
orderly, systematic presentation of the gospel 
of Christ. 

And not only so, but there were those there 
professing Christianity, who earnestly busied 
themselves in tearing down its fundamental 
doctrines— who told the representative heathen 
of their doubts as to the inerrancy of the Christian 

R1592 : page 325 

Scriptures; that the Bible accounts must 
be received with a large degree of allowance 
for fallibility; and that their teachings must be 
supplemented with human reason and philosophy, 
and only accepted to the extent that 
they accord with these. There were those 
there, professing to be orthodox Christians, who 
repudiated the doctrine of the ransom, which 
is the only foundation of true Christian faith, 
and, denying the fall of man, proclaimed the 
opposite theory of evolution;— that man never 
was created perfect, that he never fell, and 
that consequently he needed no Redeemer; 
that since his creation in some very low condition, 



far removed from the "image of God," 
he has been gradually coming up, and is still 
in the process of an evolution whose law is the 
survival of the fittest. And this, the very opposite 
of the Bible doctrine of ransom and restitution, 
was the most popular view. 

Below we give a few brief extracts indicating 
the compromising spirit of Protestant Christianity 
both in its attitude toward that great 
antichristian system, the Church of Rome, and 
also in its attitude toward the non-Christian 
faiths. 

Said Dr. Briggs, who was introduced by the 
President, Dr. Barrows, as "one whose learning, 
courage and faithfulness to his convictions 
have given him a high place in the church 
universal," and who was received with loud 
applause:— 

"All that we can claim for the Bible is inspiration 
and accuracy for that which suggests 
the religious lessons to be imparted. God is 
true, he cannot lie; he cannot mislead or deceive 
his creatures. But when the infinite God 
speaks to finite man, must he speak words 
which are not error? [How absurd the question. 
Of course he speaks the truth, or else 
he is not true.— EDITOR.] This depends not 
only upon God's speaking, but on man's hearing, 
and also on the means of communication 
between God and man. It is necessary to 
show the capacity of man to receive the word, 
before we can be sure that he transmitted it 
correctly. [This "learned and reverend" theological 
professor should bear in mind that God 
was able to choose proper instruments for conveying 
his truth, as well as to express it to 
them; and that he did so is very manifest to 
every sincere student of his Word. Such an 
argument to undermine the validity of the sacred 
Scriptures is a mere subterfuge; and is an 
insult to the intelligence of an enlightened 
audience.] The inspiration of the holy Scriptures 
does not carry with it inerrancy in every 
particular. 

"The errors of the holy Scriptures are not 
errors of falsehood or deceit, but of ignorance, 
inadvertence, partial and inadequate knowledge, 
and of incapacity to express the whole 
truth of God which belonged to man.... 
We are obliged to admit that there are scientific 
errors in the Bible. ...Science ["falsely 
so-called"] goes on, confident that every 
form of religion which resists this criticism will 
ere long crumble into dust... There are 
historical mistakes in the Bible which cannot 
be removed by any proper method of interpretation. 



...The divine command to Abraham 

to offer up his son as a burnt-offering and 

other incidents seem unsuited to divine revelation. 

...What pleasure could God take 

in smoking altars? how could the true God 

prescribe such puerilities?" 

Said the Rev. Theodore Munger of New 
Haven:— 

"Christ is more than a Judean slain on Calvary. 
Christ is humanity as it is evolving under 
the power and grace of God, and any book 
touched by the inspiration of this fact [not 
that Jesus was the anointed Son of God, but 
that the evolved humanity as a whole constitutes 
the Christ, the Anointed] belongs to 
Christian literature." 

He instances Dante, Shakespeare, Goethe, 
Shelley, Matthew Arnold, Emerson and others, 
and then adds:— 

"Literature with few exceptions— all inspired 
literature— stands squarely upon humanity, 
and insists upon it on ethical grounds and 
for ethical ends, and this is essential Christianity 
[-with Christ left out. -EDITOR.]... 
A theology that insists on a transcendent God, 
who sits above the world and spins the thread 
of its affairs, does not command the assent of 
those minds which express themselves in literature: 
the poet, the man of genius, the broad 
and universal thinker pass it by; they stand 
too near God to be deceived by such renderings 
of his truth." 

Said the Rev. Dr. Rexford of Boston 
(Universalis!) :— 

"I would that we might all confess that a 
sincere worship, anywhere and everywhere in 
the world, is a true worship.... The unwritten, 
but dominant creed of this hour I assume 
to be that, whatever worshiper in all the world 
bends before The Best he knows, and walks true 

R1592: page 326 

to the purest light that shines for him, has access 
to the highest blessings of heaven." 
[And he surely did strike the key-note of the 
present dominant religious sentiment, especially 
as expressed in the great Parliament. 
But the Apostle Paul did not so address the 
worshipers of The Unknown God on Mars 
Hill; nor did Elijah thus defend the priests 
of Baal. Paul declares that the only access 
to God is through faith in Christ's sacrifice 
for our sins. -Acts 17:23-31; 1 Kings 18:21,22. 
-EDITOR.] 
Said the Rev. Lyman Abbott 



(Congregationalist):— 

"We do not think that God has spoken only 
in Palestine, and to the few in that narrow 
province. We do not think he has been vocal 
in Christendom and dumb everywhere else. 
No ! we believe that he is a speaking God in 
all times and in all ages." [But how did he 
speak to the prophets of Baal? He has not 
revealed himself except to his chosen people- 
to fleshly Israel in the Jewish age, and to 
spiritual Israel in the Gospel age— "You only 
have I known of all the families of the earth." 
See also Amos 3:2; 1 Cor. 2:6-10.-EDITOR.] 

A letter from Mrs. Isabel Somerset (Church 
of England), read with complimentary introduction 
by President Dr. Barrows, contained 
the following:— 

"I am in sympathy with every effort by 
which men may be induced to think together 
along the lines of their agreement, rather than 
of their antagonism. ...The only way to 
unite is never to mention subjects on which we 
are irrevocably opposed. Perhaps the chief of 
these is the historic episcopate, but the fact 
that he believes in this while I do not, would 
not hinder that great and good prelate, Archbishop 
Ireland, from giving his hearty help to 
me, not as a Protestant woman, but as a 
temperance worker. The same was true in 
England of that lamented leader, Cardinal 
Manning, and is true to-day of Mgr. Nugent 
of Liverpool, a priest of the people, universally 
revered and loved. A consensus of opinion 
on the practical outline of the golden rule, declared 
negatively by Confucius and positively 
by Christ, will bring us all into one camp.... 
This, I am persuaded, will be attained by the 
great conclave soon to assemble in the white 
city of the west." 

The doctrine of a vicarious atonement was 
seldom referred to, and by many was freely 
set aside as a relic of the past and unworthy 
of this enlightened nineteenth century. Only 
a few voices were raised in its defense, and 
these were not only a very small minority in 
the Parliament, but their views were evidently 
at a discount. Rev. Joseph Cook was one 
of this small minority, and his remarks were 
afterward criticised and roundly denounced 
from a Chicago pulpit. The Rev. Jenkin L. 
Jones, in a sermon preached before his congregation 
in All Soul's Church, replied to Joseph 
Cook's defense of the doctrine of a vicarious 
atonement before the Parliament of Religions, 
in which the Boston preacher had said that the 
Christian was the only true religion, and the 



acceptance of it the only means of securing 
happiness after death. In his address Mr. 
Cook said:— 

"Here is Lady Macbeth. See how she rubs 
her hands. What religion can wash Lady 
Macbeth's red right hand? That is the question 
I propose to the four continents and the 
isles of the sea. Unless you can answer that, 
you have not come with a serious purpose to 
the parliament of religions. I speak now to 
the branch of those skeptics who are not represented 
here; and their silence or their responses 
are as inefficient as a fishing-rod would 
be to span this vast lake or the Atlantic. I 
turn to Mohammedanism. Can you wash 
our red right hand? I turn to Confucianism 
and Buddhism. Can you wash our red right 
hand?" 

In reply Mr. Jones said in part:— 

"For the last fifteen years or more Joseph 
Cook, in his rhetorical climaxes, has escorted 
the red-handed queen of Shakespeare's great 
drama before American audiences, and has 
challenged, now Unitarianism, now philosophy, 
and again the nonchristian religions of the 
world, to clean that lady's murderous hand and 
to bring to her soul a peace as though the foul 
deed had not been done. With swift and 
vehement rhetoric he rushes into two immense 
assumptions, viz.: That all the above-named 
forces are powerless in this emergency; second, 
that Christianity, meaning, of course, his 
special kind of Christianity, can wash clean 
the stain. By some supernatural power he assumes 
that it can remove the blot and give to 
the soul again its sweetness and its purity. 

"His favorite word is to 'wash,' and by 
word and gesture he enforces the thought of a 
miraculous change, a supernatural and vicarious 
atonement, brought about by the shedding 
of another's innocent blood on Calvary. How 
this is done even the philosopher Joseph Cook 

R1592: page 327 

does not pretend to explain, but that it is 
done he asserts with all the dogmatic power 
of his ponderous eloquence. The other day, 
on the platform of the Parliament of Religions, 
he made his challenge again, a challenge that 
has been made so frequently that it might be 
called an orthodox classic. And it is a challenge 
that carries much weight to many minds. 
The frequent repetition of it seems to carry 
with it convincing power to so many that I 
deem it my duty, as a teacher of morals and 



religion, to give it some attention in this presence 
this morning— not for controversial purposes, 
but for truth's sake, for morality's sake. 
In the name of common sense and common 
decency I protest against this juggling with 
the eternal laws of right and wrong. 

"If Christianity has any short cut by which 
murderers, perjurers, defaulters and workers 
of mischief of every kind can slip unscathed 
into heaven as though they had wrought no 
mischief, then it is a rebel religion, and Jesus 
is an insurrectionist come into the world to 
defy the benign order of the universe, teaching 
men how to escape their just debts by virtue 
of a bankrupt act which does not hold in any 
court save his own. It is hard to tell just 
what Joseph Cook means, but it is perfectly 
clear that he expects that Lady Macbeth can 
take advantage of some transaction that happened 
in far-off Palestine that can transfer her 
guilt to the suffering one who was lifted on 
the cross of Calvary. And because he suffered 
she may escape the consequences of her deeds. 

"In order that we may discover the immorality 
of the vicarious atonement— this "look-to-Jesus-and-be-saved" 
kind of a scheme with 
which the great Boston orator undertook to 
browbeat out of countenance the representatives 
of other faiths and forms of thought at 
the parliament— let us study closely the character 
of the deed, the temper of the woman to 
whom he promised such swift immunity if she 
would only "look on the cross." This champion 
of orthodoxy indignantly flung into the 
faces of the representatives of all the religions 
of the world the assertion that it is "impossible 
in the very nature of things for one to 
enter into the kingdom of heaven except he 
be born again" through this Christ atonement, 
this supernatural vicariousness that washes her 
red hand white and makes the murderess a 
saint. All I have to say to such Christianity 
is this: that I am glad I do not believe in it; 
and I call upon all lovers of morality, all 
friends of justice, all believers in an infinite 
God whose will is rectitude, whose providence 
makes for righteousness, to deny it. Such a 
"scheme of salvation" is not only unreasonable 
but it is immoral. It is demoralizing, it 
is a delusion and a snare in this world, however 
it may be in the next. 

"I know not whom Mr. Cook meant by the 
'skeptics not represented here,' of whom he 
made his first demand that they should wash 
Lady Macbeth's hand clean, but if he meant 
those represented by Darwin, Spencer or Emerson, 



those who trust science and reason, who 

believe in progress and search for the foundations 

of religion in the soul itself, they would 

say, as I understand them: 'Who dares clean 

the hand of blood that has not yet completed 

its mission?' The stain remains; the smell 

abides for the saving of the soul. They are a 

part of the redemption processes of the God 

of nature, and if Christianity pretends to interfere 

with that holy law, to sneer at that 

blessed schoolmaster of the spirit, so much the 

worse for Christianity. 

"All representatives of all religions will join 
with Joseph Cook in turning glad faces toward 
Jesus and will recognize in him a representative 
of those great types of humanity who, in 
the gladness of goodness, have encouraged 
souls to fight the good fight with weakness and 
temptation, to learn the hard though holy lesson 
that "whatsoever ye sow that shall ye also 
reap," that "by their fruits ye shall know 
them." I turn from Calvary if my vision 
there leaves me selfish enough to ask for a salvation 
that leaves Prince Sidartha outside of a 
heaven in which Lady Macbeth or any other 
red-handed soul is eternally included. I ask 
you to join with me in this slow, long but sure 
struggle of humanity toward truth, righteousness 
and love. Let us struggle for it, reach 
for it, pray and labor for it, so that we may 
merit the sweet benediction of the old man in 
the play: "God's benison go with you, and 
with those that would make good of bad and 
friends of foes." 

Subsequently an "oriental platform meeting" 
was held in this same church, when this 
same reverend (?) gentleman read select sayings 
from Zoroaster, Moses, Confucius, Buddha, 
Socrates and Christ, all tending to show the 
universality of religion, which was followed by 
the address of an Armenian Catholic. After 
this address, says the Press reporter:— 

"Mr. Jones said that he had had the temerity 
to ask Bishop Keane, of the Catholic University 
of Washington, if he would attend this 
meeting and stand on such a radical platform. 
The bishop had replied with a smile that he 
would be in Dubuque or he might be tempted 
to come. I then asked him,' said Mr. Jones, 

R1592: page 328 

'if he could suggest any one.' The bishop replied: 
'You must not be in too much of a hurry. 
We are getting along very fast. It may not be 
a long time before I shall be able to do so.'" 



'"The Roman Catholic Church,' continued 
Mr. Jones, 'under the leadership of such men 
as Cardinal Gibbons, Archbishop Ireland and 
Bishop Spalding, is getting along, and these 
men are forcing the laggards to work. People 
tell us that we have given up the parliament 
of religions to the Catholics on one hand and 
the Pagans on the other. We will hear from 
our Pagan friends now. That word pagan 
does not have the same meaning as it did, and 
I thank God for it.'" 

Prof. Henry Drummond, author of "Natural 
Law in the Spiritual World," was on the 
program for an address on "Christianity and 
Evolution." He failed to arrive, however, and 
his paper, which was sent in advance, was read 
by Dr. Bristol. The following extract from it 
shows how far Prof. Drummond's faith has departed 
from the one true foundation laid in the 
Scriptures. He said:— 

"The theory of evolution fills a gap at the 
very beginning of our religion, and if science 
is satisfied in a general way with its theory of 
evolution as the method of creation, assent is 
a cold word with which those whose business 
it is to know and love the ways of God should 
welcome it. [This was greeted with loud applause.] 
As to its harmony with the theory 
about the book of Genesis [as to its authority], 
it may be that theology and science have been 
brought into perfect harmony, but the era of 
the reconcilers is past. Genesis is not a scientific, 
but a religious book. Its object was 
purely religious, the point being, not how certain 
things were made, which is a question for 
science, but that God made them. [If that be 
the only object of the book of Genesis, then 
why does it attempt more than the simple 
statement that God made all things? Boasted 
science comes very far short of common sense, 
as well as of the divine revelation.— EDITOR.] 
There is only one theory of creation in the 
field, and that is evolution. 

"Under the new view the question of revelation 
is undergoing expansion. The whole 
order and scheme of nature are seen to be only 
part of the manifold revelation of God. As to 
the specific revelations, the Old and New Testaments, 
evolution has already given to the 
world what amounts to a new Bible. [Yea, verily; 
for it could never harmonize with the old 
Bible, the divinely inspired Word of truth.— 
EDITOR.] The suggestion has been made that 
sin is probably a relic of the animal caste, the 
undestroyed residuum of the animal. ...If 
science can help us in any way to know how 



sin came into the world, it may help us better 
to know how to get it out. [Applause.] A better 
understanding of its genesis and nature may 
modify, at least, some of the attempts made to 
get rid of it. ['Professing themselves wise, they 
became fools'— foolish indeed in discarding 
the Bible account of the fall of man and the 
Bible plan of salvation through faith in the 
precious blood of Christ our Redeemer, who 
alone has power to eliminate sin and to restore 
the sinner to the divine image in which he 
was first created.— EDITOR.]" 

A FEW DEFENDERS OF THE FAITH. 



In the midst of this compromising spirit, so 
bold and outspoken, it was indeed refreshing 
to find a very few representatives of Protestant 
Christianity who had the moral courage, in the 
face of so much opposition, both latent and expressed, 
to defend the faith once delivered to 
the saints; though even these show signs of 
perplexity, because they do not see the plan 
of the ages and the important relationship of 
the fundamental doctrines of Christianity to 
the whole marvelous system of divine truth. 
We append below some extracts from these 
commendable discourses, praying that the faithfulness 
of these witnesses thus far may continue, 
and that it may lead them to the clearer 
knowledge of the truth now due to the faithful. 

Prof. W. C. Wilkinson, of the Chicago 
University, spoke on The Attitude of Christianity 
toward other Religions. He directed 
his hearers to the Scriptures of the Old and 
New Testaments for an exposition of Christianity, 
to the hostile attitude of Christianity 
toward all other religions, which must 
of necessity be false if it be true, and to our 
Lord's exclusive claim of power to save, as 
manifested in such expressions as:— 

"No man cometh unto the Father [that is, 
no man can be saved] but by me." 

"I am the bread of life." 

"If any man thirst, let him come unto me 
and drink." 

"I am the light of the world." 

"I am the door of the sheep." 

"All that came before me are thieves and 
robbers." 

R1592: page 329 

"I am the door; by me if any man enter 



in, he shall be saved." 

"Such," said he, "are a few specimens of 
the expressions from Jesus' own lips of sole, 
exclusive claim to be himself alone the savior 
of man. 

"It may be answered, 'But Jesus also said, 
I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me; 
and we are thence warranted in believing, of 
many souls involved in alien religions, that, 
drawn consciously or unconsciously to Jesus, 
they are saved, notwithstanding the misfortune 
of their religious environment. 

"To this, of course, I agree. I am grateful 
that such seems indeed to be the teaching 
of Christianity. [But this hope flows from a 
generous heart rather than from a knowledge 
of the divine plan of the ages. He does 
not yet see that the drawing of the world 
to Christ belongs to the Millennial age, and 
that only the drawing of the Church is now 
in progress; and that knowledge of the Lord, 
the drawing power now, will be the power then. 
"The knowledge of the Lord shall [then] 
fill the earth, as the waters cover the deep."— 
EDITOR.] I simply ask to have it borne steadily 
in mind that it is not at all the extension 
of the benefits flowing from the exclusive power 
of Jesus to save that we are at present discussing, 
but strictly this question: Does Christianity 
recognize any share of saving efficacy 
as inherent in the non-Christian religions? 
In other words, is it anywhere in Scripture 
represented that Jesus exerts his saving power, 
in some degree, greater or less, through religions 
not his own? If there is any hint, any 
shadow of hint, in the Bible, Old Testament 
or New, looking in the direction of the answer 
yes to that question, why, I confess I never 
have found it. Hints far from shadowy I have 
found, and in abundance, to the contrary. 

"I feel the need of begging you to observe 
that what I say in this paper is not to be misunderstood 
as undertaking on behalf of Christianity 
to derogate anything whatever from the 
merit of individual men among the nations, 
who have risen to great ethical heights without 
aid from historic Christianity in either its 
New Testament or its Old Testament form. 
But it is not of persons, either the mass or the 
exceptions, that I task myself here to speak. 
I am leading you to consider only the attitude 
assumed by Christianity toward the non-Christian 
religions. 

"Let us advance from weighing the immediate 
utterances of Jesus to take some account 
of those upon whom, as his representatives, 



Jesus, according to the New Testament, conferred 
the right to speak with an authority 
equal to his own. Speaking of the adherents 
generally of the Gentile religions, he uses this 
language: 'Professing themselves to be wise, 
they became fools, and changed the glory of 
the incorruptible God for the likeness of an 
image of corruptible man, and of birds, and 
four-footed beasts, and creeping things.' 

"Man, bird, beast, reptile— these four specifications 
in their ladder of descent seem to 
indicate every different form of Gentile religion 
with which Christianity, ancient or modern, 
came into historic contact. The consequences 
penally visited by the offended jealous 
God of Hebrew and of Christian, for such degradation 
of the innate worshiping instinct, 
such profanation of the idea, once pure in human 
hearts, of God the incorruptible, are described 
by Paul in words whose mordant, flagrant, 
caustic, branding power has made them 
famous and familiar: 'Wherefore God gave 
them up to the lusts of their hearts, unto uncleanliness, 
that their bodies should be dishonored 
among themselves; for that they exchanged 
the truth of God for a lie, and worshiped 
and served the creature rather than the 
Creator, who is blessed forever.' 

"I arrest the quotation unfinished. The remainder 
of the passage descends into particulars 
of blame, well known, and well known to be 
truly charged against the ancient pagan world. 
No hint of exceptions here in favor of points 
defectively good, or at least not so bad, in the 
religions condemned; no qualification, no mitigation 
of sentence suggested. Everywhere 
heavy shotted, point blank denunciation. No 
idea submitted of there being in some cases 
true and acceptable worship hidden away, disguised 
and unconscious, under false forms. 
No possibility glanced at of there being a 
silent distinction made by some idolaters, if 
made only by a very few discerning among 
them, between the idol server and the one incorruptible 
jealous God as meant by such exceptional 
idolaters to be merely symbolized in 
the idol ostensibly worshiped by them. Reserve 
none on behalf of certain initiated, 
illuminated souls seeking and finding purer 
religion in esoteric "mysteries" that were shut 
out from the profane vulgar. Christianity 
leaves no loophole of escape for the judged 
and reprobate anti-Christian religions with 
which it comes in contact. It shows instead 
only indiscriminate damnation [condemnation] 
leaping out like forked lightning from 



the glory of his power upon those incorrigibly 
guilty of the sin referred to, the sin of worship 
paid to gods other than God. 

R1592: page 330 

"There is no pleasing alleviation anywhere 
introduced in the way of assurance, or even of 
possible hope, that a benign God will graciously 
receive into his ear the ascriptions formally 
given to another as virtually, though misconceivingly, 
intended for himself. That idea, 
whether just or not, is not scriptural. It is, indeed, 
anti-scriptural, therefore anti-Christian. 
Christianity does not deserve the praise of any 
such liberality. As concerns the sole, the exclusive, 
the incommunicable prerogatives of 
God, Christianity is, let it be frankly admitted, 
a narrow, a strict, a severe, a jealous religion. 
Socrates, dying, may have been forgiven his 
proposal of a cock to be offered in sacrifice to 
Aesculapius; but Christianity, the Christianity 
of the Bible, gives us no shadow of reason for 
supposing that such idolatrous act on his part 
was translated by God into worship acceptable 
to himself. 

"Peter said, 'Of a truth I perceive that God 
is no respecter of persons, but in every nation 
he that feareth him and worketh righteousness 
is acceptable to him.' 

"To fear God first, and then also to work 
righteousness, these are the traits characterizing 
ever and everywhere the man acceptable 
to God. But evidently to fear is not, in the 
idea of Christianity, to worship another than 
he. It will accordingly be in degree as a man 
escapes the ethnic religion dominant about 
him, and rises— not by means of it, but in 
spite of it— into the transcending element of 
the true divine worship, that he will be acceptable 
to God. 

"Of any ethnic religion, therefore, can it 
be said that it is a true religion, only not perfect? 
Christianity says no. Christianity speaks 
words of undefined, unlimited hope concerning 
those, some of those, who shall never have 
heard of Christ. These words Christians, of 
course, will hold and cherish according to 
their inestimable value. But let us not mistake 
them as intended to bear any relation 
whatever to the erring religions of mankind. 
Those religions the Bible nowhere represents 
as pathetic and partly successful gropings after 
God. They are one and all represented as 
groping downward, not groping upward. According 
to Christianity they hinder, they do 



not help. Their adherents' hold on them is 
like the blind grasping of drowning men on 
roots and rocks that only tend to keep them 
to the bottom of the river. The truth that is 
in the false religion may help, but it will be 
the truth, not the false religion. 

"According to Christianity the false religion 
exerts all its force to choke and to kill the 
truth that is in it. Hence the historic degeneration 
represented in the first chapter of Romans 
as effecting false religions in general. 
If they were upward Teachings they would 
grow better and better. If, as Paul teaches, 
they in fact grow worse and worse, it must be 
because they are downward Teachings. The 
indestructible instinct to worship, that is in 
itself a saving power. Carefully guarded, carefully 
cultivated, it may even save. But the 
worshiping instinct, misused or disused, that 
is depraved to idolatry or extinguished in atheism 
—'held down,' as Paul graphically expresses 
it— is in swift process of becoming an 
irresistible destroying power. The light that 
is in the soul turns swiftly into darkness. The 
instinct to worship lifts Godward. The issue 
of that instinct, its abuse in idolatry, its disuse 
in atheism, is evil, only evil, and that 
continually. 

"The attitude, therefore, of Christianity toward 
religions other than itself is an attitude 
of universal, absolute, eternal, unappeasable 
hostility, while toward all men everywhere, the 
adherents of false religions by no means excepted, 
its attitude is an attitude of grace, 
mercy, peace for whosoever will. How many 
may be found that will, is a problem which 
Christianity leaves unsolved." 

The Rev. Jas. Devine of New York City also 
spoke on the message of Christianity to other 
religions, clearly presenting the doctrine of 
redemption through the precious blood of 
Christ. He said:— 

"We are brought now to another fundamental 
truth in Christian teaching— the mysterious 
doctrine of atonement. Sin is a fact 
which is indisputable. It is universally recognized 
and acknowledged. It is its own evidence. 
It is, moreover, a barrier between man 
and his God. The divine holiness and sin, 
with its loathsomeness, its rebellion, its horrid 
degradation and its hopeless ruin, cannot 
coalesce in any system of moral government. 
God cannot tolerate sin or temporize with it 
or make a place for it in his presence. He 
cannot parley with it; he must punish it. He 
cannot treat with it; he must try it at the bar. 



He cannot overlook it; he must overcome it. 
He cannot give it a moral status; he must 
visit it with the condemnation it deserves. 

"Atonement is God's marvelous method of 
vindicating, once for all, before the universe, 
his eternal attitude toward sin, by the voluntary 
self-assumption, in the spirit of sacrifice 
of its penalty. This he does in the person of 
Jesus Christ. The facts of Christ's birth, life, 

R1592: page 331 

death and resurrection take their place in the 
realm of veritable history, and the moral value 
and propitiatory efficacy of his perfect obedience 
and sacrificial death in a representative 
capacity become a mysterious element of limitless 
worth in the process of re-adjusting the 
relation of the sinner to his God. 

"Christ is recognized by God as a substitute. 
The merit of his obedience and the exalted 
dignity of his sacrifice are both available 
to faith. The sinner, humble, penitent and 
conscious of unworthiness, accepts Christ as 
his redeemer, his intercessor, his savior, and 
simply believes in him, trusting in his assurances 
and promises, based as they are upon his 
atoning intervention, and receives from God, 
as the gift of sovereign love, all the benefits 
of Christ's mediatorial work. This is God's 
way of reaching the goal of pardon and reconciliation. 
It is his way of being himself just 
and yet accomplishing the justification of the 
sinner. Here again we have the mystery of 
wisdom in its most august exemplification. 

"This is the heart of the gospel. It throbs 
with mysterious love; it pulsates with ineffable 
throes of divine feeling; it bears a vital relation 
to the whole scheme of government; it 
is in its hidden activities beyond the scrutiny 
of human reason; but it sends the life-blood 
coursing through history and it gives to Christianity 
its superb vitality and its undying vigor. 
It is because Christianity eliminates sin from 
the problem that its solution is complete and 
final. 

"Christianity must speak in the name of 
God. To him it owes its existence, and the 
deep secret of its dignity and power is that it 
reveals him. It would be effrontery for it to 
speak simply upon its own responsibility or 
even in the name of reason. It has no philosophy 
of evolution to propound. It has a message 
from God to deliver. It is not itself a 
philosophy; it is a religion. It is not earth-born; 
it is God-wrought. It comes not from 



man, but from God, and is intensely alive with 
his power, alert with his love, benign with his 
goodness, radiant with his light, charged with 
his truth, sent with his message, inspired with 
his energy, pregnant with his wisdom, instinct 
with the gift of spiritual healing and mighty 
with supreme authority. 

"It has a mission among men, whenever or 
wherever it finds them, which is as sublime as 
creation, as marvelous as spiritual existence 
and as full of mysterious meaning as eternity. 
It finds its focus, and as well its radiating center, 
in the personality of its great revealer and 
teacher, to whom, before his advent, all the 
fingers of light pointed, and from whom, since 
his incarnation, all the brightness of the day 
has shown. 

"Its spirit is full of simple sincerity, exalted 
dignity and sweet unselfishness. It aims to 
impart a blessing, rather than to challenge a 
comparison. It is not so anxious to vindicate 
itself as to confer its benefits. It is not so solicitous 
to secure supreme honor for itself as to 
win its way to the heart. It does not seek to 
taunt, to disparage or humiliate its rival, but 
rather to subdue by love, attract by its own 
excellence and supplant by virtue of its own 
incomparable superiority. It is itself incapable 
of a spirit of rivalry, because of its own indisputable 
right to reign. It has no use for a 
sneer, it can dispense with contempt, it carries 
no weapons of violence, it is not given to argument, 
it is incapable of trickery or deceit, and 
it repudiates cant. It relies ever upon its own 
intrinsic merit, and bases all its claims on its 
right to be heard and honored. 

"Its miraculous evidence is rather an exception 
than a rule. It was a sign to help weak 
faith. It was a concession made in the spirit 
of condescension. Miracles suggest mercy quite 
as much as they announce majesty. When we 
consider the unlimited sources of divine power, 
and the ease with which signs and wonders 
might have been multiplied in bewildering variety 
and impressiveness, we are conscious of 
a rigid conservation of power and a distinct 
repudiation of the spectacular. The mystery 
of Christian history is the sparing way in which 
Christianity has used its resources. It is a tax 
upon faith, which is often painfully severe, to 
note the apparent lack of energy and dash and 
resistless force in the seemingly slow advances 
of our holy religion. [But it is no longer so to 
those who understand God's plan of the ages. 
-EDITOR.] 

"Doubtless God had his reasons, but in the 



meantime we cannot but recognize in Christianity 
a spirit of mysterious reserve, of marvelous 
patience, of subdued undertone, of purposeful 
restraint. It does not 'cry, nor lift 
up, nor cause its voice to be heard in the street.' 
Centuries come and go and Christianity touches 
only portions of the earth, but wherever it 
touches it transfigures. It seems to despise material 
adjuncts, and counts only those victories 
worth having which are won through spiritual 
contact with the individual soul. Its relation 
to other religions has been characterized by 
singular reserve, and its progress has been 
marked by an unostentatious dignity which is 
in harmony with the majestic attitude of God, 
its author, to all false gods who have claimed 

R1592 : page 332 

divine honors and sought to usurp the place 
which was his alone. 

"We are right, then, in speaking of the spirit 
of this message as wholly free from the commonplace 
sentiment of rivalry, entirely above 
the use of spectacular or meretricious methods, 
infinitely removed from all mere devices or 
dramatic effect, wholly free from cant or double 
facedness, with no anxiety for alliance with 
worldly power or social eclat, caring more for 
a place of influence in a humble heart than for 
a seat of power on a royal throne, wholly intent 
on claiming the loving allegiance of the 
soul and securing the moral transformation of 
character, in order that its own spirit and principles 
may sway the spiritual life of men. 

"It speaks, then, to other religions with 
unqualified frankness and plainness, based 
upon its own incontrovertible claim to a hearing. 
It has nothing to conceal, but rather invites 
to inquiry and investigation. It recognizes 
promptly and cordially whatever is worthy 
of respect in other religious systems; it acknowledges 
the undoubted sincerity of personal 
conviction and the intense earnestness of moral 
struggle in the case of many serious souls who, 
like the Athenians of old, 'worship in ignorance'; 
it warns, and persuades, and commands, 
as is its right; it speaks as Paul did in 
the presence of cultured heathenism on Mars 
hill, of that appointed day in which the world 
must be judged, and of 'that man' by whom 
it is to be judged; it echoes and re-echoes its 
invariable and inflexible call to repentance; it 
requires acceptance of its moral standards; it 
exacts submission, loyalty, reverence and 
humility. 



"All this it does with a superb and unwavering 
tone of quiet insistence. It often presses 
its claim with argument, appeal and tender 
urgency; yet in it all and through it all would 
be recognized a clear, resonant, predominant 
tone of uncompromising insistence, revealing 
that supreme personal will which originated 
Christianity, and in whose name it ever speaks. 
It delivers its message with an air of untroubled 
confidence and quiet mastery. There is no 
anxiety about precedence, no undue care for 
externals, no possibility of being patronized, 
no undignified spirit of competition. It speaks, 
rather, with the consciousness of that simple, 
natural, incomparable, measureless supremacy 
which quickly disarms rivalry, and in the end 
challenges the admiration and compels the submission 
of hearts free from malice and guile." 

It gives us great pleasure to thus find a few 
earnest voices raised in defence of the cross 
and of the Bible. 

Among these noble utterances in defence 
of the truth was also that of Count Bernstorff, 
of Germany. He said:— 

"I trust that nobody is here who thinks 
light of his own religion [though he certainly 
learned to the contrary before the Parliament 
closed. This was said at its beginning.] I for 
myself declare that I am here as an individual 
evangelical Christian, and that I should never 
have set my foot in this parliament if I thought 
that it signified anything like a consent that 
all religions are equal, and that it is only necessary 
to be sincere and upright. I can consent 
to nothing of this kind. I believe only the 
Bible to be true, and Protestant Christianity 
the only true religion. I wish no compromise 
of any kind. 

"We cannot deny that we who meet in this 
Parliament are separated by great and important 
principles. We admit that these differences 
cannot be bridged over; but we meet, believing 
everybody has the right to his faith. 
You invite everybody to come here as a sincere 
defender of his own faith. I, for my part, 
stand before you with the same wish that 
prompted Paul when he stood before the representatives 
of the Roman Congress and 
Agrippa, the Jewish king. 'I would to God that 
all that hear me to-day were both almost, and 
altogether, such as I am.' I cannot say, 'except 
these bonds.' I thank God I am free; except 
for all these faults and deficiencies which are 
in me and which prevent me embracing my 
creed as I should like to do. 

"But what do we then meet for, if we cannot 



show tolerance. Well, the word tolerance 

is used in different ways. If the words of King 

Frederick, of Prussia— In my country everybody 

can go to heaven after his own fashion'— 

are used as a maxim of statesmanship, we cannot 

approve of it too highly. What bloodshed, 

what cruelty would have been spared in the 

world if it had been adopted. But if it is the 

expression of the religious indifference prevalent 

during this last century and at the court 

of the monarch who was the friend of Voltaire, 

then we must not accept it. 

"St. Paul, in his epistle to the Galatians, 
rejects every other doctrine, even if it were 
taught by an angel from heaven. We Christians 
are servants of our Master, the living 
Savior. We have no right to compromise the 
truth he intrusted to us; either to think lightly 
of it, or to withhold the message he has given 
us for humanity. But we meet together, each 
one wishing to gain the others to his own creed. 
Will this not be a parliament of war instead of 

R1592: page 333 

peace? Will it take us further from, instead of 
bringing us nearer to, each other? I think not, 
if we hold fast our truths that these great vital 
doctrines can only be defended and propagated 
by spiritual means. An honest fight with 
spiritual weapons need not estrange the combatants; 
on the contrary, it often brings them 
nearer. 

"I think this conference will have done 
enough to engrave its memory forever on the 
leaves of history if this great principle [religious 
liberty] finds general adoption. One light 
is dawning in every heart, and the nineteenth 
century has brought us much progress in this 
respect; yet we risk to enter the twentieth century 
before the great principle of religious liberty 
has found universal acceptance." 

In marked contrast also with the general 
spirit of the Parliament, was the discourse of 
Mr. Grant of Canada. He said:— 

"It seems to me that we should begin this 
Parliament of Religions, not with a consciousness 
that we are doing a great thing, but with 
an humble and lowly confession of sin and 
failure. Why have not the inhabitants of the 
world fallen before the truth? The fault 
is ours. The Apostle Paul, looking back on 
centuries of marvelous God-guided history, 
saw as the key to all its maxims this: that 
Jehovah had stretched out his hands all day 
long to a disobedient and gainsaying people; 



that, although there was always a remnant of 
the righteous, Israel as a nation did not understand 
Jehovah, and therefore failed to understand 
her own marvelous mission. 

"If St. Paul were here to-day would he not 
utter the same sad confession with regard to 
the nineteenth century of Christendom? Would 
he not have to say that we have been proud of 
our Christianity, instead of allowing our Christianity 
to humble and crucify us; that we have 
boasted of Christianity as something we possessed, 
instead of allowing it to possess us; 
that we have divorced it from the moral and 
spiritual order of the world instead of seeing 
that it is that which interpenetrates, interprets, 
completes and verifies that order; and that so 
we have hidden its glories and obscured its 
power. All day long our Savior has been saying, 
I have stretched out my hands to a disobedient 
and gainsaying people.' But the 
only one indispensable condition of success is 
that we recognize the cause of our failure, that 
we confess it with humble, lowly, penitent and 
obedient minds, and that with quenchless 
western courage and faith we now go forth and 
do otherwise." 

Would to God that these sentiments had 
found an echo in the great Parliament; but 
they did not. On the other hand it was characterized 
by great boastfulness as to the "marvelous 
religious progress of this nineteenth 
century; and Count Bernstorffs first impression, 
that it meant a bold compromise of Christian 
principles and doctrine, was the correct 
one, as the subsequent sessions of the Parliament 
proved. 

While Christendom stood representatively 
before the representative heathen world, boastful 
of its religious progress, and knowing 
not that it is "poor and blind and miserable 
and naked" (Rev. 3:17), the contrast of an 
evident feeling after God on the part of some 
in heathen lands was very marked. 

HEATHEN REFORMERS FEELING AFTER GOD. 



In two able addresses by representative Hindoos, 
we have set before us a remarkable movement 
in India which gives evidence that the 
Bible, which the missionaries carried there, 
has been doing a work which the conflicting 
creeds that accompanied it, and claimed to interpret 
it, have only hindered. From Japan 
also we hear of similar conditions. Below we 



append some extracts from three addresses remarkable 

for their evident sincerity, thought, 

and clear expression, and showing the very 

serious attitude of heathen reformers who are 

feeling after God if haply they may find him. 

A VOICE FROM NEW INDIA. 

Mr. Mozoomdar was greeted with loud applause. 
His address was as follows:— 

"MR. PRESIDENT, REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONS 
AND RELIGIONS:-I told you the other 
day that India is the mother of religion; the 
land of evolution. I am going this morning 
to demonstrate the truth of what I said. The 
Brahmo-Somaj of India, which I have the honor 
to represent, is a new society; our religion 
is a new religion, but it comes from far, far 
antiquity, from the very roots of our national 
life, hundreds of centuries ago. 

"Sixty-three years ago the whole land of 
India was full of a mighty clamor. The great 
jarring noise of a heterogeneous polytheism rent 
the stillness of the sky. The cry of widow; 
nay, far more lamentable, the cry of those 
miserable women who had to be burned on 

R1592: page 334 

the funeral pyres of their dead husbands, desecrated 

the holiness of God's earth. We had 

the Buddhist, goddess of the country, the 

mother of the people, ten handed, holding in 

each hand the weapons for the defense of her 

children. We had the white goddess of learning, 

playing on her Vena, a stringed instrument 

of music, the strings of wisdom. The 

goddess of good fortune, holding in her arms, 

not the horn, but the basket of plenty, blessing 

the nations of India, was there, and the 

god with the head of an elephant, and the god 

who rides on a peacock— martial men are always 

fashionable, you know— and the thirty-three 

millions of gods and goddesses besides. 

I have my theory about the mythology of Hindooism, 

but this is not the time to take it up. 

"Amid the din and clash of this polytheism 
and so-called evil, amid all the darkness of the 
times, there arose a man, a Brahman, pure bred 
and pure born, whose name was Raja Ram 
Dohan Roy. Before he became a man he wrote 
a book proving the falsehood of all polytheism 
and the truth of the existence of the living 
God. This brought upon his head persecution. 
In 1830 this man founded a society 
known as the Brahmo-Somaj— the society of 



the worshipers of the one living God. While 

on the one hand he established the Brahmo-Somaj, 

on the other hand he co-operated with 

the British government to abolish the barbarous 

custom of suttee, or the burning of widows 

with their dead husbands. 

"The Brahmo-Somaj founded this monotheism 
upon the inspiration of the old Hindoo 
Scriptures, the Vedas and the Upanishads. 

"In the course of time, as the movement 
grew, the members began to doubt whether the 
Hindoo scriptures were really infallible. In 
their souls they thought they heard a voice 
which here and there, at first in feeble accents, 
contradicted the deliverances of the Vedas and 
the Upanishads. What shall be our theological 
principles? Upon what principles shall 
our religion stand? The small accents in which 
the question first was asked became louder and 
louder and were more and more echoed in the 
rising religious society until it became the most 
practical of all problems— upon what book shall 
true religion stand? 

"Briefly they found that it was impossible 
that the Hindoo scriptures should be the only 
records of true religion. They found that although 
there were truths in the Hindoo scriptures, 
they could not recognize them as the 
only infallible standard of spiritual reality. 
So twenty-one years after the foundation of the 
Brahmo-Somaj the doctrine of the infallibility 
of the Hindoo scriptures was given up. Then 
a further question came. Are there not other 
scriptures also? Did I not tell you the other 
day that on the imperial throne of India Christianity 
now sat with the Gospel of Peace in 
one hand and the scepter of civilization in the 
other? The Bible had penetrated into India. 
The Bible is the book which mankind shall 
not ignore. Recognizing, therefore, on the 
one hand, the great inspiration of the Hindoo 
scriptures, we could not but on the other hand 
recognize the inspiration and the authority of 
the Bible. And in 1861 we published a book 
in which extracts from all scriptures were given 
as the book which was to be read in the course 
of our devotions. It was not the Christian 
missionary that drew our attention to the Bible; 
it was not the Mohammedan priests who 
showed us the excellent passages in the Koran; 
it was no Zoroastrian who preached to us the 
greatness of his Zend-Avesta; but there was 
in our hearts the God of infinite reality, the 
source of inspiration of all the books, of the 
Bible, of the Koran, of the Zend-Avesta, who 
drew our attention to his excellencies as revealed 



in the record of holy experience everywhere. 
By his leading and by his light it was 
that we recognized these facts, and upon the 
rock of everlasting and eternal reality our 
theological basis was laid. 

"Was it theology without morality? What 
is the inspiration of this book or the authority 
of that prophet without personal holiness— the 
cleanliness of this God-made temple. Soon 
after we had got through our theology, the 
question stared us in the face that we were not 
good men, pure minded, holy men, and that 
there were innumerable evils about us, in our 
houses, in our national usages, in the organization 
of our society. The Brahmo-Somaj, therefore, 
next laid its hand upon the reformation 
of society. In 1851 the first intermarriage was 
celebrated. Intermarriage in India means the 
marriage of persons belonging to different 
castes. Caste is a sort of Chinese wall that 
surrounds every household and every little 
community, and beyond the limits of which no 
audacious man or woman shall stray. In the 
Brahmo-Somaj we asked 'Shall this Chinese 
wall disgrace the freedom of God's children 
forever?' Break it down; down with it, and 
away. 

"Next, my honored leader and friend, Keshub 
Chunder Sen, so arranged that marriage 
between different castes should take place. 
The Brahmans were offended. Wiseacres shook 
their heads; even leaders of the Brahmo-Somaj 
shrugged up their shoulders and put 

R1592: page 335 

their hands into their pockets. 'These young 
firebrands,' they said, 'are going to set fire to 
the whole of society.' But intermarriage took 
place, and widow-marriage took place. 

"Do you know what the widows of India 
are? A little girl of ten or twelve years happens 
to lose her husband before she knows 
his features very well, and from that tender 
age to her dying day she shall go through 
penances and austerities and miseries and loneliness 
and disgrace which you tremble to hear 
of. I do not approve of or understand the 
conduct of a woman who marries a first time 
and then a second time and then a third time 
and a fourth time— who marries as many times 
as there are seasons in the year. I do not 
understand the conduct of such men and 
women. But I think that, when a little child of 
eleven loses what men call her husband, to 
put her to the wretchedness of a lifelong widowhood 



and inflict upon her miseries which 

would disgrace a criminal, is a piece of inhumanity 

which cannot too soon be done away 

with. Hence intermarriages and widow marriages. 

Our hands were thus laid upon the 

problem of social and domestic improvement, 

and the result of that was that very soon a 

rupture took place in the Brahmo-Somaj. We 

young men had to go— we, with all our social 

reform— and shift for ourselves as we best 

might. When these social reforms were partially 

completed there came another question. 

"We had married the widow; we had prevented 
the burning of widows; what about her 
personal purity, the sanctification of our own 
consciences, the regeneration of our own souls? 
What about our acceptance before the awful 
tribunal of the God of infinite justice? Social 
reform and the doing of public good is itself 
only legitimate when it develops into the all-embracing 
principle of personal purity and the 
holiness of the soul. 

"My friends, I am often afraid, I confess, 
when I contemplate the condition of European 
and American society, when your activities 
are so manifold, your work is so extensive that 
you are drowned in it, and you have little time 
to consider the great questions of regeneration, 
of personal sanctification, of trial and 
judgment and of acceptance before God. That 
is the question of all questions. A right theological 
basis may lead to social reform, but a 
right line of public activity and the doing of 
good is bound to lead to the salvation of the 
doer's soul and the regeneration of public men. 

"After the end of the work of our social reform 
we were therefore led into the great subject, 
How shall this unregenerate nature be 
regenerated; this defiled temple, what waters 
shall wash it into a new and pure condition? 
All these motives and desires and evil impulses, 
the animal inspirations, what will put an end 
to them all, and make man what he was, the 
immaculate child of God, as Christ was, as all 
regenerated men were? Theological principle 
first, moral principle next; and in the third 
place the spiritual of the Brahmo-Somaj— 
devotions, repentance, prayer, praise, faith; 
throwing ourselves entirely and absolutely 
upon the spirit of God and upon his saving 
love. [This heathen philosopher sees to 
only a partial extent what sin is, as is indicated 
by his expression, "an immaculate child 
of God.. .as all regenerated men were." 
He does not see that even the holiest of the 
fallen race are far from being actually spotless, 



immaculate, perfect; hence that they all need 

the merit of Christ's perfection and sin sacrifice 

to justify them. He speaks of prayers, 

etc., and the mercy of God; but he has not yet 

learned that justice is the foundation underlying 

all of God's dealings; and that only 

through the merit of Christ's sacrifice can God 

be just, and yet the justifier of sinners believing 

into Christ, and thus covered by his 

great atonement for sin, made eighteen centuries 

ago,— once for all— to be testified to all 

in due time.-EDITOR.] 

"Moral aspirations do not mean holiness; 
a desire of being good does not mean to be 
good. The bullock that carries on his back 
hundredweights of sugar does not taste a 
grain of sweetness because of its unbearable 
load. And all our aspirations, and all our fine 
wishes, and all our fine dreams, and fine sermons, 
either hearing or speaking them— going 
to sleep over them or listening to them intently 
—these will never make a life perfect. Devotion 
only, prayer, direct perception of God's 
spirit, communion with him, absolute self-abasement 
before his majesty; devotional fervor, 
devotional excitement, spiritual absorption, 
living and moving in God— that is the 
secret of personal holiness. And in the third 
stage of our career, therefore, spiritual excitement, 
long devotions, intense fervor, contemplation, 
endless self abasement, not merely 
before God but before man, became the rule 
of our lives. God is unseen; it does not harm 
anybody or make him appear less respectable 
if he says to God: I am a sinner; forgive 
me.' But to make your confessions before 
man, to abase yourselves before your brothers 
and sisters, to take the dust off the feet of holy 
men, to feel that you are a miserable, wretched 
object in God's holy congregation— that requires 

R1592 : page 336 

a little self humiliation, a little moral 
courage. Our devotional life, therefore, is two-fold, 
bearing reverence and trust for God and 
reverence and trust for man, and in our infant 
and apostolical church we have, therefore, 
often immersed ourselves into spiritual practices 
which would seem absurd to you if I were 
to relate them in your hearing. 

"The last principle I have to take up is the 
progressiveness of the Brahmo-Somaj. Theology 
is good; moral resolutions are good; devotional 
fervor is good. The problem is, how 
shall we go on ever and ever in an onward way, 



in the upper path of progress and approach toward 
divine perfection? 

"Christianity declares the glory of God; 
Hindooism speaks about his infinite and eternal 
excellence: Mohammedanism, with fire 
and sword, proves the almightiness of his will; 
Buddhism says how joyful and peaceful he is. 
He is the God of all religions, of all denominations, 
of all lands, of all scriptures, and our 
progress lay in harmonizing these various systems, 
these various prophecies and developments 
into one great system. Hence the new 
system of religion in the Brahmo-Somaj is 
called the New Dispensation. The Christian 
speaks in terms of admiration of Christianity; 
so does the Hebrew of Judaism; so does the 
Mohammedan of the Koran; so does the Zoroastrian 
of the Zend-Avesta. The Christian admires 
his principles of spiritual culture; the 
Hindoo does the same; the Mohammedan does 
the same. 

"But the Brahmo-Somaj accepts and harmonizes 
all these precepts, systems, principles, 
teachings and disciplines and makes them into 
one system, and that is his religion. For a 
whole decade, my friend, Keshub Chunder 
Sen, myself and other apostles of the Brahmo-Somaj 
have traveled from village to village, 
from province to province, from continent to 
continent, declaring this new dispensation and 
the harmony of all religious prophecies and 
systems unto the glory of the one true, living 
God. But we are a subject race; we are uneducated; 
we are incapable; we have not the 
resources of money to get men to listen to our 
message. In the fulness of time you have 
called this august parliament of religions, and 
the message that we could not propagate you 
have taken into your hands to propagate. We 
have made that the gospel of our lives, the 
ideal of our being. 

"I do not come to the sessions of this parliament 
as a mere student, not as one who has 
to justify his own system. I come as a disciple, 
as a follower, as a brother. May your labors 
be blessed with prosperity, and not only 
shall your Christianity and your America be 
exalted, but the Brahmo-Somaj will feel most 
exalted; and this poor man who has come such 
a long distance to crave your sympathy and 
your kindness shall feel himself amply 
rewarded. 

"May the spread of the New Dispensation 
rest with you and make you our brothers and 
sisters. Representatives of all religions, may 
all your religions merge into the Fatherhood 



of God and the brotherhood of man, that 
Christ's prophecy may be fulfilled, the world's 
hope may be fulfilled, and mankind may become 
one kingdom with God, our Father." 

A VOICE FROM JAPAN. 

When Kinza Ringe M. Harai, the learned 
Japanese Buddhist, read his paper on "The 
Real Position of Japan Toward Christianity" 
the brows of some of the Christian missionaries 
on the platform contracted and their 
heads shook in disapproval. But the Buddhist 
directed his stinging rebukes at the false Christians 
who have done so much to impede the 
work of spreading the gospel in Japan. The 
paper follows: 

"There are very few countries in the world 
so misunderstood as Japan. Among the innumerable 
unfair judgments, the religious thought 
of my countrymen is especially misrepresented, 
and the whole nation is condemned as heathen. 
Be they heathen, pagan, or something else, it 
is a fact that from the beginning of our history 
Japan has received all teachings with open 
mind; and also that the instructions which 
came from outside have commingled with the 
native religion in entire harmony, as is seen 
by so many temples built in the name of truth 
with a mixed appellation of Buddhism and 
Shintoism: as is seen by the affinity among 
the teachers of Confucianism and Taoism, or 
other isms, and the Buddhists and Shinto priests; 
as is seen by the individual Japanese, who pays 
his other respects to all teachings mentioned 
above; as is seen by the peculiar construction 
of the Japanese houses, which have generally 
two rooms, one for a miniature Buddhist temple 
and the other for a small Shinto shrine, before 
which the family study the respective scriptures 
of the two religions. In reality Synthetic 
religion, or Entitsim, is the Japanese speciality, 
and I will not hesitate to call it Japanism. 

"But you will protest and say: 'Why, then, 
is Christianity not so warmly accepted by your 
nation as other religions?' This is the point 
which I wish especially to present before you. 

R1592: page 337 

There are two causes why Christianity is not 

so cordially received. This great religion was 

widely spread in our country, but in 1637 the 

Christian missionaries, combined with the converts, 

caused a tragic and bloody rebellion 

against the country, and it was understood that 



those missionaries intended to subjugate Japan 
to their own mother country. This shocked 
Japan, and it took the government of the Shogun 
a year to suppress this terrible and intrusive 
commotion. To those who accuse us that 
our mother country prohibited Christianity, 
not now, but in a past age, I will reply that it 
was not from religious or racial antipathy, but 
to prevent such another insurrection; and to 
protect our independence we were obliged to 
prohibit the promulgation of the gospels. 

"If our history had had no such record of 
foreign devastation under the disguise of religion, 
and if our people had had no hereditary 
horror and prejudice against the name of 
Christianity, it might have been eagerly embraced 
by the whole nation. But this incident 
has passed and we may forget it. Yet it 
is not entirely unreasonable that the terrified 
suspicion, or you may say superstition, that 
Christianity is the instrument of depredation, 
should have been avoidably or unavoidably 
aroused in the oriental mind, when it is an admitted 
fact that some of the powerful nations 
of Christendom are gradually encroaching upon 
the Orient, and when the following circumstance 
is daily impressed upon our mind, reviving 
a vivid memory of the past historical 
occurrence. The circumstance of which I am 
about to speak is the present experience of 
ourselves, to which I especially call the attention 
of this Parliament, and not only this 
Parliament, but also the whole of Christendom. 

"Since 1853, when Commodore Perry came 
to Japan as the ambassador of the President 
of the United States of America, our country 
began to be better known by all western nations 
and the new ports were widely opened 
and the prohibition of the gospels was abolished, 
as it was before the Christian rebellion. 
By the convention at Yeddo, now Tokio, in 
1858, the treaty was stipulated between America 
and Japan and also with the European 
powers. It was the time when our country 
was yet under the feudal government; and on 
account of our having been secluded for over 
two centuries since the Christian rebellion of 
1637, diplomacy was quite a new experience 
to the feudal officers, who put their full confidence 
upon western nations, and, without 
any alteration, accepted every article of the 
treaty presented from the foreign governments. 
According to the treaty we are in a very disadvantageous 
situation; and amongst the others 
there are two prominent articles, which deprive 
us of our rights and advantages. One is the 



exterritoriality of western nations in Japan, 
by which all cases in regard to right, whether 
of property or person, arising between the 
subjects of the western nations in my country 
as well as between them and the Japanese are 
subjected to the jurisdiction of the authorities 
of the western nations. Another regards the 
tariff, which, with the exception of 5 per cent 
ad valorem, we have no right to impose where 
it might properly be done. 

"It is also stipulated that either of the contracting 
parties to this treaty, on giving one 
year's previous notice to the other, may demand 
a revision thereof on or after the 1st of 
July, 1872. Therefore in 1871 our government 
demanded a revision, and since then we 
have been constantly requesting it, but foreign 
governments have simply ignored our requests, 
making many excuses. One part of the treaty 
between the United States of America and 
Japan concerning the tariff was annulled, for 
which we thank with sincere gratitude the 
kind-hearted American nation; but I am sorry 
to say that, as no European power has followed 
in the wake of America in this respect, our 
tariff right remains in the same condition as 
it was before. 

"We have no judicial power over the foreigners 
in Japan, and as a natural consequence 
we are receiving injuries, legal and moral, the 
accounts of which are seen constantly in our 
native newspapers. As the western people 
live far from us, they do not know the exact 
circumstances. Probably they hear now and 
then the reports from the missionaries and their 
friends in Japan. I do not deny that their 
reports are true; but if any person wants to 
obtain any unmistakable information in regard 
to his friend he ought to hear the opinions 
about him from many sides. If you closely 
examine with your unbiased mind what injuries 
we receive, you will be astonished. 
Among many kinds of wrongs there are some 
which were utterly unknown before and entirely 
new to us 'heathen,' none of whom 
would dare to speak of them even in private 
conversation. 

"One of the excuses offered by foreign nations 
is that our country is not yet civilized. 
Is it the principle of civilized law that the 
rights and profits of the so-called uncivilized 
or the weaker should be sacrificed? As I 
understand it, the spirit and the necessity of 
law is to protect the rights and welfare of the 

R1592: page 338 



weaker against the aggression of the stronger; 
but I have never learned in my shallow studies 
of law that the weaker should be sacrificed for 
the stronger. Another kind of apology comes 
from the religious source, and the claim is 
made that the Japanese are idolaters and 
heathen. Whether our people are idolaters or 
not you will know at once if you will investigate 
our religious views without prejudice from 
authentic Japanese sources. 

"But admitting, for the sake of argument, 
that we are idolaters and heathen, is it Christian 
morality to trample upon the rights and 
advantages of a non-christian nation, coloring 
all their natural happiness with the dark stain 
of injustice? I read in the Bible, 'Whosoever 
shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to 
him the other also;' but I cannot discover 
there any passage which says, 'Whosoever shall 
demand justice of thee smite his right cheek, 
and when he turns smite the other also.' Again, 
I read in the Bible, 'If any man will sue thee 
at law, and take away thy coat, let him have 
thy cloak also;' but I cannot discover there 
any passage which says, 'If thou shalt sue any 
man at the law, and take away his coat, let 
him give thee his cloak also.' 

"You send your missionaries to Japan, and 
they advise us to be moral and believe Christianity. 
We like to be moral, we know that 
Christianity is good, and we are very thankful 
for this kindness. But at the same time our 
people are rather perplexed and very much in 
doubt about this advice when we think that 
the treaty stipulated in the time of feudalism, 
when we were yet in our youth, is still clung to 
by the powerful nations of Christendom; when 
we find that every year a good many western 
vessels engaged in the seal fishery are smuggled 
into our seas; when legal cases are always decided 
by the foreign authorities in Japan unfavorably 
to us; when some years ago a Japanese 
was not allowed to enter a university on the 
Pacific coast of America because of his being 
of a different race; when a few months ago the 
school board in San Francisco enacted a regulation 
that no Japanese should be allowed to 
enter the public school there; when last year 
the Japanese were driven out in wholesale from 
one of the territories of the United States of 
America; when our business men in San Francisco 
were compelled by some union not to 
employ the Japanese assistants or laborers, but 
the Americans; when there are some in the 
same city who speak on the platforms against 



those of us who are already here; when there 
are many men who go in processions hoisting 
lanterns marked 'Jap must go;' when the Japanese 
in the Hawaiian islands are deprived of 
their suffrage; when we see some western people 
in Japan who erect before the entrance of 
their houses a special post upon which is the 
notice, 'No Japanese is allowed to enter here,' 
just like a board upon which is written, 'No 
dogs allowed;' when we are in such a situation 
is it unreasonable— notwithstanding the kindness 
of the western nations, from one point of 
view, who send their missionaries to us— for 
us intelligent 'heathen' to be embarrassed and 
hesitate to swallow the sweet and warm liquid 
of the heaven of Christianity? If such be the 
Christian ethics, well, we are perfectly satisfied 
to be heathen. 

"If any person should claim that there are 
many people in Japan who speak and write 
against Christianity, I am not a hypocrite and 
I will frankly state that I was the first in my 
country who ever publicly attacked Christianity- 
no, not real Christianity, but false Christianity, 
the wrongs done toward us by the people 
of Christendom. If any reprove the Japanese 
because they have had strong anti-Christian 
societies, I will honestly declare that I 
was the first in Japan who ever organized a society 
against Christianity— no, not against real 
Christianity, but to protect ourselves from false 
Christianity, and the injustice which we receive 
from the people of Christendom. Do 
not think that I took such a stand on account 
of my being a Buddhist, for this was my position 
many years before I entered the Buddhist 
Temple. But at the same time I will proudly 
state that if any one discussed the affinity of 
all religions before the public, under the title 
of Synthetic Religion, it was I. I say this to 
you because I do not wish to be understood as 
a bigoted Buddhist sectarian. 

"Really there is no sectarian in my country. 
Our people well know what abstract truth is in 
Christianity, and we, or at least I, do not care 
about the names if I speak from the point of 
teaching. Whether Buddhism is called Christianity 
or Christianity is named Buddhism, 
whether we are called Confucianists or Shintoists, 
we are not particular; but we are very 
particular about the truth taught and its consistent 
application. Whether Christ saves us or 
drives us into hell, whether Gautama Buddha 
was a real person or there never was such a 
man, it is not a matter of consideration to us, 
but the consistency of doctrine and conduct is 



the point on which we put the greater importance. 

Therefore unless the inconsistency which 

we observe is renounced, and especially the unjust 

treaty by which we are entailed is revised 

upon an equitable basis, our people will never 

R1592: page 339 

cast away their prejudice about Christianity, 
in spite of the eloquent orator who speaks its 
truth from the pulpit. We are very often 
called barbarians, and I have heard and read 
that Japanese are stubborn and cannot understand 
the truth of the Bible. I will admit that 
this is true in some sense, for, though they admire 
the eloquence of the orator and wonder 
at his courage, though they approve his logical 
argument, yet they are very stubborn and will 
not join Christianity as long as they think it is 
a western morality to preach one thing and 
practice another. 

"But I know this is not the morality of the 
civilized west, and I have the firm belief in 
the highest humanity and noblest generosity 
of the Occidental nations toward us. Especially 
as to the American nation, I know their 
sympathy and integrity. I know their sympathy 
by their emancipation of the colored people 
from slavery. I know their integrity by 
the patriotic spirit which established the independence 
of the United States of America. 
And I feel sure that the circumstances which 
made the American people declare independence 
are in some sense comparable to the present 
state of my country. I cannot refrain my 
thrilling emotion and sympathetic tears whenever 
I read the Declaration of Independence. 
You, citizens of this glorious, free United States, 
who struck when the right time came, struck 
for 'Liberty or Death;' you, who waded through 
blood that you might fasten to the mast your 
banner of the stripes and stars upon the land 
and sea; you, who enjoy the fruition of your 
Liberty through your struggle for it; you, I say, 
may understand somewhat our position, and, as 
you asked for justice from your mother country, 
we ask justice from these foreign powers. 

"If any religion teaches injustice to humanity, 
I will oppose it, as I ever have opposed it, 
with my blood and soul. I will be the bitterest 
dissenter from Christianity, or I will be the 
warmest admirer of its gospel. To the Promoters 
of the Parliament and the ladies and 
gentlemen of the world who are assembled here, 
I pronounce that your aim is the realization 
of the Religious Union, not nominally, but 



practically. We, the forty million souls of 
Japan, standing firmly and persistently upon 
the basis of international justice, await still 
further manifestations as to the morality of 
Christianity." 

A YOUNG MAN'S VOICE FROM THE ORIENT. 

A voice from the young men of the Orient 
was sounded by Herant M. Kiretchjian, of 
Constantinople, as follows:— 

"Brethren from the Sun-rising of all lands: 
—I stand here to represent the young men of 
the Orient, in particular from the land of the 
pyramids to the icefields of Siberia, and in 
general, from the shores of the Aegean to the 
waters of Japan. But on this wonderful platform 
of the Parliament of Religions, where I 
find myself with the sons of the Orient facing 
the American public, my first thought is to tell 
you that you have unwittingly called together 
a council of your creditors. We have not 
come to wind up your affairs, but to unwind 
your hearts. Turn to your books and see if 
our claim is not right. We have given you 
science, philosophy, theology, music and poetry, 
and have made history for you at tremendous 
expense. And moreover, out of the light 
that shone upon our lands from heaven, there 
have gone forth those who shall forever be 
your cloud of witnesses and your inspiration 
—saints, apostles, prophets, martyrs. And 
with that rich capital you have amassed a stupendous 
fortune, so that your assets hide away 
from your eyes your liabilities. We do not 
want to share your wealth, but it is right that 
we should have our dividend, and, as usual, it 
is a young man presents the vouchers. 

"You cannot pay this dividend with money. 
Your gold you want yourselves. Your silver 
has fallen from grace. We want you to give us 
a rich dividend in the full sympathy of your 
hearts. And, like the artisan who, judging by 
their weight, throws into his crucible nuggets 
of different shape and color, and, after fire and 
flux have done their work, pours it out and 
behold, it flows pure gold, so, having called 
together the children of men from the ends of 
the earth, and having them here before you 
in the crucible of earnest thought and honest 
search after truth, you find, when this parliament 
is over, that out of prejudice of race and 
dogma, and out of the variety of custom and 
worship, there flows out before your eyes nothing 
but the pure gold of humanity; and henceforth 
you think of us, not as strangers in foreign 



lands, but as your brothers, in China, and 
Japan and India, your sisters in the Isles of 
Greece and the hills and valleys of Armenia, 
you shall have paid us such a dividend out of 
your hearts and received yourselves withal such 
a blessing that this will be a Beulah land of 
prophecy for future times, and send forth the 
echo of that sweet song that once was heard 
in our land of "Peace on earth and good 
will to man." 

"There has been so much spoken to you 
here, by men of wisdom and experience of the 
religious life of the great east, that you would 

R1592: page 340 

not expect me to add anything thereto. Nor 
would I have stood here presuming to give you 
any more information about the religions of 
the world. But there is a new race of men 
that have risen up out of all the great past 
whose influence will undoubtedly be a most 
important factor in the work of humanity in 
the coming century. They are the result of all 
the past, coming in contact with the new life 
of the present— I mean the young men of the 
Orient: they who are preparing to take possession 
of the earth with their brothers of the 
great west. 

"I bring you a philosophy from the shores 
of the Bosphorus and a religion from the city 
of Constantine. All my firm convictions and 
deductions that have grown up within me for 
years past have, under the influence of this 
parliament, been shaken to their roots. But 
I find to-day those roots yet deeper in my 
heart and the branches reaching higher into 
the skies. I cannot presume to bring you anything 
new, but if all the deductions appear to 
you to be logical from premises which human 
intelligence can accept, then I feel confident 
that you will give us credit of honest purpose 
and allow us the right as intelligent beings to 
hold fast to that which I present before you. 

"When the young men of to-day were children, 
they heard and saw every day of their 
lives nothing but enmity and separation between 
men of different religions and nationalities. 
I need not stop to tell you of the influence 
of such a life upon the lives of young 
men who found themselves separated and in 
camps pitched for battle against their brother 
men with whom they had to come in contact 
in the daily avocations of life. And as the 
light of education and ideas of liberty began 
to spread over the whole Orient with the latter 



part of this century, this yoke became more 
galling upon the necks of the young men of 
the Orient and the burden too heavy to bear. 

"Young men of all the nationalities I have 
mentioned, who for the past thirty years have 
received their education in the universities of 
Paris, Heidelberg, Berlin, and other cities of 
Europe, as well as the Imperial Lyceum of Constantinople, 
have been consciously or unconsciously, 
passively or aggressively, weaving the 
fabric of their religion, so that to the thousand 
young men, for whom their voice is an 
oracle, it has come like a boon, and enlisted 
their heart and mind. 

"They find their brothers in large numbers 
in all the cities of the Orient where European 
civilization has found the least entrance, and 
there is scarcely any city that will not have 
felt their influence before the end of the century. 
Their religion is the newest of all 
religions, and I should not have brought it 
upon this platform were it not for the fact it 
is one of the most potent influences acting in 
the Orient and with which we religious young 
men of the east have to cope efficiently, if we 
are to have the least influence with the peoples 
of our respective lands. 

"For, remember, these are men of intelligence, 
men of excellent parts, men who, with 
all the young men of the Orient, have proved 
that in all arts and science, in the marts of the 
civilized world, in the armies of the nations 
and at the right hand of kings they are the 
equal of any race of men, from the rising of 
the sun to the setting thereof. They are men, 
moreover, for the most part, of the best intentions 
and the most sincere convictions, and, 
when you hear their opinion of religion and 
think of the position they hold, you cannot, I 
am sure, as members of the religious parliament, 
feel anything but the greatest concern 
for them and the lands in which they dwell. 

"I represent, personally, the religious young 
men of the Orient; but let me, by proxy, for 
the young men of the newest religion, speak 
before you to the apostles of all religions: 
'You come to us in the name of religion to 
bring to us what we already have. We believe 
that man is sufficient unto himself, if, as you 
say, a perfect God has created him. If you 
will let him alone he will be all that he should 
be. Educate him, train him, don't bind him 
hand and foot, and he will be a perfect man, 
worthy to be the brother of any other man. 
Nature has sufficiently endowed man, and you 
should use all that is given you in your intelligence 



before you trouble God to give you 

more. Moreover, no one has found God. 

We have all the inspiration we want in sweet 

poetry and enchanting music, and in the companionship 

of refined and cultured men and 

women. If we are to listen to it, we would like 

Handel to tell us of the Messiah, and if the 

heavens resound, it is enough to have Beethoven's 

interpretation. 

'"We have nothing against you, but really, 
as to all religions, we must say that you have 
done the greatest possible harm to humanity 
by raising men against men and nation against 
nation. And now to make a bad thing worse 
in this day of superlative common sense you 
come to fill the minds of men with impossible 
things and burden their brains with endless 
discussions of a thousand sects. For there are 
many I have heard before you and I know how 
many could follow. We consider you the one 

R1592: page 341 

of all men to be avoided, for your philosophy 
and your doctrines are breeding pessimism 
over the land.' 

"Then with a religious instinct and innate 
respect that all orientals have, I have to say 
suddenly: 'But, see here, we are not infidels 
or atheists or skeptics. We simply have no 
time for such things. We are full of the inspiration 
for the highest life, and desire freedom 
for all young men of the world. We have a 
religion that unites all men of all lands, and 
fills the earth with gladness. It supplies every 
human need, and, therefore, we know that it 
is the true religion, especially because it produces 
peace and the greatest harmony. So, we 
do not want any of your 'isms' nor any other 
system or doctrine. We are not materialists, 
socialists, rationalists or pessimists, and we are 
not idealists. Our religion is the first that 
was, and it is also the newest of the new— we 
are gentlemen. In the name of peace and humanity, 
can you not let us alone? If you invite 
us again in the name of religion, we shall 
have a previous engagement, and if you call 
again to preach, we are not at home.' 

"This is the oriental young man, like the 
green bay tree. And where one passes away, 
so that you do not find him in his place, there 
are twenty to fill the gap. Believe me, I have 
not exaggerated; for word for word, and ten 
times more than this, I have heard from intelligent 
men of the army and navy, men in commerce 
and men of the bars of justice in earnest 



conversation and deep argument, in the 
streets of Constantinople, in the boats of the 
Golden Horn and the Bosphorus, in Roumania 
and Bulgaria, as well as in Paris and New 
York and the Auditorium of Chicago, from 
Turk and Armenian, from Greek and Hebrew, 
as well as Bulgarian and Servian, and I can 
tell you that this newest substitute of religion, 
keeping the gates of commerce and literature, 
science and law, through Europe and the Orient, 
is a most potent force in shaping the destinies 
of the nations of the east, and has to be 
accounted for intelligently in thinking of the 
future of religion, and has to be met with an 
armament as powerful in the eyes of the young 
men of the Orient as that which science and 
literature have put in the hands of these men 
of the great army of the new gentlemen class. 
"There is another class of young men in the 
Orient who call themselves the religious young 
men and who hold to the ancient faith of their 
fathers. Allow me to claim for these young 
men, also, honesty of purpose, intelligence of 
mind, as well as a firm persuasion. For them 
also I come to speak to you, and in speaking 
for them I speak also for myself. You will 
naturally see that we have to be from earliest 
days in contact with the new religion; so let 
me call it for convenience. We have to be in 
colleges and universities with those same young 
men. We have to go hand in hand with them 
in all science and history, literature, music 
and poetry, and naturally with them we share 
in the firm belief in all scientific deduction 
and hold fast to every principle of human 
liberty. 

THE DIGNITY OF MAN. 

"First, all the young men of the Orient, 
who have the deepest religious convictions, 
stand for the dignity of man. I regret that I 
should have to commence here; but, out of 
the combined voices and arguments of philosophies 
and theologies, there comes before us 
such an unavoidable inference of an imperfect 
humanity that we have to come out before we 
can speak on any religion for ourselves and 
say: 'We believe that we are men.' For us it 
is a libel on humanity, and an impeachment 
of the God who created man, to say that man 
is not sufficient within himself, and that he 
needs religion to come and make him perfect. 

[Note how the natural man accuses and excuses 
himself in the same breath. Imperfection 
cannot be denied; but power to make ourselves 



perfect in time is claimed, and thus the 

necessity for "the precious blood" of the "sin-offering 

which God has provided, is ignored 

by the heathen as it is now being denied by the 

worldly-wise of Christendom.— EDITOR.] 

"It is libeling humanity to look upon this or 
that family of man and to say that they show 
conceptions of goodness and truth and high 
ideals and a life above simple animal desires, 
because they have had religious teaching by 
this or that man, or a revelation from heaven. 
We believe that if man is man he has it all in 
himself, just as he has all his bodily capacities. 
Will you tell me that a cauliflower that I plant 
in the fields grows up in beauty and perfection 
of its convolutions, and that my brain, which 
the same God has created a hundred thousand 
times more delicate and perfect, cannot develop 
its convolutions and do the work that 
God intended I should do and have the highest 
conceptions that he intended I should have; 
that a helpless pollywog will develop, and become 
a frog with perfect, elastic limbs and a 
heaving chest, and that frogs will keep together 
in contentment and croak in unity, and 
that men need religion and help from outside 
in order that they may develop into the perfection 

R1592: page 342 

of men in body and soul and recognize the 
brotherhood of man and live upon God's earth 
in peace? I say it is an impeachment of God, 
who created man, to promulgate and acquiesce 
in any such doctrine. 

"Nor do we accept the unwarranted conclusions 
of science. We have nothing to do 
with the monkeys. If they want to speak to 
us they will have to come up to us. There is 
a western spirit of creating difficulties which we 
cannot understand. One of my first experiences 
in the United States was taking part in a meeting 
of young ladies and gentlemen in the City 
of Philadelphia for a quiet evening, of which 
there are quite a number there. The subject 
of the evening was whether animals had souls, 
and the cat came out prominently. Very serious 
and erudite papers were read. But the 
conclusion was that, not knowing just what a 
cat is and what a soul is, they could not decide 
the matter, but still was it a serious matter 
bearing upon religion. Now suppose an Armenian 
girl should ask her mother if cats had 
souls. She would settle the question in parenthesis 
and say, for example: 'My sweet one, 
you must go down and see if the water is boiling 



(What put the question into your head? 
Of course cats have souls. Cats have cats' souls 
and men have men's souls.) Now go down.' 
And the child would go down rejoicing in her 
humanity. And if my Armenian lady should 
one day be confronted with the missing link 
of which we hear so much, still her equanimity 
would remain unperturbed and she would 
still glory in her humanity by informing you 
that the missing link had the soul of a missing 
link and man had the soul of a man. 

"So far we come with the young men of the 
gentlemen class, hand in hand, upon the common 
plane of humanity. But here is a corner 
where we part, and take widely diverging paths. 
We cry, 'Let us alone, and we will expand and 
rise up to the height of our destiny;' and, behold, 
we find an invisible power that will not 
let us alone. We find that we can do almost 
everything in the ways of science and art. But 
when it comes to following our conception of 
that which is high and noble, that which is 
right and necessary for our development, 
we are wanting in strength and power to advance 
toward it. I put this in the simplest 
form, for I cannot enlarge upon it here. But 
the fact for us is as real as that of the dignity 
of man, that there is a power which diverts 
men and women from the path of rectitude and 
honor, in which they know they must walk. 
You cannot say it is inherent in man, for we 
feel it does not belong to us. And if it did 
not belong to us, and it was the right conception 
of man to go down into degradation and 
misery, rapacity, and the desire of crushing 
down his fellow man, we would say, 'Let him 
alone, and let him do that which God meant 
that he should do.' 

"So, briefly, I say to anyone here who is 
preparing to boil down his creed, put this in 
it before you reach the boiling point: And I 
believe in the devil, the arch-enemy of God, 
the accuser of God to man.' One devil for 
the whole universe? We care not. A legion 
of demons besieging each soul? It matters 
not to us. We know this; that there is a 
power outside of man which draws him aside 
mightily. And no power on earth can resist it. 

"And so, here comes our religion. If you 
have a religion to bring to the young men of 
the Orient, it must come with a power that 
will balance, yea, counterbalance the power of 
evil in the world. Then will man be free to 
grow up and be that which God intended he 
should be. We want God. We want the spirit 
of God. And the religion that comes to us in 



any name or form, must bring that, or else, for 
us, it is no religion. And we believe in God, 
not the God of protoplasms, that hides between 
molecules of matter, but God whose 
children we are. 

"So we place as the third item of our philosophy 
and protest the dignity of God. Is chivalry 
dead? Has all conception of a high and 
noble life, of sterling integrity, departed from 
the hearts of men that we cannot aspire to 
knighthood and princeship in the courts of our 
God? We know we are his children, for we 
are doing his works and thinking his thoughts. 
What we want to do is to be like him. Oh, is 
it true that I can cross land and sea and reach 
the heart of my mother, and feel her arms clasping 
me, but that I, a child of God, standing 
helpless in the universe, against a power that I 
cannot overcome, cannot lift up my hands to 
him, and cry to him, that I may have his spirit 
in my soul and feel his everlasting arms supporting 
me in my weakness? 

"And here comes the preacher from ancient 
days, and the modern church, and tells us of 
one who did overcome the world, and that 
he came down from above. We need not to be 
told that he came from above, for no man born 
of woman did any such thing. But we are persuaded 
that by the means of grace and the 
path which he shows us to walk in, the spirit 
of God does come into the hearts of men, and 
that I can feel it in my heart fighting with me 
against sin and strengthening my heart to hold 
resolutely to that which I know to be right by 

R1592: page 343 

the divine in me. We do not know whether 
the spirit of God proceedeth from the Father 
or from the Son, but we know that it proceedeth 
into the heart of man and that sufficeth 
unto us. 

"And so with a trembling hand but firm 
conviction, with much sadness with humanity, 
but joy of eternal triumph, I come with you all 
to the golden gates of the twentieth century, 
where the elders of the coming commonwealth 
of humanity are sitting to pass judgment upon 
the religion that shall enter those gates to the 
support of the human heart. I place there by 
the side of ancient Oriental Confucianism and 
modern theosophy, ancient Oriental Buddhism 
and modern spiritualism, and every faith of ancient 
days and modern materialism, rationalism 
and idealism— there I place ancient Oriental 
Christianity with its Christ, the power of God 



and the wisdom of God, and its cross, still radiant 
in the love of God, 

"'Towering o'er the wrecks of time.'" 

The thoughtful observer cannot read the 
noble sentiments of some of these who are feeling 
after God and aspiring toward righteousness, 
without marking the contrast between 
their serious sincerity and their noble purpose 
and effort to lift up before their fellow-men 
the highest standards of righteousness they can 
discern, and the compromising attitude of so 
many Christians who have been more highly 
favored by birth and environment with a knowledge 
of the truth, who are now anxious to sell 
it at the immense sacrifice of its noble principles, 
merely to gain the present popular favor. 
To whom much has been given much will be 
required by the Lord, who is now weighing 
them all in the balances. 

But while a few of the foreign representatives 
call out our admiration and respect, the great 
majority of them were rejoicing in their privilege 
of parading and recommending their 
superstitions to such a representative assembly 
of the civilized and enlightened nations. Buddhism, 
Shintoism, Brahminism, Confucianism 
and Mohammedanism were repeatedly set forth 
with great boldness, and the Mohammedan 
apostle even had the audacity to recommend 
polygamy. This was almost too much for the 
audience, but their manifestations of disapproval 
were quickly silenced by the chairman, 
Dr. Barrows, who reminded them of the object 
of the Parliament— to give all a fair hearing 
without dispute. So all had an abundant 
hearing and freely argued their points before 
the already unsettled minds of thousands of 
professed Christians, and they have had much 
reason to expect converts to their religions 
here in America. The same privileges were 
also enjoyed by many of the anti-christian 
movements, such as Christian Science, Theosophy, 
Swedenborgianism, etc. 

CLOSING SENTIMENTS OF THE GREAT 
PARLIAMENT. 



As to the probable outcome of this great convocation, 
which has already made Babylon's 
confusion worse confounded, we may judge 
somewhat by the farewell remarks of the different 
representatives on the last evening of the 
Parliament, from which we quote a few brief 
extracts. 



Suamie Vive Kananda (priest of Bombay, 
India) said:— 

"Much has been said of the common ground 
of religious unity. I am not going just now to 
venture my own theory; but if any one here 
hopes that this unity would come by the triumph 
of any one of these religions and the destruction 
of the others, to him I say, Brother, 
yours is an impossible hope. Do I wish that 
the Christian would become Hindoo? God 
forbid. Do I wish that the Hindoo or Buddhist 
would become Christian? God forbid. 
The Christian is not to become a Hindoo or a 
Buddhist, nor a Hindoo or a Buddhist to become 
a Christian. Learn to think without prejudice. 
...If theology and dogma stand in 
your way in the search of truth, put them aside. 
Be earnest, and work out your own salvation 
with diligence, and the fruits of holiness will 
be yours." 

Vichand Ghandi (Jainist of India) said:— 

"If you will permit a 'heathen' to deliver 
his message of peace and love, I shall only ask 
you to look at the multifarious ideas presented 
to you, in a liberal spirit, and not with superstition 
and bigotry. ...I entreat you to examine 
the various religious systems from all 
standpoints." 

The Right Rev. Shabita, high priest of the 
Shinto religion in Japan, said:— 

"What I wish to do is to assist you in 
carrying out the plan of forming the universal 
brotherhood under the one roof of truth. You 
know unity is power. [But not when God is 

R1592: page 344 

on the opposite side of such union. See Isa. 8:9.] 
Now I pray that the eight million deities 
protecting the beautiful cherry tree country 
of Japan may protect you and your government 
forever, and with this I bid you good-by." 

H. Dharmapala of Ceylon said:— 

"I, on behalf of four hundred and seventy-five 
millions of my co-religionists, followers of 
the gentle Lord Buddha Gautauma, tender my 
affectionate regards to you.... You have 
learned from your brothers of the far east their 
presentation of the respective religious systems 
they follow;. ..you have listened with commendable 
patience to the teachings of the all-merciful 
Buddha through his humble followers." 

Bishop Keane (Roman Catholic) said:— 

"When the invitation to this parliament 
was sent to the old Catholic church, people said, 
'Will she come?' And the old Catholic church 



said, 'Who has as good a right to come to a 
parliament of all the religions of the world as 
the old Catholic universal church?'. ..Even 
if she has to stand alone on that platform she 
will stand on it. And the old church has 
come and is rejoiced to meet her fellow-men, 
her fellow-believers, her fellow-lovers of every 
shade of humanity and every shade of creed, 
been planted here a seed that will grow to 
union wide and perfect. If it were not better 
for us to be one than to be divided, our Lord 
would not have prayed that we might all be 
one as he and the Father are one." [But they 
are not praying for such a union as exists between 
the Father and the Son: the proposed 
union is a vastly different one.] 

The sentiments thus expressed found fullest 
acceptance in the Parliament from Protestant 
representatives. Thus, for instance, Rev. Dr. 
Candlin, missionary to China, said:— 

"The conventional idea of religion which 
obtains among Christians the world over is 
that Christianity is true, all other religions false; 
that Christianity is of God, while other religions 
are of the devil; or else, with a little spice 
of moderation, that Christianity is a revelation 
from heaven, while other religions are manufactures 
of men. You know better [mark that], 
and with clear light and strong assurance can 
testify that there may be friendship instead of 
antagonism between religion and religion, that 
so surely as God is our common father, our 
hearts alike have yearned for him and our souls 
in devoutest moods have caught whispers of 
grace dropped from his throne. Then this is 
Pentecost, and behind is the conversion of the 
world." 

The Rev. Dr. Bristol, of the Methodist 
church, said:— 

"Infinite good and only good will come 
from this parliament. To all who have come 
from afar we are profoundly and eternally indebted. 
Some of them represent civilization 
that was old when Romulus was founding 
Rome; whose philosophies and songs were ripe 
in wisdom and rich in rhythm before Homer 
sang his Iliads to the Greeks; and they have 
enlarged our ideas of our common humanity. 
They have brought to us fragrant flowers from 
the gardens of eastern faiths, rich gems from 
the old mines of great philosophies, and we 
are richer to-night from their contributions of 
thought and particularly from our contact with 
them in spirit. 

"Never was there such a bright and hopeful 
day for our common humanity along the 



lines of tolerance and universal brotherhood. 

And we shall find that by the words that these 

visitors have brought to us and by the influence 

they have exerted they will be richly 

rewarded in the consciousness of having contributed 

to the mighty movement which holds 

in itself the promise of one faith, one Lord, 

one Father, one brotherhood. 

"The blessings of our God and our Father 
be with you, brethren from the east; the 
blessings of our Savior, our elder brother, the 
teacher of the brotherhood of man, be with 
you and your peoples forever." 

Rev. Augusta Chapin said:— 

"We who welcomed now speed the parting 
guests. We are glad you came, O wise men 
of the east. With your wise words, your large 
toleration and your gentle ways we have been 
glad to sit at your feet and learn of you in these 
things. We are glad to have seen you face to 
face, and we shall count you henceforth more 
than ever our friends and coworkers in the 
great things of religion. 

And we are glad, now that you are going to 
your far away homes, to tell the story of all 
that has been said and done here in this great 
parliament, and that you will thus bring the 
Orient into nearer relations with the Occident, 
and make plain the sympathy which exists 
among all religions. We are glad for the 
words that have been spoken by the wise men 
and women of the west, who have come and 
have given us their grains of gold after the 
washing. What I said in the beginning I will 
repeat now at the ending of this parliament. 
It has been the greatest gathering in the name 
of religion ever held on the face of this earth." 

Rev. Jenkin Lloyd Jones said: 

"I bid you, the parting guests, the godspeed 

R1592 : page 345 

that comes out of a soul that is glad to recognize 
its kinship with all lands and with all religions; 
and when you go, you go leaving behind 
you in our hearts not only more hospitable 
thoughts for the faiths you represent but 
also warm and loving ties that bind you into 
the union that will be our joy and our life 
forevermore." 
Dr. Barrows (chairman) said:— 
"Our hopes have been more than realized. 
The sentiment which has inspired this parliament 
has held us together. The principles in 
accord with which this historic convention has 
proceeded have been put to the test, and even 



strained at times, but they have not been inadequate. 

Toleration, brotherly kindness, 

trust in each other's sincerity, a candid and 

earnest seeking after the unities of religion, 

the honest purpose of each to set forth his own 

faith without compromise and without unfriendly 

criticism— these principles, thanks to 

your loyalty and courage, have not been found 

wanting. 

"Men of Asia and Europe, we have been 
made glad by your coming, and have been 
made wiser. I am happy that you have enjoyed 
our hospitalities," etc. 

The remarks of President Bonney were very 
similar; and then, with a prayer by a Jewish 
rabbi and a benediction by a Roman Catholic 
bishop, the great Parliament came to a close; 
and five thousand voices joined in repeating 
the angel's message of "Peace on earth and 
good will towards men." 

THE OUTLOOK. 



But Oh! at what sacrifice of principles and 
truth, and of loyalty to God, is such an announcement 
made to the world; and that, too, 
on the very threshold of a divinely predicted 
time of trouble such as never was since there 
was a nation, a trouble which all thinking 
people begin to realize, and the crisis and outcome 
of which they greatly fear. And it is 
this fear that is driving this heterogeneous mass 
together for mutual protection and co-operation. 
It is merely a stroke of human policy 
to try to quiet the fears of the world by crying, 
Peace! Peace! when there is no peace. 
(Jer. 6:14.) The time is coming when the 
Lord himself will speak peace unto the heathen 
(Zech. 9:10); but it will not be until he has 
first made known his presence in the whirlwind 
of revolution and in the storm of trouble. 
-Nah. 1:3. 

Those who are posted in history know something 
of the character of that great antichristian 
power with which affiliation is so earnestly 
sought— the church of Rome; and those who 
are keeping open eyes on her present operations 
know that her heart and character are 
still unchanged. And only recently tidings 
came from southern Russia of fierce persecution, 
not only of Jews, but also of Christians 
who are awakening from the blindness and 
superstition of the Greek church and who are 
seeking and finding God and the truth through 



the study of his Word. The persecution incited 

by the priests and the police are of the 

most cruel and revolting nature. But, nevertheless, 

union and co-operation with both these 

systems is most earnestly sought, as also with 

all the forms of heathen superstition and 

ignorance. 

Of the gross darkness of heathenism with 
which co-operation and sympathy is even now 
craved by Christians, we may gain some idea 
from the following indignant retort of Dr. 
Pentecost against the critical tone which some 
of the foreigners assumed toward Christianity 
and Christian missions. He said:— 

"I think it is a pity that anything should 
tend to degenerate the discussions of this parliament 
into a series of criminations and recriminations; 
nevertheless, we Christians have 
been sitting patiently and listening to a series 
of criticisms upon the results of Christianity 
from certain representatives of the eastern religions. 
For instance, the slums of Chicago 
and New York, the nameless wickednesses palpable 
to the eye even of the strangers who are 
our guests; the licentiousness, the drunkenness, 
the brawls, the murders, and the crimes of the 
criminal classes have been scored up against us. 
The shortcomings of Congress and government 
both in England and America have been 
charged to Christianity. The opium trade, the 
rum traffic, the breach of treaties, the inhuman 
and barbarous laws against the Chinaman, etc., 
have all been charged upon the Christian 
church. [Aye, but if Christians claim that 
these are Christian nations, can they reasonably 
blame these heathen representatives for 
thinking and judging them accordingly?— 
EDITOR.] 

"Now it seems almost needless to say that 
all these things, the immoralities, drunkenness, 
crimes, unbrotherliness, and selfish greed of 
these various destructive traffics which have 
been carried from our countries to the Orient, 
lie outside the pale of Christianity. The Church 
of Christ is laboring night and day to correct 
and abolish these crimes. The unanimous 
voice of the Christian Church condemns the 
opium traffic, the liquor traffic, the Chinese 

R1592: page 346 

acts of oppression, and all forms of vice and 
greed of which our friends from the East 
complain. 

"We are willing to be criticised; but when 
I recall the fact that these criticisms are in 



part from gentlemen who represent a system 
of religion whose temples, manned by the 
highest castes of Brahmanical priesthood, are 
the authorized and appointed cloisters of a 
system of immorality and debauchery the parallel 
of which is not known in any Western 
country, I feel that silence gives consent. I 
could take you to ten thousand temples, more 
or less— more rather than less— in every part 
of India, to which are attached from two to 
four hundred priestesses, whose lives are not 
all they should be. 

"I have seen this with my own eyes, and 
nobody denies it in India. If you talk to the 
Brahmans about it, they will say it is a part of 
their system for the common people. Bear in 
mind this system is the authorized institution 
of the Hindoo religion. One needs only to 
look at the abominable carvings upon the 
temples, both of the Hindoos and Buddhists, 
the hideous symbols of the ancient Phallic 
systems, which are the most popular objects 
worshiped in India, to be impressed with the 
corruption of the religion. Bear in mind, these 
are not only tolerated but instituted, directed, 
and controlled by the priests of religion. Only 
the shameless paintings and portraiture of ancient 
Pompeii equal in obscenity the things 
that are openly seen in and about the entrance 
to the temples of India. 

"It seems a little hard that we should bear 
the criticism which these representatives of 
Hindooism make upon the Godless portion of 
Western countries, when they are living in such 
enormous glass houses as these, every one of 
them erected, protected and defended by the 
leaders of their own religion. 

"We have heard a good deal about the 
'fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of 
man,' as being one of the essential doctrines 
of the religions of the East. As a matter of 
fact, I have never been able to find— and I 
have challenged the production of them all 
over India— a single text in any of the Hindoo 
sacred literature that justifies or even suggests 
the doctrine of the 'fatherhood of God and 
the brotherhood of man.' This is a pure plagiarism 
from Christianity. We rejoice that they 
have adopted and incorporated it. How can a 
Brahman, who looks upon all low-caste men, 
and especially upon the poor pariahs, with a 
spirit of loathing, and regards them as a different 
order of beings, sprung from monkeys and 
devils, presume to tell us that he believes in the 
fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man? 
If a Brahman believes in the brotherhood of 



man, why will he refuse the social amenities 
and common hospitalities to men of other castes, 
as well as to his Western brethren, whom he so 
beautifully enfolds in the condescending arms 
of his newly found doctrine of the fatherhood 
of God and the brotherhood of man? 

"If there is any brotherhood of man in India 
the most careless observer need not hesitate 
to say that there is no sisterhood recognized 
by them. Let the nameless horrors of 
which the Hindoo women of India are the subjects 
answer to this statement. 

"Until the English government put down 
with a strong hand the ancient religious Hindoo 
institution of Sutte, hundreds of Hindoo 
widows every year gladly flew to the funeral 
pyres of their dead husbands, thus embracing 
the flames that burned their bodies rather than 
deliver themselves to the nameless horrors and 
living hell of Hindoo widowhood. Let our 
Hindoo friends tell us what their religion has 
done for the Hindoo widow, and especially 
the child widow, with her head shaved like a 
criminal, stripped of her ornaments, clothed 
in rags, reduced to a position of slavery worse 
than we can conceive, made the common 
drudge and scavenger of the family, and not 
infrequently put to even worse and nameless 
uses. To this state and condition the poor 
widow is reduced under the sanction of Hindooism. 
Only two years ago the British government 
was appealed to pass a new and 
stringent law 'raising the age of consent' to 
twelve years, at which it was lawful for the 
Hindoo to consummate the marriage relation 
with his child wife. The Christian hospitals, 
filled with abused little girls barely out of their 
babyhood, became so outrageous a fact that 
the government had to step in and stop these 
crimes, which were perpetrated in the name of 
religion. So great was the excitement in India 
over this that it was feared that a religious revolution 
which would almost lead to a new 
mutiny was imminent. 

"We have been criticised by our Oriental 
friends forjudging with an ignorant and prejudiced 
judgment, because at a recent challenge 
in the early part of this parliament only 
five persons were able to say that they had read 
the Bible of Buddha; so it was taken for 
granted that our judgment was ignorant and 
unjust. The same challenge might have been 
made in Burmah or Ceylon, and outside of the 
priesthood it is almost fair to say that not so 
many would have been able to say they had 



R1592 : page 347 

read their own scriptures. The Badas of the 
Hindoos are objects of worship. None but a 
Brahman may teach, much less read them. Before 
the Christian missionary went to India, 
the Sanskrit was practically a dead language. 
If the Indian Scriptures have at last been translated 
into the vernacular or given to the Western 
nations, it is because the Christian missionary 
and Western scholars have rediscovered 
them, unearthed them, translated them, and 
brought them forth to the light of day. The 
amount of the Sanskrit Scriptures known by 
the ordinary Indian who has secured a Western 
education is only those portions which have 
been translated into English or the vernacular 
by European or Western scholars. The common 
people, ninety-nine one-hundredths of all, 
know only tradition. Let us contrast this dead 
exclusiveness on the part of these Indian religions 
with the fact that the Christian has translated 
his Bible into more than three hundred 
languages and dialects, and has sent it broadcast 
by hundreds of millions among all the nations 
and tongues and peoples of the earth. 
We court the light, but it would seem that the 
Bibles of the East love the darkness rather than 
light, because they will not bear the light of 
universal publication. 

"The new and better Hindooism of to-day 
is a development under the influence of a Christian 
environment, but it has not yet attained 
to that ethical standard which gives it right to 
read the Christian Church a lesson in morals. 
Until India purges her temples of worse than 
Augean filth, and her pundits and priests disown 
and denounce the awful acts and deeds 
done in the name of religion, let her be modest 
in proclaiming morals to other nations and 
people." 

RESULTS OF THE GREAT PARLIAMENT. 



Viewed from its own standpoint, the Parliament 
was pronounced a grand success, and 
the unthinking world responds, Amen! and 
America, and especially Chicago, and President 
Bonney and Chairman Dr. Barrows come 
in for a large share of the honors of the occasion 
so great in the eyes of men. It is looked 
upon by them as the harbinger of universal 
peace. The whole world is to be bound up 
in one universal bond of religious unity and 



brotherhood, and yet all are to think and act 
and grope along in the darkness of ignorance 
and superstition just as they have always done, 
refusing "the light that shines in the face of 
Jesus Christ," which is the only true light. 
And Christians are rejoicing in this prospect, 
and hailing such an event as the most glorious 
event in history; and they are promising the 
world a universal and everlasting peace on 
this hypothesis; and they think they can bring 
about arbitration instead of war for the settlement 
of national disputes. 

To accomplish this it was even proposed and 
argued at the Congress that the Pope of Rome 
is the most suitable person in the world to be 
the arbitrator of nations. 

But while the general impression created by 
the great Parliament is that it is the first step, 
and a long one, towards a realization of the 
angel's message at the birth of Christ, of peace 
on earth and good will toward men, we view 
it far otherwise— as another manifestation of 
the faithlessness of Christendom. Surely, as 
saith the prophet, "The wisdom of their wise 
men shall perish, and the understanding of 
their prudent men shall be hid." (Isa. 29:14.) 
And again we hear him say, "Associate yourselves, 
O ye people, and ye shall be broken in 
pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: 
gird yourselves and ye shall be broken in 
pieces. Take counsel together and it shall 
come to naught; speak the word and it shall 
not stand. "-Isa. 8:9,10. 

With the Psalmist we would again propound 
the question, "Why do the people imagine a 
vain thing?— Why do they cry, Peace! Peace! 
when there is no peace? The kings of the 
earth [civil and ecclesiastical] set themselves, 
and the rulers take counsel together, against 
the Lord and against his Anointed, saying, Let 
us break their bands asunder and cast away 
their cords from us. He that sitteth in the 
heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them 
in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in 
his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure," 
and the great time of trouble will come. 
-Psa. 2:1-5. 

When God's chosen people— spiritual Israel 
now, like fleshly Israel anciently— abandon 
his Word and his leading, and seek to ally 
themselves with the nations that know not God, 
and to blend divine truth with the world's 
philosophies, they take such steps at a peril 
which they do not realize; and they would do 
well indeed to mark God's recompenses to his 
ancient people, and take warning. 



Several very unfavorable results are, we 
think, clearly discernible:— 

(1) It has introduced to the already unsettled 
minds of Christians the various heathen 
philosophies, and that in their most favorable 
aspects, and doubtless the impression already 
made upon many minds is that there are no 
religious certainties. Such a condition was 
even hinted at by one of the delegates from 

R1592: page 348 

Syria— Christophore Jibara. He said:— 

"My Brothers and Sisters in the worship of 
God:— All the religions now in this general 
and religious congress are parallel to each 
other in the sight of the whole world. Every 
one of these religions has supporters who realize 
and prefer their own to other religions, and 
they might bring some arguments or reasons 
to convince others of the value and truth of 
their own form of religion. From such discussions 
a change may come: perhaps even 
doubts about all religions; or a supposition 
that all of them are identical faiths. And, 
therefore, the esteem of every religion may fall 
or decrease; doubt may be produced against 
all the inspired books, or a general neglect 
may happen, and no one will remain to hold a 
certain religion, and many may entirely neglect 
the duties of religion, for the reason of 
restlessness in their hearts and the opinion 
which prevails in one form of religion, just as 
is going on among many millions in Europe 
and America. Therefore, I think that a committee 
should be selected from the great religions, 
to investigate the dogmas and to make a 
full and perfect comparison, approving the true 
one, and announcing it to the people." 

(2) It has made special friendship between 
Babylon the great, the mother of harlots (the 
church of Rome), and her many daughters 

(the various Protestant sects), who glory in their 
shame, and are proud to own the relationship, 
all unmindful of the disreputable character 
ascribed to her in the divine revelation and 
abundantly verified in her history even to the 
present day. 

(3) It has taken a long step, which will 
doubtless be followed by others— already proposed 
—towards the affiliation, in some sense, 

of all religions; toward a yet closer union of 
the church (nominal) and the world. It was 
publicly announced by the President at the 
last session of the Parliament that "a proclamation 
of fraternity will be issued to promote 



the continuation in all parts of the world of 
the great work in which the congresses of 1893 
have been engaged." 

(4) It has practically said to the heathen 
that there is really no necessity for Christian 
missions; that Christians are themselves uncertain 
of their religion; that their own religions 

are good enough, if followed sincerely; 

and that Christianity, to say the least, can 

only be received with a large measure of incredulity. 

It is a cause of astonishment to 

note how the heathen representatives have 

measured nominal Christianity; how clearly 

they have made distinctions between the Christianity 

of "Christendom," and the Christianity 

of the Bible; and how keenly their rebukes 

were often administered. 

(5) It has said to distracted Christendom, 
Peace! Peace! when there is no peace, instead 
of sounding an alarm, as saith the Prophet 
(Joel 2:1): "Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and 
sound an alarm in my holy mountain;... 

for the day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at 
hand," and calling upon all to humble themselves 
under the mighty hand of God. 

(6) It was evidently a measure of policy, originating 
in the fears of the leaders in "Christendom," 

as they discerned the approaching 
trouble of this day of the Lord. Mark! it had 
its beginning in the distracted and perplexed 
Presbyterian church. The cry of Peace! Peace! 
in the very midst of the rising storm of this 
day of the Lord, reminds us of the prophecy— 
"When they shall say, Peace and safety, then 
sudden destruction cometh upon them."— 
1 Thes. 5:3. 

Let not the children of God be deluded by 
Babylon's false prognostications. In God only 
can we find a safe retreat. (Psa. 91.) Let us 
rally closer round the cross of Christ, which 
is our only hope. Let the universal brotherhood 
of false religions and apostate Christianity 
prove the value of that relationship; but 
let us recognize only the brotherhood in Christ 
—the brotherhood of all who trust in him alone 
for salvation, through faith in his precious 
blood. Other men are not children of God, 
and will not be until they come unto him by 
faith in Christ as their Redeemer, their substitute. 
They are the "children of wrath," even 
as were we before we came into Christ (Eph. 2:3); 
and some are the children of the wicked 
one, whose works they do. When God condemned 
Adam and his posterity to death, on 
account of sin, he no longer owned and treated 
them as sons. And only as men come into 



Christ by faith in his precious blood are they 
reinstated in that blessed relationship to God. 
Consequently, if we are no longer the children 
of wrath, but are owned of God as his sons 
through Christ, other men, not so recognized 
of God, are not in any sense our brethren. 

Several propositions have already been publicly 
made for another similar world's congress, 
to convene in the year 1900; and New York, 
Jerusalem and Benares, India, have been suggested 
as suitable places. A great "Eucharistic 
Congress" was held in May under the direction 
of Roman Catholics, the object of which 
seemed to be to advance the cause of union 
between the various branches of the Catholic 
church, particularly the largest two bodies, 

R1592 : page 349 

the Greek and Roman branches. 

Let all the children of light watch and be 
sober (1 Thes. 5:5,6); let the soldiers of the 
cross be valiant for the truth, and receive no 
other gospel, though it be declared by an angel 
from heaven (Gal. 1:8); and let them consummate 
no union with any class save the 
"little flock" of consecrated and faithful followers 

R1593 : page 349 

of the Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the sin of the world. 



R1593 : page 349 

NOMINAL CHURCH PECULIARITIES. 



CANTON, Ohio, has some peculiar people. A 
Congregational Church there, after getting 
behind financially, decided by a vote— in which 
the pastor joined— that they would unite with 
any denomination that would purchase their 
meeting house. The Methodists were their 
purchasers— purchasing people and pastor as 
well as real estate— and now it is a Methodist 
Episcopal church; and the minister has been 
installed a M.E. Church pastor at Zanesville, O. 
How evident that principles and doctrines have 
perished with the masses of Protestants! 

Following the example of his Baptist fellow-minister 
of Long Island City, who gave the 
use of his church to the Catholics of that city 



after their own building had been burned, the 
Rev. Mr. Preyer, of the Knox Presbyterian 
Church, of Harrison, N.J., has offered the use 
of his church to the Catholics who are about 
to organize a church in the town. Father 
Kernan, the priest, who is in charge of the 
organization, has declined the offer with thanks, 
as he had made other arrangements before the 
offer was made. —New York Tribune. 



page 349 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1593 : page 349 

THE GRACE OF LIBERALITY. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VII., NOV. 12, 2 COR. 8:1-12. 

Golden Text— "He became poor, that we through his 
poverty might be rich."— 2 Cor. 8:9. 

At the council held by the apostles at 
Jerusalem, A.D. 50, which determined that 
the Jewish law was not binding upon those 
converts to Christianity, from among the 
Gentiles, Paul promised to take up collections 
among the congregations of the Gentiles 
for the poor at Jerusalem. He had already 
taken collections in Macedonia and Greece 
and Asia Minor; and in the words of this 
lesson he appeals to the Church at Corinth. 

There was great need for such a collection. 
(1) The converts to Christianity were mostly 
from the poorer classes. (2) The turbulent 
state of the times had driven many 
people from the surrounding country into 
the City of Jerusalem for greater security, 
and many were thus thrown upon the charity 
of their fellows. (3) Christians were unpopular, 
and could expect no outside aid. 



The appeal of this lesson was made A.D. 
57, about twelve years before the destruction 
of Jerusalem. Concerning the distress 
of Jerusalem at that time, Canon Cook says, 
—"The abnormal condition of the labor 
market is illustrated by the fact that Agrippa 
II. was compelled to resort to artificial 
means, such as paving the streets of Jerusalem 
with white marble— after having declined 
a proposal to destroy and rebuild 
'Solomon's porch'— in order to supply with 
work and wages 1 8,000 workmen who had 
been employed in repairing the temple. 
Life and property were rendered painfully 
insecure by the terrible atrocities of the 
Sicarii, at once assassins and robbers." 

Charity at that time was not a public 
affair, as it is at present in civilized countries, 
where County or Parish homes and 
other aids for the indigent are liberally 
supported by a general tax, and supplied 
regardless of religious professions. Nevertheless, 
we are to remember that the forty 
years' day of wrath upon the Jewish nation, 
which began with our Lord's ministry, A.D. 
30, and ended with the destruction of Jerusalem, 
A.D. 70, was a pattern or type of the 
present day of wrath upon nominal "Christendom, 

R1593 : page 350 

which, having begun with the year 

A.D. 1875, will end with the beginning of 

A.D. 1915. And while there are better provisions 

now for the poor, we may reasonably 

expect that coming disturbances of 

society may disarrange these systematic 

charities, and that there will be opportunities 

for doing good unto all men— especially 

toward the household of faith. At all 

events, there will always be opportunities 

for those who may desire, and who have 

this world's goods, to spend it for spiritual 

food for the famishing ones fleeing out of 

Babylon. Babylon spends millions annually 

upon her own literature and institutions, 

and "knows not that she is wretched and 

miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." 

(Rev. 3:17.) And God's children in her need 

help from those whose eyes have been 

anointed with the eye-salve of present 

truth. It is not our financial help that they 

need, but our spiritual help; and yet financial 

ability is necessary to the holding forth 

of the Word of life. Let each one possessing 

the gift of wealth exercise it according 



to his judgment of the Master's will— in 
"doing good unto all men [temporally or 
spiritually, especially spiritually] as he has 
opportunity, especially to the household of 
faith."-Gal. 6:10. 

The Apostle's experience proved to him 
the truth of the saying, "The liberal soul 
shall be made fat." (Prov. 11:25.) He 
had noted the fact that those individuals 
and congregations which exercised themselves 
most in this grace of liberality (under 
the guidance of reason and justice, of course) 
were the most blessed in spiritual health 
and wealth. He, therefore, longed to see 
all Christians appreciating and using this 
grace. 

The congregation of the Lord at Corinth, 
while, in many respects, highly favored 
with instruction and knowledge, had not 
made the proper progress in spiritual development, 
and hence was greatly in danger 
of losing the truths received but never 
properly put into practice. (1 Cor. 1:4-6,11-13; 
3:1-3.) They, too, had evidently 
been appealed to with reference to contributions 
for the poor of the congregation at 
Jerusalem; but, seemingly, they had not 
responded,— or, at least, not according to 
their means. Paul now, therefore, while 
patiently correcting their errors, deflections 
and stumblings, suggests to them that the 
exercise of the grace of benevolence is an 
important factor in spiritual life. In proof 
of this he points them to the congregations 
of Macedonia, which, although themselves 
sorely pressed by a great trial and by deep 
poverty (no doubt results of the famine 
which occurred in the reign of the Emperor 

R1594 : page 350 

Claudius), had been very liberal in their donations 
to the yet poorer ones at Jerusalem. 
The giving, says Paul, did not stop with 
the money, but extended even to the giving 
of themselves in any way to serve the cause 
of God, and thus it brought them great 
spiritual blessings.— Verse 5. 

In view of this spiritual blessing upon 
the Macedonian Christians, the Apostle 
urged upon Titus the importance of bringing 
the subject to the careful notice of the 
troubled and distracted Christians at Corinth, 
believing that if they would begin to 
practice the spirit of Christianity— love, benevolence 
—they would speedily receive a 



blessing, and come to see more clearly the 
doctrines of Christ, which, because of failure 
to practice, they were in danger and losing. 

Benevolence, unselfishness, the Apostle 
suggests, is a test or proof of the sincerity 
of our love. If any one claim to have died 
to the carnal mind of selfishness, and to have 
been begotten to the new mind of love, the 
opportunities for the exercise of benevolence 
will prove it— or to what extent the new 
mind is ruling in us and conquering the 
old. (Verse 8.) As an illustration of the 
true spirit of love in unselfish benevolence, 
the Apostle cites our Lord Jesus.— Verse 9. 

VERSES 10,1 1 show that they were dilatory 
about doing what they had purposed. 
And then (verse 12), lest some who had a 
proper, benevolent will in the matter might 
feel that their gifts were too insignificant, 
this noble teacher assures them (in harmony 
with our Lord's teachings— Mark 12:42-44) 
that God accepts our hearts, our wills; and 
if our gifts to his service be actually small, 
they are accepted in proportion to what we 
have— in proportion to what the gifts cost 
us in the way of self-denials. 

At the Religious Parliament recently held 
in Chicago the greatest evidence of spiritual 
development among converts in heathen 
lands came from Japan. We hope to publish 
extracts from the report there given, by a Japanese 
convert, showing the status of Christianity 
in Japan. In this connection we 
merely notice his report that the average 
donations for the support of Christianity, by 
native Japanese converts, was $6.72 each 

R1594: page 351 

in 1882; $2.15 each in 1888, and $1.95 each in 
1892. What an excellent showing this is for 
people coming out of heathenism;— people, 
too, who have never yet heard the real good 
tidings, but merely the human perversion! 
What might be expected of such earnest 
souls if once the eyes of their understandings 
were opened to behold the full light of 
the gospel of Christ. We notice, however, 
a steady decline in the past ten years, indicating, 
possibly, a loss of zeal and first love; 
and so also the report declares that a 
lethargy and spiritual decline is at present 
spreading over the Christians of Japan. 
"The liberal soul shall be made fat"— 
spiritually. Do not our individual experiences 
corroborate this? 



R1594: page 351 
IMITATION OF CHRIST. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VIII., NOV. 19, EPH. 4:20-32. 

Golden Text— "And be ye kind one to another, tender 
hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for 
Christ's sake hath forgiven you."— Eph. 4:32. 

If the relationship of this lesson to the 
preceding portion of the Apostle's letter be 
observed, it will be seen to be at utter variance 
with what is now popularly considered 
broad and liberal Christianity;— the Christianity 
which makes little or no distinction 
between the Church and the world, which 
calls all men brethren, and has large charity 
for every heathen religion and every apostasy 
from Christianity, if only the worshipers 
be sincere; that is, if they have succeeded 
in deceiving themselves, and are 
earnestly going about deceiving others. 

Let the student carefully observe the 
Apostle's teaching: (1) That God has predestinated 
the selection of a chosen few, 
on certain conditions, that he might train 
and afterward exalt them for a special purpose. 
—Chap. 1:5. (2) That that purpose 
is, ultimately, in his own appointed time, 
to lift up and bless the remainder of humanity 
through this trained, exalted and 
empowered few. (Eph. 1:10; 3:10.) (3) 
That he declares the rest of the world to be 
"children of wrath," as we also were until 
brought nigh to God by the blood of Christ. 
(Chap. 2:3,13.) (4) That now we are no 
longer strangers and foreigners [like the 
rest of the world, who are not recognized 
as sons of God, and who, therefore, should 
not be recognized as our "brethren"— since 
we are no longer in Adam, but now in 
Christ] but fellow-citizens with the saints, 
and of the household of God.— Chap. 2: 19. 

In chapter fourth the Apostle exhorts all 
of this class— not the world, but the saints, 
the few who have come into Christ— to endeavor 
to keep the unity of the spirit in 
the bond of peace (verse 3), and to grow 
up as one harmonious body into the likeness 
of Christ, all recognizing the one Lord; 
holding the one faith of divine revelation 
through the apostles and prophets, and accepting 



no other though it be preached by 
an angel from heaven; and being baptized 
with the same baptism of complete subjection 
to the will of Christ— Verses 4-13. 

And this whole compact body of Christ, 
thus apart from the world and its spirit, is to 
be separate from the world and not in affiliation 
or alliance with it. Since they have 
received the spirit of Christ, they must not 
walk, as other Gentiles walk.— Verses 16-19. 

VERSES 20-24. Such have not so learned 
Christ as to observe no difference between 
themselves and the world. They have put 
off the old man, the old sinful dispositions 
inherited from Adam, which constituted 
their former selves, and have put on the 
new man: they have become new creatures 
in Christ Jesus, the second Adam, created 
in righteousness and true holiness. 

VERSES 25-32 are worthy of the careful 
pondering of all such new creatures in 
Christ; for, though renewed in the spirit of 
their mind, they still have "to keep the 
body under," to "crucify the flesh" and to 
"war a good warfare," "against the world, 
the flesh and the devil," that they may grow 
up into Christ, and finally be received into 
the full privileges of worthy sons of God. 
Though these verses need little comment, 
they need much careful pondering in the 
spirit of humility and prayer. 

R1594: page 351 

THE CHRISTIAN HOME. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON IX., NOV. 26, COL. 3:12-25. 

Golden Text— "I will walk within my house with a 
perfect heart."— Psa. 101:2. 

The counsel of this chapter is addressed 
to those who are risen with Christ— not of 
course actually, but reckonedly— to those who 
are counting themselves dead indeed unto 
sin, and alive unto God through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. (Verse 1; Rom. 6:11.) When 
actually risen with Christ, we shall be in his 
likeness in the fullest sense; but our present 
reckoned condition is one in which we 
are seeking mentally and spiritually to appropriate 

R1594 : page 352 



the perfect likeness which by and 
by we hope to fully realize. 

This, of course, necessitates the putting 
away of sin; the living of clean, pure lives 
(verse 5); that all our conduct with our 
fellow-men should be characterized by sincerity 
and truth (verses 9,10); that we should 
exercise a spirit of forbearance and of forgiveness 
toward the erring (verse 13), covering 
all the world, and especially the saints, 
with an abundant mantle of charity (verse 14), 
and allowing the peace of God to rule 
our hearts and to sway all our actions.— 
Verse 15. 

Such a condition of heart and mind can 
only be secured by letting the word of Christ 
dwell in us richly (verse 16); by bearing in 
mind his teachings and endeavoring to apply 
them in our daily life; and, being filled 
thus with his spirit, doing all things with 
an eye single to his glory, out of love and 
gratitude. 

It will also regulate all the affairs of domestic 
life showing to husbands and wives, 
parents and children and servants all their 
respective relationships and duties. (Verses 18-22.) 
See our issue of July. 

If we faithfully walk in the path of duty, 
doing all as unto the Lord, and not unto 
men, we are assured of an abundant reward 
from the Anointed Lord, whose we are and 
whom we serve. (Verse 24.) But if, after 
having been enlightened by the truth, and 
thus enabled to discern clearly the path of 
righteousness, we forsake it, and walk not 
in it, we are also forewarned of a just recompense 
for such a course, with the assurance 
that "there is no respect of persons 
with God."— Verse 25. 

Therefore, let all the children of light 
walk worthy of the grace of God through 
Christ, and of the knowledge of his Word. 

R1595 : page 352 

GRATEFUL OBEDIENCE. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON X., DEC. 3, JAMES 1:16-27. 

Golden Text— "We love him because he first loved 
us."-l John 4:19. 

This epistle, unlike all the other apostolic 
epistles, is addressed to the twelve tribes of 



Israel scattered abroad. While to a large 
extent its teachings are applicable to various 
times and peoples, it will be specially 
applicable to converted Hebrews in the 
present and in the immediate future— in the 
dawn of the Millennial age, when their 
blindness is turned away, and when they 
turn to the Lord as "a kind of firstfruits of 
his creatures"— not the very first fruits, 
which is the Church, but the first fruits from 
among the nations of the earth. It also 
contains many valuable lessons for all beginners 
in the Christian life, as well as for 
those to whom it is specially addressed. 

VERSE 18 teaches that the agency which 
will accomplish the turning away of Israel's 
blindness, and their begetting as new creatures 
in Christ, will be "the Word of truth." 
The great time of trouble will so thoroughly 
prepare the soil of their hearts, that the 
truth, then so clearly enunciated, emphasized 
and illustrated in the risen prophets and 
ancient worthies, will find such ready acceptance 
that "a nation [the nation of Israel] 
shall be born at once" (Isa. 66:8-14), a 
kind of firstfruits of God's creatures, begotten 
by the Word of truth. 

VERSES 19-22 are timely words of counsel 
to the newly converted then, and are of 
equal force to all such at any time, either 
now or in the future. And all the children 
of God who have not yet outgrown the necessity 
for such counsel would do well to 
lay it to heart, and to apply themselves diligently 
to the building up of a worthy 
Christian character. 

VERSES 22-25 give an apt illustration of 
a listless disposition, which contents itself 
with its faith in Christ, but makes no effort 
to bring the life into conformity with his 
teachings. There is no blessing in store for 
such listless hearers— not doers of the Word. 
The blessing of the Lord is for the earnest 
and faithful soul who applies his heart unto 
instruction— "This man shall be blessed in 
his deed." 

VERSE 26 declares that religion vain 
which does not bridle the tongue. O, how 
many there are whose religion is vain, when 
judged by this inspired rule— who freely 
indulge that unruly member to the detriment 
of others and of their own highest interests, 
even after they have learned the more 
excellent way. 

VERSE 27 defines pure religion or piety 
to consist in abstaining from sin and in doing 



good works. This, of course, is the 
religion of the natural, justified man, such 
as those to whom this epistle is addressed; 
but the religion of the Gospel Church goes 
further and devotes the life to self-sacrifice, 
even unto death, looking for the reward of 
joint-heirship with Christ in his divine 
nature and Kingdom. 



page 354 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1595 : page 354 

ABRAHAM'S AGE ON ENTERING CANAAN. 



We are in receipt of a number of letters, 
calling attention to what seems to the writers 
an error in the Chronology given in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II., relative to the date of 
Abraham's birth, his entrance into Canaan, 
etc. For the sake of these, as well as others who 
may have the same difficulty, we here enlarge 
upon what is stated in VOL. II., pages 44-47. 

Gen. 1 1:32 says that at his death Terah's 
age was two hundred and five years; Acts 7:4 
says that then Abraham removed into Canaan; 
and Gen. 12:4 states that Abraham was seventy -five 
years old when he left Haran. Hence 
Terah's age at Abraham's birth must have been 



one hundred and thirty years. 

But is not this out of harmony with Gen. 1 1:26, 
which says: "And Terah lived seventy 
years, and begat Abram, Nahor and Haran"? 
We answer, No. The point of confusion is in 
the fact that Haran, the eldest, is mentioned 
last, while Abram, the youngest, is mentioned 
first— possibly because of his greater prominence 
in the narrative, or, possibly, as a little 
stumbling-block to hinder us from seeing the 
facts except as guided by the Lord, in his due 
time. 

That Haran was the eldest of the sons of 
Terah is quite evident from the recorded facts. 
His son Lot was old enough to be the companion 
of his uncle Abraham. Lot and Abraham 
were probably nearly of the same age, as 
each had his own flocks and herds and herdsmen. 
When Sodom was destroyed Lot had 
two daughters of marriageable age and others 
already married. This was before Isaac was 
born, Abraham being then ninety-nine years 
old.-Gen. 17:24; 18:1,16; 19:8,14. 

Again, notice the likelihood of Haran's being 
much the eldest of Terah's sons, and Nahor 
the second, thus,— Nahor married one of his 
brother Haran's daughters (Milcah— See Gen. 24:15), 
whose grand-daughter, Rebecca, became 
the wife of Abraham's son, Isaac— Gen. 24:67. 

Our reckoning as given in the DAWN is 
therefore sustained by all the known facts, as 
well as by the exact statements of Scripture. 

page 354 

THE TOWER FOR 1894 TO THE LORD'S POOR. 



We would remind the dear friends who receive 
the WATCH TOWER free, because poor 
through misfortune or infirmity, that we expect 
them, as well as paying subscribers, to 
renew their subscriptions yearly. A postal 
card will serve the purpose, if on it you repeat 
your request to have the TOWER continue its 
visits. If still unable to pay, state the fact, 
and it will be cheerfully continued. We like 
to hear from all at this season of the year. 
Those who can pay later, but to whom it is 
not convenient just now, will please so state 
themselves. A + indicates Lord's Poor. 

In our Terms, above, it will be noticed that 
we request such responses sometime during the 
month of December;— this because we have 
your names and addresses in type, and the 



labor and expense of distributing thousands 
of addresses and then, later, resetting many 
of them, is considerable. 

R1599 : page 354 

MILLENNIAL DAWN IN SWEDISH. 



The Swedish translation of the first volume 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN is now ready, and waiting 
orders have been filled. It can be supplied 
in both cloth and paper bindings, at same 
prices as the English edition. 

Friends of the truth who have knowledge of the 
subject, are requested to let us know of Swedish 
settlements— giving some idea of the population 
of such colonies; also of colonies of Danes and 
of Norwegians; for we hope to have the Dano-Norwegian 
translation ready about March next. 
We shall soon have some tracts in these languages, 
and shall be pleased to send freely 
whatever quantity you will use judiciously. 



R1595 : page 355 

VOL. XIV. DECEMBER 1, 1893. NO. 23. 

THE APOSTLE PETER'S EXHORTATION. 



"Wherefore, gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and 
hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you 
at the revelation of Jesus Christ; as obedient children, 
not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts 
in your ignorance: but as he who hath called you 
is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; 
because it is written, Be ye holy, 
for I am holy. "-1 Pet. 1:13-16. 

TO fully appreciate the apostolic exhortations 
we need to become well acquainted with 
their several characters, to note their circumstances, 
to mark their zeal and faithfulness, 
and to remember that every word of exhortation 
addressed to the Church has the substantial 
backing of their worthy examples. They 
endured hardness as good soldiers, and suffered 
much for the privilege of declaring the truth. 
In their writings are blended a high degree of 
the powers of logic, eloquence, pathos and an 
inspiring enthusiasm which must awaken in 



every student of their teachings a measure at 
least of the same sacred flame. 

Though written so long ago the above words 
of exhortation lose none of their force to us. 
They were penned for the instruction of the 
whole Church, down to the end of the age. 
The introductory, "Wherefore," refers us to 
the glorious hope of our high calling, and of 
the necessarily severe measures required to fit 
us for our exalted inheritance, as mentioned 
in the preceding verses. Peter would have us 
appreciate what it is to be called with such a 
high calling— to an inheritance incorruptible 
and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved 
in heaven for those who are kept by the 
power of God through faith. (Verse 4.) He 
would have us know that, if faithful, we are to 
be made "partakers even of the divine nature," 
and that we are to be joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ, of all things.— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

As the spirit of God draws our hearts into 
closer fellowship and sympathy with the divine 
mind, the value of these "exceeding great and 
precious promises" is more and more fully 
realized, until there glows in our hearts the same 
holy enthusiasm that so filled the hearts of the 
apostles. And only when our hearts are thus 
warmed and our minds thus awakened, are we 
prepared to understand the Apostle's "Wherefore," 
upon the inspiring comprehension of 
which depends our ability to heed the earnest 
exhortation which follows. 

If our hearts are not duly inspired with this 
hope— if we have begun to lightly esteem it, or 
to forget it, or to think of it as an idle tale— 
to heed the counsel of Peter, here given, will 
be impossible. If, therefore, we realize that 
a spiritual lethargy has to any extent been 
creeping over us, imperceptibly benumbing our 
spiritual senses, so that the truth is losing its 
inspiring power upon us, our first duty is to 
betake ourselves to prayer and to communion 
with God through his Word, that its sanctifying 
power may be realized. 

"Wherefore," then, you that discern the 
prize of your high calling, and who are endeavoring 
to press along the line toward it, 
"gird up the loins of your mind"— as in the 
illustration, strengthen and fortify your purposes 
and efforts, renew your determination, 
redouble your diligence, cast aside the weights 
of unnecessary worldly cares, increase your 

R1595 : page 356 

zeal; and, as the Apostle Paul also urges, run 



with patience the race set before you. Run, 
not like one who is merely beating the air, but 
like one who has a purpose in view, and who, 
in desperate earnest, is determined to make his 
calling and election sure. 

Having thus "girded up the loins of your 
mind" for a long, steady and determined effort, 
he further counsels,— "Be sober:" do not 
allow yourself to become excited and, under 
the spur of excitement, to exhaust all your 
spiritual vitality in a very short time, and then 
to suffer a relapse into coldness or discouragement; 
but thoughtfully consider and prepare 
for a long and patient endurance of all the discipline 
and trial of faith and patience necessary 
to prove an overcomer and worthy of the 
blessed reward promised "to him that overcometh." 
The race before us is not one to be 
run by fits and starts, but by "patient continuance 
in well doing." Soberly, thoughtfully, 
we are to weigh and endeavor to realize the import 
of the exceeding great and precious promises 
and to gather from them their invigorating 
inspiration; earnestly we must apply our minds 
and hearts to the instruction of the inspired 
Word of God, availing ourselves also of such 
helps— of "pastors and teachers" and their 
literary productions which prove harmonious 
with, and helpful to, the study of the Scriptures; 
diligently and patiently we must submit 
ourselves to all the transforming influences of 
divine grace and truth; and then loyally and 
faithfully we must devote our consecrated talents, 
however few or many, to the great work 
of preaching this gospel of the Kingdom to all 
who will hear. 

Such a sober view of the situation fortifies 
the mind against discouragement, and enables 
us, as the Apostle suggests, to "hope to the 
end for the grace to be brought unto us at the 
revelation of Jesus Christ." Such a sober view 
keeps Reason on the throne of our minds. 
And Reason says, The divine call to joint-heirship 
with Christ clearly implies eligibility 
to the exalted office; the divine promise 
clearly insures divine grace to enable us to 
fulfil the conditions; the divine provision 
for my justification, by faith in the precious 
blood of Christ, releases me from the condemnation 
to death; and the righteousness of 
Christ, imputed to me by faith, fully supplements 
all my weaknesses, so that before God 
I stand approved in him. Sober Reason also 
says, the directions given in the Scriptures to 
those who would run the race are clear and explicit, 
and make plain every step of the way 



to those who are truly and fully consecrated to 
the Lord. The examples of the Lord and the 
Apostles on the pathway shine with a moral 
luster and glory that cannot lead us astray. 
If we walk in their foot-prints we will assuredly 
reach the same goal. 

Therefore, in this sober view of our high 
calling and privileges, and the abundant resources 
of divine grace, let us not be discouraged 
or overcome in any way, but let us hope 
to the end for the grace (favor) that is to be 
brought unto us at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ— at his second advent. The Church 
has enjoyed much of the divine favor all through 
the age of her probation and trial; but the 
grace to be revealed at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ— when he comes to reign in power and 
great glory— is her exaltation with him to sit 
with him in his throne. This glorious consummation, 
the Church all through the age 
must steadily keep in view: but how glorious 
is the privilege of those of its members living 
in this end of the age, when already, even before 
our change into his glorious likeness— in 
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye— we begin 
to enter the joys of our Lord. 

Those who are still sober and faithful, and 
who have not cast away their confidence, have 
been led into the secret of the Master's presence; 
and they have been made to sit down to 
meat, and the Master himself has come forth 
and served them. Yes, our hearts have been 
made to burn within us while he has opened 
up the Scriptures and made us understand, 
from the testimony of the law and the prophets 
and the apostles, that the time is fulfilled— 
that the end of the age is now here, and that 
the Lord of the harvest is present to direct 
and supervise the great work of reaping the 
fruit of precious seed long ago sown in tears, 
and now to be gathered with joy and singing; 

R1595 : page 357 

while he has opened up to us the treasures of 
divine wisdom and grace displayed in the plan 
of the ages, which God purposed before the 
foundation of the world, which he has been 
gradually working out in the ages past, and which 
is now nearing its glorious consummation. 

Oh! what feasting, what rejoicing there has 
been around the table of the Lord, as one after 
another the treasures of divine grace have been 
opened to us, revealing the glories of the new 
heavens and the new earth and the blessedness 
of all the obedient subjects of him who sitteth 



on the throne to reign in righteousness; how 

all tears shall be wiped away from off all 

faces, and how the reproach of God's people is to be 

taken away. Well indeed did Daniel prophesy, 

saying, "O the blessedness of him that 

waiteth and cometh to the thousand, three 

hundred, thirty and five days"— the days of 

the Lord's second presence, when all that is 

written to be accomplished by his glorious reign 

shall begin to come to pass. 

Seeing then that such are our privileges and 
hopes, "what manner of persons ought we to 
be in all holy conversation and god-likeness." 
(2 Pet. 3:11.) Being purified by this hope, 
ought we not, as the Apostle exhorts, to fashion 
ourselves, not according to the former 
lusts (desires and ambitions, which we had) in 
our ignorance, but as he who has called us is 
holy, should not we also be holy in all manner 
of conversation— in all our words and 
ways? Since it is written, "Be ye holy; for 
I [the Lord] am holy" (1 Pet. 1:15,16), should 
not we who are called to be partakers of his 
own nature and glory be holy also? 

Some Christians have the erroneous idea 
that God does all the fashioning, and that his 
children are to be merely passive in his hand; 
but Peter does not so express it. He exhorts 
us to fashion ourselves according to the divine 
instructions. There is a work to be done in 
us and about us, and those who are not up and 
doing, but who passively sit and wait for the 
Lord to work miracles in their behalf, are 
greatly deceived, and are giving the enemy 
great advantage over them, which he will certainly 
use to bind them hand and foot and cast 
them into outer darkness, unless they bestir 
themselves to work out their salvation with 
fear and trembling, while God, co-operating 
with their earnest effort, works in them, to will 
and to do his good pleasure. (Phil. 2:12,13.) 
"Watch and pray," beloved, lest any of these 
snares of the enemy entrap you and beguile you 
of your reward. 



R1595 : page 357 
DISCIPLES OF CHRIST. 



"Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If 
ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; 
and ye shall know the truth, and the truth 



shall make you free."— John 8:31,32. 

THE Lord's preaching always produced two 
opposite effects upon the promiscuous 
multitudes that heard him. It attracted one 
class and repelled another. Those who were 
full of pride and conceit, and who preferred 
darkness to light because their deeds were evil, 
and because they realized that if they admitted 
the light of truth they must of necessity conform 
their characters to it,— all such were repelled 
by the teachings of Christ. And if the 
Lord had undertaken the work of the ministry 
according to the methods pursued to-day, depending 
for support on the good will and contributions 
of the people, that support would 
often have been very meagre, or at least very 
fluctuating. On some occasions multitudes 
received his testimony, and later deserted him 
and walked no more with him, as he continued 
to enforce the lessons of divine truth. 
(Luke 4:14,15,22,28,29.) Sometimes the 
multitudes hung upon his words, wondering 
at the gracious words that proceeded out of 
his mouth; and again and again they forsook 
him, while only the merest handful remained. 
(John 6:60,66-69.) What consternation 
would follow in the various churches of to-day, 
if the professed ministers of the gospel 
would follow the Master's example in similarly 
declaring the whole counsel of God. How 
quickly they would become unpopular, and be 
charged with breaking up the church. Why, 
the great congregations that now throng the 

R1595 : page 358 

temples of fashion dedicated to the service of 
God and the teachings of Christ would not 
stand it. They go there to be entertained 
with pleasing and eloquent discourses from 
titled gentlemen who presumably know their 
tastes and ideas, and who will preach to please 
them. They are quite willing to pay their 
money for what they want, but they do not 
want the truth. 

Those who followed the Lord only for a 
little season and then forsook him, of course 
ceased then to be his disciples and were no 
longer so recognized; nor did they presume 
longer to claim to be his disciples. A disciple 
is a pupil, a learner; and when any man ceases 
to be a student and pupil of Christ, the great 
Teacher, he is no longer a disciple of Christ. 
This was very manifest when the Lord was 
present, and when his name was one of reproach 



among men; but later, when his presence 

was withdrawn, and when his doctrines 

were unscrupulously mixed with human philosophies 

to such an extent as to divest them of 

their reproach, and to really make them void, 

then men began to claim to be his disciples 

long after they had utterly repudiated his 

doctrines. 

The Lord's expression— "disciples indeed" 
—implies a distinction between real and merely 
nominal disciples. And since we desire to 
continue to be his real, sincere disciples, let 
us mark the expressed condition: "If ye continue 
in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed." 
The hypocrisy of merely nominal discipleship 
is an abomination to the Lord. 

It is a blessed thing to take the first step in 
the Christian life— that of belief in and acceptance 
of Christ as our Redeemer and Lord; 
but the reward of this step depends entirely 
upon our continuance in his Word, in the attitude 
of true disciples. It is not difficult to do 
this, yet the disposition of human pride is to 
wander away from the simplicity of divine 
truth and to seek out new theories and philosophies 
of our own, or to pry into those of other 
men, who desire to be considered wise and 
great according to this world's estimate. 

The reward of continued discipleship is, "Ye 
shall know the truth"— not that we shall be 
"ever seeking and never coming to a knowledge 
of the truth." (2 Tim. 3:7.) Here is 
the mistake that many make: failing to continue 
in the Word of the Lord, they delve into 
various human philosophies which ignore 
or pervert the Word of the Lord and set up 
opposing theories. There is no promise, to 
those who seek for truth among these, that they 
shall ever find it. And they never do. Divine 
truth is never found except in the divinely appointed 
channels: and those channels are the 
Lord and the apostles and prophets. To continue 
in the doctrine set forth in their inspired 
writings, to study and meditate upon them, to 
trust implicitly in them, and to faithfully conform 
our characters to them, is what is implied 
in continuing in the Word of the Lord. 

But the idea is entirely compatible with that 
of heeding all the helps which the Lord from 
time to time raises up from among our brethren 
in the body of Christ, as enumerated by 
the Apostle Paul. (Eph. 4:11-15; 1 Cor. 12:13,14.) 
The Lord always has raised up, and 
will to the end raise up, such helps for the 
edification of the body of Christ; but it is the 
duty of every member to carefully prove their 



teaching by the infallible Word. 

If we thus continue in the Word of the Lord, 
as earnest and sincere disciples, we shall indeed 
"know the truth," be "established in the 
present truth" [the truth due], and be "rooted 
and grounded in the truth;" we shall be "firm 
in the faith," and "able to give a reason for 
the hope that is in us," to "earnestly contend 
for the faith once delivered to the saints," to 
"war a good warfare," to "witness a good 
confession," and to firmly "endure hardship 
as good soldiers of Jesus Christ," even unto 
the end of our course. We will not come into 
the knowledge of the truth at a single 
bound; but gradually, step by step, we will be 
led into the truth. Every step will be one of 
sure and certain progress and each one leading 
to a higher vantage ground for further attainments 
both in knowledge and in its blessed 
fruits of established character. 

The truth thus acquired, step by step, becomes 
a sanctifying power bringing forth in 
our lives its blessed fruits of righteousness, 

R1595 : page 359 

peace, joy in the holy Spirit, love, meekness, 
faith, patience and every virtue and every 
grace, which time and cultivation will ripen 
to a glorious maturity. 

And not only shall the true disciple thus 
know the truth and be sanctified by it, but the 
Lord also said, "The truth shall make you 
free." Those who have received the truth 
know by blessed experience something of its 
liberating power. As soon as any measure of 
it is received into a good and honest heart, it 
begins to strike off the fetters of sin, of ignorance 
and superstition, and of fear. It throws 
its health-restoring beams into the darkest recesses 
of our hearts and minds, and thus invigorates 
the whole being. Sin cannot endure 
its light; and those who continue to live in sin 
when a sufficiency of light has been received 
to manifest its deformity must inevitably lose 
the light because they are unworthy of it. 

Ignorance and superstition must vanish before 
the light of truth. And what a blessed 
realization it is to be thus liberated! Millions 
are still under this galling yoke. Under its 
delusions they fear and reverence some of the 
basest tools of Satan for their oppression and 
degradation, because they hypocritically claim 
divine appointment; and they have been made 
to fear God as a vengeful tyrant consigning 
the vast majority of his creatures to an eternity 



of torment. Thank God, we who have received 
the truth have escaped that terrible 
nightmare, and the bondage of Satan over us 
is broken. 

We are made free, too, from the fear that 
we now see coming upon the whole world as 
the great civil and ecclesiastical systems that 
have so long ruled the world are being terribly 
shaken. All thinking people are in dread of 
the possible outcome of anarchy and terror. 
And the alarm of all will increase as we near 
the awful crisis toward which we are rapidly 
hastening, and as the danger becomes more 
and more visible. Yet, in the midst of it all, 
and with the fullest assurance of the infallible 
Word of God of the terrors of the conflict 
through which the world will have to pass 
within a few years, the true disciples of Christ 
who abide in his Word are not afraid, but rejoice, 
because they know that God's object in 
permitting the storm is to clear the moral atmosphere 
of the world, and that, after the 
storm, there shall come, by his providence, an 
abiding peace. Instructed in the truth, they 
realize the necessities of the situation, and have 
confidence in the divine providence that can 
make even the wrath of man to praise him. 

Blessed promise!— "If ye continue in my 
Word, then are ye my disciples indeed, and 
ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall 
make you free." Dearly beloved, having received 
this favor from the Lord, shall we not 
continue in it, giving no heed to seducing 
doctrines? And shall we not be faithful to it 
under all circumstances, defending it against 
every assault, and with it bearing its reproach? 
Let us prove our appreciation of it by our 
loyalty and faithfulness to it. 



R2232 : page 359 

HEALING FOR BROKEN HEARTS. 

-HELEN WATTS McVEY.- 

Grieving and worn, discouraged, 

Sick of the day-long strife, 
Bruised by the restless tossing 

Over the sea of life; 
Hurt by the hands I trusted, 

Yearning for rest and home, 
Famishing, faint and doubting, 

Unto the Book I come. 



One of the sweet, old chapters— 

Sometimes a verse or two- 
Falls on my troubled spirit 

Like to a healing dew. 
Soothing the fevered pulses, 

Comforts the soul's despair; 
Lifts from my path the shadows; 

Banishes clouds and care. 

"Ye that are heavy-laden," 

Burdened with woe and grief, 
"Knock and the door shall open;" 

Here you will find relief. 
"Let not your hearts be troubled;" 

"Only believe and trust:" 
Thus do the healing waters 

Flow o'er Life's desert dust. 



R1595 : page 360 

A GLIMPSE OF CHRISTIANITY IN JAPAN. 

FROM TWO JAPANESE CHRISTIANS AT THE 
LATE WORLD'S PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS. 



MR. Nobuta Kishimoto, in his interesting address 
on "The Future of Religion in 
Japan," expressed his hope for the ultimate 
triumph of Christianity, although he showed 
that the religious impulses of the people are 
divided between Shintoism, Confucianism and 
Buddhism. He said:— 

"The prevailing attitude of the educated 
classes toward any religion is one of cold indifference, 
if not strong antagonism. Among 
them the agnosticism of Spencer, the materialism 
of Comte and the pessimism of Schoppenhauer 
and Hartmann are most influential. 
To them, God is either the product of our 
own imagination or, at most, unknowable. 
To them, religion is nothing but superstition; 
to them, the universe is a chancework and has 
no end or meaning. Again, to them, men are 
nothing but lower animals in disguise, without 
the image of God in them and without a 
bright future before them." 

He reports a Christian population of 100,000, 
of which the Roman Catholic is the 
strongest in membership; then the Protestant, 
which is represented by thirty-one different 
denominations; and, finally, the Greek Catholic. 
But which is to triumph? That is the 



question, to which he replies:— 

"We do not want Catholic Christianity, nor 
do we want Protestant Christianity. We want 
the Christianity of the Bible. ...We do 
not want the Christianity of England, nor the 
Christianity of America: we want the Christianity 
of Japan.... We Japanese want the 
Christianity of the Christ. We want the truth 
of Christianity; nay, we want the truth, pure 
and simple. We want the spirit of the Bible, 
at least in spirit, if not in form. But we Japanese 
Christians are hoping more: we are ambitious 
to present to the world one new and 
unique interpretation of Christianity as it is 
in our Bible, which knows no sectarian controversy 
and which knows no heresy hunting. 
Indeed, the time is coming, and ought to come, 
when God shall be worshiped, not by rites 
and ceremonies, but in spirit and in truth." 

Mr. Harmchi Kozaki, president of Doshisha 
University, Japan, presented a paper on "Christianity 
in Japan; Its Present Condition and 
Future Prospects," in which he said:— 

"The progress of Christianity in Japan is 
quite remarkable. It is only thirty-four years 
since the first Protestant missionary put his 
foot on its shore. And it is scarcely twenty 
years since the first Protestant church was organized 
in Japan. Yet now there are more 
Christians there than in Turkey, where missionaries 
have been working more than seventy 
years; and there are more self-supporting 
churches there than in China, where a double 
or triple number of missionaries have been 
working nearly a century. In Japan, Christian 
papers and magazines are all edited by the 
natives, not only in name but in reality. 
Christian books, which have been most influential, 
have nearly all been written or translated 

R1596 : page 360 

by them, while in other countries it is 

very rare to find the native Christians writing 

Christian books or editing papers. Only recently 

The Christian, the most influential 

Christian paper in Japan, had a Symposium to 

name fifteen books which are most useful in 

leading men to Christianity, instructing Christians 

and giving good counsel to young people; 

and it is interesting to see that most of 

the books named are those written or translated 

by Japanese Christians. 

"Christianity in Japan has already reached 
a stage that no other missionary fields have 
ever attained. Their native Christians not 



only take part in all discussions, but they are 
in fact leading all kinds of discussion, theological 
as well as practical. They are leading, 
not only all kinds of Christian work, literary 
and evangelistic, educational and charitable, 
but they are also leading Christian thought in 
Japan. Let me relate one or two instances. 
"Some six or seven years ago, when we 
were contemplating the union of the Itochi 
and Kumiai denominations, the two most 
powerful Christian bodies in Japan, among 
twenty members of a joint committee appointed 
by the Synod of one and the General Council 
of the other, there were only four missionaries. 
When, a few years ago, the Kumiai denomination 
adopted a new confession of faith, the 
missionaries took almost no part. This confession 
was drawn up by a committee, consisting 
entirely of Japanese, and adopted in the General 
Council, in which missionaries took very 
little or no part. In Japan, missionaries are 
really "helpers," and I should say to their 
credit they, in most cases, willingly take secondary 
positions in all Christian works. All 
this, I say, is not to disparage the work of 

R1596 : page 361 

missionaries, but only to show the progress 
of Christianity among the natives of Japan. 

"There are many peculiar features in Japanese 
Christianity which are seldom seen in 
other countries. ...For instance, while 
in most of the churches in this country female 
members are almost two to one in proportion 
to male members, it is quite otherwise in Japan. 
There female members in relation to male 
members are nearly three to four. This is almost 
in inverse ratio to their proportions in 
the United States. Another is the predominance 
of young people in our churches. You 
may step into any of our churches in any city 
or village and you will be struck by the great 
preponderance of young faces. We have not 
yet taken statistics of members as to their age, 
but any one who has experience in Christian 
work there notes this peculiarity.... 

"One more point is the predominance of the 
Shizoku or military class. They have been 
and still are the very brains of the Japanese 
people. Though they are not usually well off 
in material wealth, they are superior intellectually 
and morally. Christians in other missionary 
fields are usually from the lower classes. 
In India the Brahmins rarely become Christians, 
neither do the literary class in China. But in 



Japan the Shizoku class take a lead. 

"These peculiarities in the constituency of 
the membership of Christian churches in Japan 
may be accounted for by the simple fact that 
the males, the young and the Shizoku classes 
are most accessible. The Shizoku class, as 
a body, has had hitherto almost no religion, 
and they have been mostly Confucianists. By 
the last revolution they lost their profession as 
well as their means of support, and thus they 
are all unsettled in life, and so accessible to 
every kind of new influence and truth. Young 
people have also no settled opinions and are 
open to new influences and thus accessible to 
new truth. And so it is with men as compared 
with women. They are generally more progressive, 
and hence more accessible.... 

"As the Japanese Christian population is of 
such a constituency, the native Christians are 
more progressive, more active, more able to 
stand on their own feet, and more capable of 
establishing self-supporting churches. But this 
strength is also their weakness. They are more 
liable to be drifted, more apt to be changed 
and more disposed to be flippant. 

"The next peculiar feature of Japanese Christianity 
is lack of sectarian or denominational 
spirit. About thirty different denominations 
of Protestant churches, represented by about 
an equal number of missionary boards, are on 
the field, each teaching its own peculiar tenets. 
But they are making very little impression on 
our Christians. ...We have been having, 
at first annually, but lately once in three 
years, what was called "Dai Shin Baku Kwai," 
which was afterward changed into the Evangelical 
Alliance, the meeting of all Christians 
in Japan, irrespective of denominations or 
churches— the most popular and interesting we 
have. Again, Japanese Christians did not 
know any distinction of denominations or 
churches. But when they found out that there 
are many different folds, and that one belongs 
to his denomination, not by his own choice, 
but simply by chance or circumstance which 
could in no way be controlled, there is no 
wonder that these Christians begin to ask: 
Why should not we, all Christians, unite in 
one church? 

"The union movement in Japan rose at first 
in some such way. Though we have now lost 
much of this simple spirit, still, Japanese 
Christians are essentially undenominational. 
You may see that the church which adopted 
Presbyterian forms of government refused to 
be called 'Presbyterians' or 'Reformed,' and 



adopted the broad name 'Itschi,' the 'United;' 
but, not content even with this broad name, 
it has recently changed it to a still broader 
name, 'Nippon Kinisuto Kio Kwai,'— 'The 
Church of Christ in Japan.' 

"The church which has adopted an Episcopal 
form of government lately dropped the 
name Episcopacy and adopted instead the name 
of The Holy Church of Japan.' Kumiai 
churches for a long time had no name except 
this: 'A Church of Christ' When it was 
found out that it was necessary to adopt some 
name to distinguish itself from other churches, 
its Christians reluctantly adopted the name of 
'Kumiai,' which means 'associated;' for at 
that time they happened to form an association 
of churches which were until then independent 
of each other. They always refused to be 
called the 'Congregational churches,' although 
they have adopted mostly Congregational policy 
of church government. 

"The third distinctive feature of Japanese 
Christianity is the prevalence of a liberal spirit 
in doctrinal matters. While missionaries are 
both preaching and teaching the orthodox doctrines, 
Japanese Christians are eagerly studying 
the most liberal theology. Not only are they 
studying, but they are diffusing these liberal 
thoughts with zeal and diligence, and so I believe 
that, with a small exception, most of 
Japanese pastors and evangelists are more or 
less liberal in their theology.... 

R1596 : page 362 

"While the American Board of Foreign Missions 
is strenuously on the watch to send no 
missionary who has any inclination toward the 
Andover Theology, the pastors and evangelists 
of the Kumiai churches, which are in close 
connection with the same board, are advocating 
and preaching theology perhaps more 
liberal than the Andover Theology. Just to illustrate: 
Some years ago, in one of our councils, 
when we were going to install a pastor, 
he expressed the orthodox belief on future life, 
which was a great surprise to all. Then members 
of the council pressed hard questions to 
him so as to force him to adopt the doctrine 
of future probation, as though it were the only 
doctrine which is tenable. 

"Only recently, when a bishop of a certain 
church was visiting Japan, he was surprised to 
find that a young Japanese professor in the 
seminary connected with his own church was 
teaching quite a liberal theology, and he gave 



him a strong warning. 

"As to the creeds: when 'The Church of 
Christ in Japan' was organized, it adopted the 
Presbyterian and the Reformed standards; 
namely, the Westminster Shorter Catechism, 
the Canon of Dort and the Heidelberger Confession 
of Faith. But Christians of the same 
church found them too stiff, one-sided and 
conservative, and thus they have lately dropped 
these standards as their creed altogether. They 
have now the 'Apostles' Creed' with a short 
preface attached to it. 

"When the Kumiai church was first organized, 
it adopted the Nine Articles of the Basis 
of the Evangelical Alliance as its creed. But 
Christians of the same denomination became 
soon dissatisfied with its narrowness, and so in 
1890 they made their own creed, which is far 
simpler and broader. But even this creed is 
not understood as binding to all, but only as 
a common expression of religious belief prevailing 
among them in general. 

"Though Japanese Christians are largely on 
the side of liberal theology, they are not in any 
way in favor of Unitarianism or even Universalism. 
...The most of our educated classes 
have no religion. Though they favor certain 
kinds of Christian ethical teachings, they have 
no faith in any religion or supernatural truth. 
Christ, and are all to be characterized as 
evangelical.... 

"There was a time when Christianity was 
making such a stride in its progress that, in 
one year, it gained 40 or 50 per cent increase. 
This was between 1882 and 1888. These years 
may be regarded as a flowery era in the annals 
of Japan. It was in 1883 that, when we were 
having the 'Dai Shin Boku Kwai' in Tokyo, 
perhaps the most interesting meeting in its 
history, one of the delegates expressed his firm 
belief that in ten years Japan would become 
a Christian country. This excited quite an 
applause; and no one felt it as too extravagant 
to cherish such a hope, for such was the firm 
belief at that time. Since then, progress in our 
churches has not been such as was expected. 
Not only have members not increased in such 
a proportion as in years before, but in some 
cases there can be seen a decline of religious 

R1597 : page 362 

zeal and of the self-sacrificing spirit. And so 

in these last few years the cry heard most frequently 

among our churches has been 'Awake, 

awake as in the days past!' 



"To show the decline of that religious enthusiasm, 
I may take an illustration from statistics 
of the Kumiai churches as to its amount 
of contribution. In 1882 this amount was 
$6.72 per Christian; in 1888 this amount ran 
down to $2.15, and in the last year there has 
been still more decline, coming down to $1.95. 
In amount of increase of membership there has 
been a proportional decline. Why there was 
such a decline is not hard to see. Among various 
causes I may mention three principal ones. 

"Public sentiment in Japan has been always 
fluctuating from one side to another. 
It is like a pendulum, now going to one extreme 
and then to another. This movement 
of public sentiment, within the last fifteen or 
twenty years, can easily be pointed out. From 
1877 to 1882 I may regard as a period of reaction 
that of revival of the antiforeign spirit. 
During this period the cry, 'Repel foreigners,' 
which was on the lips of every Japanese at the 
time of the revolution, and since then unheard, 
was again heard. It was at this time that 
Confucial teaching was revived in all the public 
schools; and the Emperor issued a proclamation 
that the western ethical principles were 
not suitable to the Japanese, and were not to 
be taught in our public schools. 

"Then the pendulum went to the other side. 
And now another era came in. This was a 
period of western ideas, which covers the years 
between 1882 and 1888. This was the age of 
great interest in everything that came from 
abroad. Not only was English eagerly taught, 
but all sorts of foreign manners and customs 
were busily introduced. Foreign costumes, 
not only of gentlemen but of ladies, foreign 
diet, as well as foreign liquors, became most 
popular among all classes. Every newspaper, 
almost without exception, advocated the adoption 
of everything foreign, so that Japan 

R1597 : page 363 

seemed as if it would be no longer an oriental 
nation, but would become occidentalized. It 
was at this time that such a paper as Jiji Shimpo 
advocated adoption of Christianity as the 
national religion of Japan. It was no wonder 
that people poured into Christian churches, 
and that the latter made unprecedented strides 
in progress. 

"But the pendulum swung to its extreme, 
and now another movement came in. The 
sign of reactionary and antiforeign spirit might 
be seen in everything— in costumes, in sentiments, 



as well as in opinions. Then the cry 
'Japan for the Japanese' became heard in all 
corners of the empire. Everything that has 
flavor of foreign countries has been stigmatized 
as unworthy of adoption by the Japanese, and, 
instead of it, everything native is praised as 
superior or worthy of preservation. Buddhism, 
which has been regarded for years as a religion 
of the ignorant and inferior classes, is now 
praised as a superior religion, much superior 
to Christianity; and many who once favored 
adoption of Christianity as the national religion 
are seen publicly in Buddhistic ceremonies. 
Christianity is denounced as antagonistic to 
the growth of our national spirit, in conflict 
with our best morality, and also as against the 
intent of the imperial edict which was issued 
two years ago as the code of morals in all our 
schools. Conflict between Christianity and 
national education has become the most popular 
theme among certain classes of the people. 
Strong sense of national feeling has been 
aroused among all classes of people, and now 
it is not strange that Christians also feel its 
influence. 

"And thus the doors to Christianity seem to 
have been closed, and we have a great decline 
in its growth. But now, again, the pendulum 
has reached another end, and there are signs that 
another era is ushering in. 'Every movement 
has rhythm,' says Herbert Spencer, and this is 
true in the progress of Christianity in Japan. 

"One word as to the prospect in the future. 
That Japan will not become a Christian nation 
in a few years is a plain fact. But that it will 
become one in the course of time is almost 
above doubt, and it is only a question of time. 
Still, 'Rome was not built in a day,' and so 
it will take time to Christianize Japan. That 
there are strong obstacles and great hindrances 
can easily be seen. It may be easy to show 
the reasonableness of Christianity, but to instil 
true Christian spirit into the heart of the 
people is not an easy task. We can show them 
more easily the folly of other religions, but to 
build up a true Christian church requires a 
long time. ...I am not at all anxious about 
the future of Christianity in Japan, as far as its 
final victory is concerned. But there are many 
difficult problems pressing us hard for their 
solution. I shall here simply state these problems 
in a few words. 

(1) "The first problem that comes under 
our notice is that of relation between Christianity 
and our nationality, namely, our national 
habit and spirit. Professor Inonge and 



others have been raising their voices against 

Christianity, claiming it is in conflict with our 

national spirit. And this cry against Christianity 

has become so popular among Buddhists, 

Shintoists and Reactionists that they make it 

the only weapon of their attack against Christianity. 

But in my belief this problem is not 

so hard as it looks. What outsiders think to 

be the real conflict seems to us only shadow 

and vapor. 

(2) "Relation between missionaries and 
native Christians is another problem. How 
must they be related? In other countries, such 
as India or China, such a question, perhaps, 
may never arise; but in Japan it is entirely 
different. Japanese Christians will never be 
satisfied under missionary auspices. To be 
useful to our country the missionaries must 
either co-operate with or join native churches 
and become like one of the native workers. 

(3) "Problem of denominations and church 
government is another difficulty. Of course 

we shall not entirely dispense with denominations 

and sects. But it seems rather foolish 

to have all denominations, which are peculiar 

to some countries and which have certain peculiar 

histories attached to them, introduced 

into Japan where no such history exists and 

where circumstances are entirely different. 

And so we think we can reduce the number 

of denominations. But how to begin is a hard 

problem. 

"So also with the form of church government. 
It is needless to say that we need not, 
or ought not, to copy in any way the exact 
forms of church governments which are in 
vogue in the United States or in any other 
countries. But to formulate a form of government 
that suits our country the best, and at 
the same time works well elsewhere, is quite a 
difficult task. 

(4) "Whether we need any written creed, 
and, if so, what kind of creed is best to have, 

is also a question. In all teachings of missionaries 
and others there is always more or 
less of husks mixed with genuine truth. And 
at the same time every form of Christianity 
has some excellent truth in it. And it is hard 

R1597 : page 364 

to make distinction between essentials and non-essentials, 
between creed and husks. This is a 
hard problem for Japanese theologians to solve. 
[DAWN will solve it for you as it has for others!] 
"Japanese Christians must solve all these 



problems by themselves. I believe there is a 
grand mission for Japanese Christians. I believe 
that it is our mission to solve all these 
problems which have been, and are still, stumbling 
blocks in all lands; and it is also our 
mission to give to all the oriental nations and 
the rest of the world a guide to true progress 
and a realization of the glorious Gospel which 
is in Jesus Christ.. ..Our prayer is and always 
must be: 'Thy Kingdom come, thy will 
be done, as in heaven, so in earth.'" 



R1597 : page 364 

TRUE CHRISTIAN LIBERALITY. 



LIBERALITY, generosity, is essentially a 
Christian grace. God is love, and all who 
partake of his spirit must be proportionately 
loving and generous. But as we are instructed 
not to be wise in our own conceits, 
nor to be wise above what is written in 
God's Word, so likewise it is well for all 
true children of God to beware of assuming 
to have a greater, wider or deeper love than 
that clearly set forth in God's Word as the 
only real and true standard. God's people 
are to set up a standard neither for God 
nor for themselves; but as obedient children 
they should not fashion their minds and 
faith after their own defective conceptions, 
but according as the Lord has revealed. 

Some err on one side of this question and 
some on the other; but the remedy for both 
errors is the same— submit your heads and 
your hearts unto the direction of the Lord 
through his inspired Word. 

That Word nowhere teaches that everlasting 
torment is the wages of sin, but that 
the wages of sin is death. Every plain 
(non-symbolic) statement of the Scriptures 
agrees that "the soul that sinneth, it shall 
die." Surely, then, no one is justified in 
maligning, yea, blaspheming God's character 
and plan by teaching directly or indirectly 
the contrary— that he will keep the 
sinner's soul alive to all eternity in order to 
torment it. There would be neither love 
nor justice in such a course. 

On the other hand the Word nowhere 
teaches Universalism,— that the entire human 



R1598 : page 364 

family will be everlastingly saved to 

divine favor and blessing. And those who 

rash from the one extreme of faith in an almost 

universal torment, to the other extreme 

of belief in Universalism are carried from 

one human error to another human error. 

However, the finding of the one error to 

have been the result of a too careless handling 

of God's Word and a leaning to perverted 

human reason and judgment should 

put all upon their guard thereafter: but frequently 

it does not, as we see; and, getting 

filled with the thought of God's love, they 

seem to forget that God has more than one 

attribute of character and that these must 

all be co-ordinated in any plan that is his— 

that his Wisdom and his Justice each join 

with his Love in his plan for man's salvation 

from sin and its penalty, death. 

The Scriptures do, indeed, teach that the 
great ransom-sacrifice given by our Redeemer 
will sooner or later bring to every 
member of the human family fullest opportunity 
for the recovery of all that he lost 
in Adam. But they forget that although 
Adam had life, its everlasting continuance 
was not assured: for this he was on trial 
when he wilfully sinned and thus cut short 
his trial and brought upon himself, and upon 
us in his loins, the sentence of death. 

It is what was lost, and all that was lost that 
our Lord came to save. The salvation made 
possible by his ransom-sacrifice is a new trial 
for life everlasting, the results of which are 
expressed in John 3:36; Rev. 21:7,8. 

It is sufficient that God should grant a universal, 
impartial trial to all; that those who, 
under the favorable conditions of the New 
Covenant, will fully submit themselves to 
God may have life, and that others may be 
manifested and, as cumberers of the ground, 
may be destroyed in the Second Death. 
Love, Wisdom and Justice could never agree 
to let a wilful sinner live to mar the peace of 
the holy; nor could they consent that such 
should be deprived of their own wills in 
order to their everlasting existence, for their 
companionship is not sufficiently desirable; 
nor could they consent that they should be 
kept alive, and that their wills should be 
kept under divine restraints to all eternity. 
Such lives and such companionship are undesirable: 
the remainder of God's universe 
would be blessed by their destruction in 



the Second Death. Let us not be more 

R1598 : page 365 

wise, more loving, or more just than the 
only living and true God who dwells in a 
light which no man can approach unto, and 
whose mind is communicated to us through 
his Word.-l Tim. 6:16; 1 John 5:9,10. 

Let us practice the grace of liberality according 
to, and not outside of, the boundaries 
laid down in the Lord's Word. 



page 365 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1598 : page 365 

THE HEAVENLY INHERITANCE. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XL, DEC. 10, 1 PET. 1:1-12. 

Golden Text— "Giving thanks unto the Father, which 
hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of 
the saints in light."— Col. 1:12. 

Out of a heart inspired with the glorious 
hope set before the consecrated saints of the 
Gospel dispensation flows the impassioned 
and eloquent greeting of the Apostle Peter 
to others of like precious faith. To "the 
elect according to the foreknowledge of God, 
And every line of his epistle, even 
the words of greeting, are full of instruction. 

VERSE 2 shows that the election referred 
to was not an arbitrary election, but that 
it was conditioned upon three things— (1) 
the sanctification or full consecration of the 
believer; (2) his implicit obedience to the 
divine discipline and teaching; and (3) his 
full reliance upon the precious blood of 



Christ for cleansing and salvation from sin 
and death. 

VERSE 3 gratefully and joyfully points to 
the resurrection of Christ as the assurance 
of our final triumph through him. 

VERSES 4,5 declare that the glorious inheritance 
of the saints was not for immediate 
possession at the instant of death, but 
that it was reserved, and that it would be 
revealed in the last time— at the second 
advent of the Lord. So the Apostle Paul 
also taught, saying, when he was about to 
die, "Henceforth, there is laid up for me a 
crown which the Lord, the righteous Judge, 
will give me at that day; and not to me 
only, but to all them also that love his appearing." 
-2 Tim. 4:7,8. 

VERSES 6-9 are precious reminders of the 
joys of faith, to attain the full fruition of 
which, the endurance of present afflictions 
are causes for thanksgiving, because their 
discipline is necessary to prepare us for the 
glorious inheritance of the saints in light. 

VERSES 10-12 declare that the revelations 
of divine truth concerning the glorious inheritance 
of the saints of the Gospel age 
were never made known in former ages, 
even to the faithful prophets, nor to the 
angels who earnestly desired to know, and 
who diligently searched and sought to discover 
the deep significance of the prophecies 
of these things, which are now made 
known to us by the holy Spirit which inspired 
the apostles and through them instructs 
the Church. 

And this high calling of "the elect" 
"Church of the First Born, whose names 
are written in heaven," is still a blessed secret 
among the saints, which "none of the 
princes of this world [the great ones of the 
world— "the princes," either ecclesiastical 
or civil] knew." (1 Cor. 2:6-10.) Nor do 
they yet know of the glory to be revealed 
in the saints. The religious princes of all 
the religions of the world, which from the 
four corners of the earth recently assembled 
in Chicago, only verified and emphasized 
this fact, and proved their utter ignorance 
of this secret of the Lord, in which his 
humble, faithful ones are rejoicing to-day 
with joy unspeakable and full of glory. 
"Howbeit, we speak wisdom among them 
that are perfect [that are of a perfect heart, 
disposition or intention, the humble and 
obedient, the truly wise— Dan. 12:10]; yet 
not the wisdom of this world, nor of the 



princes of this world that come to nought. 

But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, 

even the hidden wisdom which God 

ordained before the world for our glory; 

which none of the princes of this world 

knew. ...Eye hath not seen, nor ear 

heard; neither have entered into the heart 

of man, the things which God hath prepared 

for them that love him. But God hath revealed 

them to us by his Spirit"— through 

his holy apostles and prophets in whose 

divine inspiration we have the fullest confidence, 

R1598 : page 366 

notwithstanding the efforts of the 
princes of this world to shake it. God be 
praised for the abundant testimony of his 
inspired, holy Word! 

R1598 : page 366 

THE GLORIFIED SAVIOR. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XII., DEC. 17, REV. 1:9-20. 

Golden Text— "Wherefore, God also hath highly exalted 
him, and given him a name which is above every 
name."— Phil. 2:9. 

VERSE 9. John, who received this vision, 
and was commissioned to convey it to the 
Church, so far from being puffed up by this 
privilege, humbly reminds us that the vision 
was from God, and that he who received it 
made no claims of superior sanctity or worthiness, 
and that he was simply their brother 
and companion in tribulation, a member with 
them of the embryo Kingdom of Heaven, 
which now suffers violence (Matt. 11:12), 
but nevertheless in patient waiting for its 
glorious triumph at the second advent of 
Jesus Christ. 

Because of his faithfulness in believing and 
teaching the Word of God and the testimony 
of Jesus Christ, John had been banished to 
the lonely and sterile isle of Patmos; but 
the place of his exile was made glorious 
with the presence of the Lord and the 
manifestations of his grace, not only to his 
faithful Apostle, but also to all of the Church 
through him. 

VERSE 10. The expression, "I was in 
the spirit on the Lord's day," we understand 



to mean that on that day (the first day of 

the week) John was specially filled with 

the holy Spirit of love and adoration and 

joy in God as to be mentally lifted above 

his surroundings and out of the thoughts 

and feelings of the old nature; so that, forgetting 

for the time the things of time and 

sense, there came to his soul an overwhelming 

sense of the divine presence and favor. 

To such a condition his circumstances were 

peculiarly favorable, isolated as he was from 

all human intercourse, and alone with God. 

His was not a sickly sentimentalism causing 

him to shirk the duties and responsibilities 

of active life and impelling him to that 

of a recluse. No; far from it. He had been 

active, faithful and loyal to God and zealous 

for his cause; and when the enforced 

seclusion came as a penalty for such faithfulness, 

he rejoiced also in this "tribulation," 

—this privilege of enduring hardness 

as a good soldier; and from his sense of the 

divine approval, both of his faithfulness in 

activity and of his patience in this enforced 

inactivity and seclusion, sprang the joy 

which only those know who have endured 

something for Christ's sake and experienced 

the fellowship of his sufferings. 

In such times of tribulation the Lord's 
presence and comfort are most precious to his 
saints, and they begin to learn what it means 
to live "in the spirit"— above the world, 
and hence to a great extent unaffected by 
its conditions and circumstances. 

Thus, as the Apostle drew near to the 
Lord, the Lord drew near to him; and on 

R1599 : page 366 

this occasion, as there was a special message 
to be conveyed to the Church, this beloved 
and faithful disciple, being in the proper 
attitude of mind and heart— "a broken and 
emptied vessel," fit for the Master's use— was 
the chosen and honored instrument. And, 
therefore, he was permitted to see and hear, 
in symbolic visions, the wonderful things 
which God had to reveal to his Church. 

He heard "behind" him [from some unseen 
source] "a great voice as of a trumpet" 
—indicative of an important proclamation. 

VERSE 1 1 . The first announcement identifies 
the speaker as our Lord and Redeemer, 
the beginning and the ending of Jehovah's 
direct creation— "the only begotten Son of 
God"— the alpha and the omega, the first 



and the last. See verses 8,17,18; John 1:2,3; 
Col. 1:15-17; Rev. 3:14; also WATCH 
TOWER, April 15, '93. 

Then followed the instructions to write 
what he was about to see, and to send the 
book to the seven churches mentioned. The 
number seven, being a symbol of completeness, 
meant here not merely the churches 
named, but the complete nominal Gospel 
church of the entire age;— the special addresses 
to each of these being specially applicable 
to the several stages of the Gospel 
Church which they represent: Ephesus representing 
the Church in apostolic times, 
Laodicea representing the church of the 
present time. 

VERSES 12,13. When the Apostle turned 
to see the speaker, he saw an appearance 
like unto a son of man— representing our 
Lord Jesus (not really the Lord, but a vision, 
an appearance)— standing in the midst 
of seven golden candlesticks, which represented 
the above seven phases of the church. 

Gold being a symbol of the divine nature, 
the seven golden candlesticks indicate that 
the divine institution of the Church is for 
the enlightening of the world, the same symbol 

R1599 : page 367 

used in the Jewish Tabernacle and later 
in the Temple, indicating the same thing. 

VERSES 13-16. The Son of man is seen 
"clothed in a garment down to the foot"— 
a long, full flowing robe such as was worn 
by kings and priests; not the dress of the 
common people. And he was girded about 
the paps (not about the loins as one about 
to toil or run, but about the paps as of one 
in the repose and dignity of sovereignty) 
with a golden girdle. 

The whiteness of the hair indicate both 
age and purity; the brightness of the eyes 
symbolize acute discernment; the polished 
and glowing feet indicate power; the voice 
as the sound of many waters indicate the 
universality of his authority and power; and 
the shining countenance— as the brightness 
of the sun in his strength— marks the glory 
and power and blessing of his presence and 
Kingdom. The seven stars— the angels or 
ministers of the Church, those whom the 
Lord recognizes as teachers in the Church 
(verse 20)— are held in his right hand, showing 
that the teaching, power and authority 
are vested in Christ, the head of the Church, 



and that the human teachers are only instruments 
in his hands, and accountable to him. 
And the two-edged sword out of his mouth 
symbolizes the mission of his truth and its 
final victory. The sword of the spirit— 
the Word of God. 

VERSE 17. The vision had an overpowering 
effect upon the Apostle's physical 
frame; and from excitement and fear, like 
Saul of Tarsus and like Daniel, the Prophet, 
he fell as one dead, until a kindly hand imparted 
new strength, and an assuring voice 
said, "Fear not; I am the first and the last 
[the only begotten Son of God]; I am he 
that liveth and was dead; and, behold, I am 
alive forevermore, Amen; and have the 
keys of hell [hades, the grave] and of death" 
—the power to open the graves and to loose 
the bands of death and set the captives free. 

VERSE 19 commands the writing of the 
vision of the things past, present and future 
that the Church to whom the message is 
sent may ponder its deeply significant 
symbolisms. 

The Golden Text is aptly chosen, pointing 
as it does, to the humiliation and vicarious 
sacrifice of Christ as the cause of his 
present exaltation and glory and power— 
"Wherefore God also hath highly exalted 
him," etc.-Phil. 2:8,9. 



page 367 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-You will 
find enclosed Money Order, which you can 
place in the Tract Fund, or as your judgment 
may direct. 

I think the most important matter which 
now concerns us is the dissemination of the 
truth. Error is abroad in the land: we meet 
it on every hand, and it seems to be the 
most difficult matter to get people interested 
in the plain and simple teachings of the 
Bible. I trust that the TOWER and other 
helps may continue to a far greater extent 
to present the truth in its wonderful power 
and purity, and that the Editor and his associates 
may be blessed of the Lord abundantly, 
in the great work which has already 
carried light and gladness to so many hearts, 



now rejoicing in the truth. 
Yours in the service, G. M. TURNER. 



R1599 : page 367 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have not 
for some time tried to sell or to distribute 
any DAWNS, as I was in doubt about some 
of their teachings. I have since, however, 
by a great deal of study, found that I was 
in error. This is indeed an evil day, full of 
snares and pitfalls, and none shall be able 
to stand, who do not humbly accept God's 
Word as their only and all-sufficient ground 
of faith and practice, in opposition to all 
church-creeds and church-authority; for 
even those churches, which claim to have 
no creed, claim to have, by divine right, the 
power to make teachers, and if they fail to 
teach according to their liking, they have 
the same divine authority to unmake them. 

Respectfully yours, J. L. KING. 

REPLY. Your letter is at hand, and I am 
glad it reveals you as again rejoicing in the 
truth, and, I trust, this time more firmly established 
therein. Severe tests come to all, 
in proportion to the measure of light possessed; 
and having, by the Lord's grace, 
overcome in this one instance, I trust you 
will be on the lookout when future trials 
come, and better ready to resist the temptations 
of the Adversary. But, be assured, 
you will not entirely escape temptation in 

R1599 : page 368 

future; yet if you make the Lord your refuge, 
you will not be overcome, but find in 
him constant strength and protection. See 
Psalm 91. 

I do not quite coincide with you in the 
opinion that the nominal churches have 
no right to unmake teachers. True, they 
have no authority to make representatives 
of the Lord, and each follower of the Lord 
should recognize no other commission than 
that given in God's Word; yet so far as the 
systems are concerned, they have as much 
right to authorize individuals to teach their 
doctrines as an individual has to appoint 
another as his representative, or as any secular 
institution has to control its representatives. 
The ability to use and make a representative 
implies the ability to withdraw 



consent at pleasure, unless bound by contract. 
And any one preaching by the authority 
of any part of Babylon, and supposed 
to teach its particular theories, should first 
dissolve his contract with such system before 
preaching or teaching contrary to its 
standards; and if he does not voluntarily do 
so, it is certainly the privilege of the institution 
to withdraw its sanction and support, 
and to give them to other individuals who 
will abide by their contracts. 

It is a blessed thing, however, to be free 
in Christ from bondage to earthly, ecclesiastical 
rule and human creeds, and subject 
only to the one Lord and Head of the 
Church, and to the one infallible guide of 
faith. We are admonished to maintain a 
clear conscience, and to labor diligently to 
learn and to teach all that he is pleased to 
reveal through it— his Word. 

May you, as free, become more and more 
the bond-servant of Christ.— EDITOR. 

page 368 

BRETHREN:— Find enclosed the amount 
of my subscription to the "Good Hope" 
fund, for the last quarter. How thankful I 
am that I am counted worthy to be admitted 
to the "household of faith," to the race for 
the prize of the high calling, and to the 
inspiring truths set forth in your publications. 
How surely the truth drives error 
from the mind; and how much more satisfying 
is a faith in a doctrine that harmonizes 
the whole Word of God, than the conflicting 
creeds of men! How much greater is 
the reward promised "To them who by 
patient continuance in well doing seek for 
glory, and honor and immortality." (Rom. 2:7.) 
How satisfying the thought that the 
words, "Ye brethren, are not in darkness 
that that day should overtake you as a thief," 
were addressed to us who are on the "Watch 
Tower," and by the light of his Word are 
proclaiming his presence. 

Surely the struggle is now commencing, 
the "strong man" is being bound and hope 
is increasing in the hearts of the Lord's 
longing children, while dismay fills the 
hearts of the unfaithful and disbelieving. 

Yours in the love of the truth, 
C. C. FIFIELD. 



DEAR SIRS:— I herewith remit amount 
of my quarterly "Good Hopes." Your 
publications have done me a world of good, 
in clearing up dark points in modern religious 
teachings. They are too potent for 
good not to receive the help I can give. 

Please send me a copy of the TOWER for 
October 1892. I wish my file complete. 

Sincerely yours, E. L. McEWEN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We had very 

good success in M , considering the 

hard times. We sold over one hundred books 

there, and I believe we could have sold as 

many more, if the people had not been disappointed 

in getting their pay. It is a 

railroad and mining town, and the laboring 

class have had considerable trouble lately 

in getting their money, as they are paid in 

store-orders instead of money; so on that account 

we could reach only the wealthier 

class. However, we feel very thankful for 

the privilege of putting out as many DAWNS 

as we did. 

I feel more encouraged than ever to press 
forward in the narrow way, and the dear 
Lord and his saints seem nearer and dearer 
to me since our last Convention than ever 
before. I can truthfully say that now is my 
salvation nearer than when I first believed. 
Praise the Lord for his loving kindness ! 
Pray for me that I may prove faithful to the 
end; for I realize that only those that are 
faithful even unto death shall hear the 
"Well done, thou good and faithful servant, 
enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

MRS. L. P. BEELER. 



page 370 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



BIBLES AND BIBLE-STUDY HELPS. 

Our readers received from our office, some 
months ago, a tract entitled "Bible Study and 
Needful Helps Thereto." In the back part of 
said tract we gave descriptions and prices of 
various styles of Bibles, etc., which we supply 
at the wholesale rates in any quantity. Please 
note the reductions in the wholesale prices of 
the following numbers: 

Bagster Bible, No. 8215, reduced 25 cents, now, $2.00 
" " 8315, " 48 " " 2.00 

Holman " " C, " 50 " " 2.00 
" " D, " 17 " " 3.00 

Oxford reprint, " 707, " 25 " " 1.50 
" " 713, " 25 " " 2.00 

CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 

WALL ROLLS. We have secured three styles 
of Wall Rolls. They are to hang upon the 
wall, and can be read at a distance. There are 
thirty-one leaves to each roll: one leaf for 
each day of the month; size 13x20 inches. 
We will supply these at 50 cents each (postage 
10 cents extra). The usual prices are 75 and 
85 cents each. All excellent, the Picture Roll 
is especially suitable where there are small 
children. 

(1) THE BIBLE PICTURE ROLL. Thirty-one 
illustrations of familiar passages of the Bible, 
with texts. 



(2) STRENGTH and SUNSHINE Wall Roll. A 
collection, aptly named, of Scripture texts and 
choice cullings from other writers. 

(3) DAILY COMFORT IN FOUR-FOLD LINKS 
Wall Roll. On each leaf four Scripture passages, 
representing prayer, promise, precept and praise. 

WALL MOTTOES. We still have these, similar 
to those supplied last year to many of our 
readers. They are of two general kinds: 

(1) Mottoes on dark green and dark red 
heavy card-board, stamped in silver. These 
are of various shapes and sizes, and the mottoes 
are various— all good. Prices 10 cents, 15 
cents, 20 cents and 25 cents each, post-paid. 

(2) Mottoes on white cards, illuminated, 
with colored flowers, etc., interspersed with the 
texts. Various styles, four mottoes for 25 cents, 
post-paid. 

"GOOD HOPES" SUPPLEMENT. 

All disposed to suggest what they desire and 
hope to be able to give to the Watch Tower 
Tract Society's fund, for 1894, for the spread 
of the doctrines inculcated by the WATCH 
TOWER publications, will find a printed supplement 
with this issue. After being filled out, it 
should be torn in two, and the one half kept 
as your memorandum, while the other half 
should be sent to the Secretary of the Watch 
Tower Tract Society at Allegheny. 

RENEWALS FOR 1894. 

As will be seen by our terms, above, ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER desires to visit regularly all who 
desire its visits. The terms are so liberal that 
none need be without it— for all can command 
at least a postal card for a request to have it as 
one of the Lord's poor. We desire, however, 
to hear from all if they desire to have these 
semi-monthly calls; for we do not wish to send 
it where it is unwelcome or merely tolerated. 

We, therefore, ask to hear from all readers 
as promptly as possible. If the money for 
1894 is not convenient to you now, say so. If 
too poor to afford it, state that. Do so before 
your name is taken off our lists. Expect tag 
on January 15th TOWER to show credits sent 
us up to December 3 1 . 

MEMENTOES OF JERUSALEM. 

The Tract Fund still has some of the Jerusalem 
mementoes presented to it by Brother 
Russell; viz., olive-wood paper-weights and 



flower cards made from the wild flowers and 
grasses of Jerusalem and its vicinity. 

We will send two paper-weights and six 
flower-cards for 50 cents; or one paper-weight 
and two flower-cards for 25 cents. To those 
on the TOWER list as "the Lord's Poor" a 
flower-card will be sent free, on request. 



R1600 : page 371 

VOL. XIV. DECEMBER 15, 1893. NO. 24. 

REPRESENTATIVE OR SUBSTITUTE? 



A BROTHER inquires whether the following 
may not be considered a fair statement of 
the truth as presented in the Scriptures; viz.:— 

"The human race was tried in Eden in the 
person of Adam its representative. His failure 
was the failure of those whom he represented, 
and hence the whole race was sentenced to 
death. Again, God purposed another trial, 
and this time put Christ Jesus as man's representative. 
Christ's obedience was perfect; 
and hence not only did he thus secure everlasting 
life for himself, but the same also for 
all the race whom he represented in his trial. 
Is not this the correct, the Scriptural view? 
If not, wherein is it at fault? Please answer 
through the WATCH TOWER." 

We reply: No; this is an incorrect and unscriptural 
view, and a very misleading one. 

Christ's death was man's ransom (corresponding 
price), substituted for Adam's death; 
and hence applicable to all who lost life under 
his sentence. Christ's death being substitutionary 
was of course a representative death, 
for or instead of the dead race of Adam; i.e., 
a corresponding price in exchange for a purchase, 
which makes possible their release from 
the death penalty, in God's due time. But 
during the thirty-three years before he died, 
Christ represented not the world but himself: 
and since his resurrection he represents, before 
the bar of divine justice, not the world but 
believers. "He died for all;" and will bring 
all to a knowledge of this truth: but he represents 
or advocates for only "the household 
of faith." "We have an advocate with the 
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous." 

Instead of saying that Adam represented the 
race in trial, let us say that he was tried individually, 



and that the race in his loins (as part 
of himself) shared his sentence and all that 
he actually (not representatively) entailed upon 
them— mental, moral and physical decay- 
death. Adam's trial, even if passed successfully, 

R1601 : page 371 

would not have entitled anyone but himself 
to everlasting life. His children would 
each have been obliged to stand an individual 
trial before being adjudged worthy of either 
everlasting life or death. 

Similarly, Christ's trial was an individual trial. 
His faithfulness proved him worthy of everlasting 
life. It in no sense proved any one else 
worthy of everlasting life; and no one gets everlasting 
life as a consequence of his obedience. 

But divine mercy and justice had arranged 
that another great transaction should be accomplished 
by the same act of obedience (the 
surrender of his life) which proved our Lord's 
love of the Father to be perfect. That other 
thing was God's acceptance of that death as a 
sacrifice, a ransom, a substitute, a corresponding 
price for the life of Adam and the race 
which lost life in him. This substitutionary 
(not representative) sacrifice of our Lord, by 
meeting the claims of justice against Adam and 
his race, sealed the New Covenant and made 
divine mercy possible. 

Now, that the claim of God's justice against 
the race has been met, it may hope for mercy 
at the hands of him who bought all with his 
own precious blood. 

R1601 : page 372 

What will Christ do to those whom he purchased, 
—the dead, the sick, the dying, the ignorant, 
the weak, the blind— the mentally, 
morally and physically dead or dying. 

We answer, In full harmony with the divine 
will, he purchased all, for the very purpose 
of granting to each member of the race 
an impartial trial for everlasting life. All 
worthy ones will be proved and granted "the 
gift of God, eternal life, through Jesus Christ 
our Lord." All those proved unworthy will 
be destroyed by the second death. 

When will this trial take place? 

It comes to all men proportionately as each 
comes to a knowledge of the truth. But during 
this age only the Church of believers comes 
to a sufficiency of light to make the trial complete, 
with a final verdict. All others, the 



masses of mankind, will receive their trial later 
on— in the blessed Millennial age, the great 
"day of judgment" (or trial) which God has 
graciously ordained.— Acts 17:31. 

Is Christ now, or will he ever be, the representative 
of all men? 

No; he bought all, but he does not represent 
all. He represents only those who "come 
unto God by him"— faithful believers. (Heb. 7:25). 
It is also clearly stated by John that 
Christ's sacrifice is the propitiation for the 
sins of all, but that only we (believers) have 
him as our advocate or representative. (1 John 2:1,2; 
Rom. 3:25.) Having mediated and 
ratified the New Covenant, he has opened the 
door of its blessed provisions to all; and all shall 
come to a knowledge of the truth. Then any 
and all who accept the conditions of the New 
Covenant are represented before justice by the 
value of the "blood of the New Covenant," 
which speaks pardon for all of their weaknesses 
and shortcomings, in proportion as these are 
not wilful. 

Whenever any member of the race enters, by 
faith in the ransom-sacrifice, into the provisions 
of the New Covenant, that moment he 
has a reckoned standing before God, a reckoned 
covering of his sins, which continues so long as 
he continues under its protecting, sheltering 
mercy. That covering is Christ's meritorious 
sacrifice (made once for all), applied for all in 
a general way by the New Covenant provisions, 
but specially only for those who come under 
that New Covenant's terms, all of whom are 
represented by their Redeemer before the bar 
of justice as perfect,— reckonedly. 

This covering by the provisions of Mercy 
under the New Covenant, and this representing 
of the mercy-covered ones by Christ, will 
last as long as it will be needed— until all of 
the weak and fallen race who thus come to God 
through Christ, desiring divine favor and seeking 
to render obedience, shall have attained 
perfection— mental, moral and physical: which 
will be at the close of the Millennial age. 
Then this covenant will cease; for perfect beings 
require no mercy. Perfect beings can 
render perfect obedience to the perfect law; 
and mercy or any excuse for failure could not 
be granted. When Christ has finished his 
work at the close of his Millennial reign, he 
will first have destroyed the reign of sin and 
death, begun by Adam's fall, will have granted 
each member of the human family a full and 
gracious opportunity of reconciliation with 
God, under the terms of the New Covenant, 



and will have destroyed all wilful sinners (Psa. 145:20; 

Heb. 10:26,27; Rev. 21:8);~and 

then all the remainder he will present before 

the Father, perfect and unreproveable.— 1 Cor. 15:24; 

Col. 1:22. 

This New Covenant of mercy, under which 
God accepts those who approach him, in the 
merit of Christ, is therefore for the very purpose 
of permitting the work of restitution. 
Under its provisions, the fallen but penitent 
sinner is accepted as though he were perfect, 
and is treated as a child of God during the 
period of his reformation of character and constitution 
—during the period in which, under the 
Lord's supervision, he is being restored, with 
added experience, to all that was lost in Adam. 

What we have described relates to the world 
in general. Now let us look at the Church 
under the New Covenant. Her relation to the 
New Covenant is during the Gospel age. But 
to her the covering mercy of that Covenant is 
not to permit time for reaching physical, mental 
and moral perfection by a process of restitution, 
but to give her a standing before God 

R1601 : page 373 

where she can offer herself unto God a living 
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God through 
the merit of Christ— under the merciful provision 
of this New Covenant. 

The call of the Gospel age is for the Bride 
class. The condition of that call is— obedience, 
faithfulness, self-sacrifice in God's service, 
even unto death. But only perfect ones 
are eligible to such a call, even as no blemished 
animal could be laid upon God's altar during 
the typical Law dispensation. So, then, the 
New Covenant is absolutely necessary, with its 
provision of covering of our sins by the merit 
of our Redeemer's sacrifice. All who come 
under the blessed provisions of that New Covenant 
are acceptable as sacrificers during "the 
acceptable year of the Lord"— the Gospel age, 
until the foreordained number shall have made 
their calling and election sure. Then the call 
to sacrifice and its very high reward of spirit-nature 
and join t-heirship with our Redeemer, 
being at an end, the New Covenant will thereafter, 
during the Millennial age, shield all of 
the remainder who may desire to benefit by it 
and thus to return to divine favor and everlasting 
life. 

Thus we answer, at length, that the idea of 
Christ's representative work as set forth by the 
Brother's question is wholly incorrect. Our 



Lord gave himself a ransom, a corresponding 
price a substitute for all, but he represents before 
the bar of justice since his resurrection, 
only those who come unto God by him under 
the gracious terms of the New Covenant, sealed 
or ratified by his death. 

Adam's trial was a personal one and not a 
representative one; and so was our Lord's 
trial a personal and not a representative one. 
As the effects or results of Adam's failure were 
inherited by those in him, so the results of 
Christ's obedience will be shared by all who 
believe INTO him.-Rom. 5:18,19; John 3:16. 



R1603 : page 373 

IS NOT THE DOCTRINE DANGEROUS? 



SOME Christians, whose hearts have been 
greatly blessed by the opening of the eyes 
of their understanding, on the subject, "The 
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is 
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord,"— 
ask, with fear, Is it not dangerous to give this 
teaching to our unconverted friends and children? 
Will it not hinder their coming to God? 
If they have for years failed to come to God 
while under the fear of eternal torment in hell, 
would not the gospel of God's love and mercy 
merely harden their hearts and prevent their 
coming at all? 

And is it not a dangerous doctrine even for 
Christians? Is there not danger that such, if 
they should lose the fear of hell, might become 
thieves, robbers, murderers, or otherwise evil 
doers? 

We answer, No; there need be no such fears. 
The professing Christian who would become 
an evil doer upon learning that his fears of 
everlasting torment are groundless, never was 
a Christian; never was a child of God;— was 
at best only a tare, a "child of the wicked one." 

And as for those who for years have had the 
fear of eternal torment before their minds, we 
suggest that what fear failed to do, God's love 
may do for them. It is written, "The love of 
God constraineth us"— or draws us— to him 
and his service. True, "The fear of the Lord 
is the beginning of wisdom"— but the true 
fear or reverence of God's mighty power is 
meant;— that inspired by the Scriptures and 
not that which results from human misrepresentations 



of the divine character. Concerning 
the latter the Lord says, "Their fear toward 
me is taught by the precepts of men."— 
Isa. 29:13. 

Many unsound minds have been completely 
unbalanced by these awful fears. And no sound 
mind can weigh and then accept the thought 
that an infinitely wise and just being could 
have arranged such a plan as is generally accredited 
to our God by his people,— That he 
created billions of human creatures under conditions 
which (all denominations agree) exposed 
them to the risk of an eternity of misery. 
Some even go further in saying that he predestinated 

R1603 : page 374 

which should go into this unthinkable 
misery before he began the work of creation; 
and that, although he has created billions, 
he has unalterably arranged that only a "few" 
shall find the narrow way and that, all told, 
only a "little flock" shall be saved from 
everlasting misery. 

True, some comparatively sound minds, some 
seemingly wise people, do accept these doctrines; 
but we deny that they ever really 
weighed them. They were told that the Bible 
so taught, and that "to doubt is to be damned." 
So they believed without proof or any kind of 
evidence,— except that certain parables of our 
Lord and certain symbols of Revelation might 
be so construed. 

Indeed, those persons who have persistently 
refused to believe such doctrines (presented by 
all denominations in the name of over one 
hundred millions of the most intelligent people 
of the world) deserve credit for having 
more than ordinary soundness of judgment. 

As the truth was the very food that your soul 
needed and still needs, so it is the food needed 
by all sound minds; and it is still more 
needful to those of unsound minds. Let the 
light of God's Word shine out. It will scatter 
darkness, and bring, instead, joy and peace 
and blessing. 

If you know one upon whom the truth has 
had no good effect, you know a score upon 
whom its effect has been blessings beyond price; 
and you know of not a single one that has 
been injured by it. The man or woman who 
becomes outwardly more wicked by a knowledge 
of God's goodness and love manifested 
in Christ's sacrifice for our sins,— to grant to 
the children of Adam a full individual opportunity 
of gaining everlasting life by obedience 



to the terms of New Covenant— is really none 
the worse at heart, but merely acts out his true 
character more openly. But these, if there are 
such, are very few. On the contrary, the instances 
of conversions through the knowledge 
of the truth are very many— not only infidels 
and skeptics, but many open law-breakers. 
Three prisoners in Sing Sing Prison, N.Y., are 
rejoicing in the truth, and preaching Christ 
and a gospel of the love and justice of God, 
of which they and we are not ashamed.— 
Rom. 1:16. 

However, while doing good in spreading the 
truth to all whom we can reach, as we have 
opportunity, we are to remember that the 
special design of the present truth is for the 
household of faith, and for them we do and 
should make our special effort, as the Apostle 
enjoined. 



R1604 : page 374 

THE COMING CRASH IN EUROPE. 



THE following from the pen of a worldly man 
—an editorial in a secular journal— expresses 
our sentiments excellently. The "world" 
is awaking, faster than the nominal church, to 
the facts of our times, which the TOWER for 
fourteen years has been showing to be the forecast 
of Scripture prophecy. We quote 
verbatim. 

"One of these days there is going to be the 
greatest upset of political institutions which 
has ever occurred. That it has been often 
predicted ought not to blind us to the fact that 
the time for it is steadily drawing nearer. An 
unexampled preparation for it has been made 
by applied science in the realm of war as well 
as industry and by the undermining of the 
foundations of religion. 

"Take France. The new session of its 
Parliament opened with a declaration against 
Socialism as the chief feature of the Administration 
program, and Socialism has rent the 
Cabinet to pieces. Socialism is beyond peradventure 
the one supreme issue before the 
French people. It was not long ago that a 
group of Bishops declared France atheistic, 
and the declaration is neither extravagant nor 
absurd. The church there, whatever its name, 
has ceased to have authority. It can command 



nobody. It is powerless in the cities: it is as 
powerless as during the Revolution. 

"Take Italy. The Cabinet there went to 
pieces after a riot in the Parliament house, 
and the King is at his wit's end, no statesmen 
having the courage to try to carry on a government 
in the face of the raging discontent, for 
which the bank scandals were only an outlet. 
Every revolutionary ism thrives in that country; 
always has, but formerly was in a measure 
controlled by the church. The church 

R1604: page 375 

now can do nothing. The Italian newspaper 
press is directed almost entirely by men indifferent 
to the church when not hostile to it, 
and not a few of the most influential papers in 
the chief cities are owned by Jews. 

"Take Germany. It was only a few weeks 
ago that the report to the Congress of Socialists 
was printed in this country, showing that 
the Socialist vote will soon exceed that of any 
other party in the Empire. The discontent 
there has been increased by the agrarian campaign, 
caused by the high prices of land and 
consequent high rents, by the sharp competition 
from abroad and by the treaties, which 
Bismarck denounced, passed in pursuance of 
the Emperor's scheme to form a commercial 
union for Central Europe. One dispatch yesterday 
announced that the Parliamentary situation 
in Germany is so complicated that no one ventures 
to forecast the issue, and that the peasantry 
are threatening to go over bodily to the Socialists. 
Another dispatch relates that an editor 
was sentenced to prison for six weeks for insulting 
Caprivi; which undoubtedly means, 
severely criticising him on account of his policy. 
Another dispatch relates that an infernal 
machine was received at the Chancellerie 
yesterday, but happily discovered to be such 
before it exploded and killed some one. And 
the church in Germany can assist the State no 
more in preserving order than in any other 
European country, Catholic or Protestant. 

"The recent news from Austro-Hungary is 
the same— Cabinet troubles, proclamations of 
martial law, complaints from the Emperor that 
the people are trying to deprive him of his 
prerogatives. 

"And the policy all over Europe is to keep 
adding to the weight on the safety valve. Immense 
armies are maintained not only against 
aggression but against rebellion. People are 
taxed to poverty to support soldiers to crush 



them. This cannot continue much longer. 
There will be an outbreak one of these days, 
and then such a tumbling of institutions as was 
never seen before. The applications of science 
and the undermining of the foundations of religion 
have prepared the way for the crash." 



R1601 : page 375 

ECHOES FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS. 

A GLIMPSE AT THE SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS LIFE OF INDIA. 



IN the hope of deepening the sympathy of 

God's consecrated people for the whole 

world which "God so loved," even while they 

were yet sinners, and which Christ shed his 

blood to redeem, and which he comes again 

to restore and bless, and in which mission of 

his Millennial reign we are called to be 

workers together with him, we publish the following 

interesting paper on "The Work of 

Social Reform in India," by B. Nagarkar, a 

native representative at the World's Parliament 

of Religions. We publish the address in full, 

both for the information it contains, and also 

as an illustration of the indirect influence of 

the Bible upon the character and sentiments 

of at least one of that benighted race— and not 

only one, but of a considerable class who are 

feeling after God. Mr. Nagarkar said:— 

"Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen: The 
conquest of India by England is one of the 
most astonishing marvels of modern history. 
To those who are not acquainted with the social 
and religious condition of the diverse races 
that inhabit the vast India peninsula, it will 
always be a matter of great wonder as to how 
a handful of English people were able to bring 
under their sway such an extensive continent 
as Hindoostan, separated from England by 
thousands of miles of the deep ocean and lofty 
mountains. Whatever the circumstances of this 
so-called conquest were, they were no more 
than the longstanding internal feuds and jealousies 
—the mutual antipathies and race-feelings 
—between caste and caste, creed and creed, 
and community and community, that have 
been thrown together in the land of India. 
The victory of the British— if victory it can be 
called— was mainly due to the internal quarrels 
and dissensions that had been going on for 



R1602 : page 375 

ages past between the conflicting and contending 
elements of the Indian population. Centuries 
ago, when such a miserable state of local 
division and alienation did not exist in India, 
or at any rate had not reached any appreciable 
degree, the Hindoos did make a brave and 
successful stand against powerful armies of 
fierce and warlike tribes that led invasion after 
invasion against the holy home of the Hindoo 
nation. Thus it was that from time to time 
hordes of fierce Bacteians, Greeks, Persians and 
Afghans were warded off by the united armies 
of the ancient Hindoos. Time there was when 
the social, political and religious institutions 

R1602 : page 376 

of the Aryans in India were in their pristine 

purity, and when as a result of these noble institutions 

the people were in the enjoyment of 

undisturbed unity, and so long as this happy 

state of things continued the Hindoos enjoyed 

the blessings of freedom and liberty. But time 

is the great destroyer of everything. What 

has withstood the withering influences of that 

arch-enemy of every earthly glory and greatness? 

In proportion as the people of India 

became faithless to their ancestral institutions, 

they fell in the scale of nations. 

DIVISION AND DEPREDATION. 

"At first they fell a prey to one foreign power 
and then to another, and then again to a third, 
and so on, each time degeneration doing the 
work of division, and division in its turn doing 
the ghastly work of further and deeper 
degeneration. About two hundred years ago 
this fatal process reached its lowest degree; and 
India was reduced to a state of deadly division 
and complete confusion. Internecine wars 
stormed the country, and the various native and 
foreign races, then living in India, tried to 
tear each other to pieces ! It was a state of 
complete anarchy, and no one could fathom 
what was to come out of this universal chaos. 

"At this critical juncture of time there appeared 
on the scene a distant power from beyond 
the ocean! No one had heard or knew 
anything of it. The white-faced sahib was 
then a sheer novelty to the people of India. 
To them in those days a white-faced biped 
animal was synonymous with a representative 



of the race of monkeys, and even to this day 

in such parts of India as have not been penetrated 

by the rays of education or civilization, 

ignorant people in a somewhat serious sense 

do believe that the white-faced European is 

perhaps a descendant of apes and monkeys! 

For aught I know the ever-shifting, ever-changing, 

novelty-hunting philosophies of the occult 

world and the occult laws, of spirit presence 

and spirit presentiment in your part of the 

globe may some day be able to find out that 

these simple and unsophisticated people had 

a glimpse of the "Descent of Man" according 

to Darwin. Whatever it may be, no one 

could ever have dreamt that the people of 

England would ever stand a chance of wielding 

supreme power over the Indian peninsula. At 

first the English came to India as mere shopkeepers. 

Not long after they rose to be the 

keepers of the country, and ultimately they 

were raised to be the rulers of the Indian empire. 

In all this there was the hand of God. 

It was no earthly power that transferred the 

supreme sovereignty of Hindoostan into the 

hands of the people of Great Britain. Through 

the lethargic sleep of centuries the people of 

India had gone on degenerating. Long and 

wearisome wars with the surrounding countries 

had enervated them: the persistent cruelty, 

relentless tyranny and ceaseless persecution of 

their fanatic invaders had rendered them weak 

and feeble, even to subjection, and a strange 

change had come over the entire face of the 

nation. 

DECAY OF ANCIENT INSTITUTIONS. 

"The glory of their ancient religion, the 
purity of their social institutions and the strength 
of their political constitution had all been 
eclipsed for the time being by a thick and 
heavy cloud of decay and decrepitude. For 
a long time past the country had been suffering 
from a number of social evils, such as 
wicked priestcraft, low superstition, degrading 
rites and ceremonies, and demoralizing customs 
and observances. It was indeed a 
pitiable and pitiful condition to be in. The 
children of God in the holy Aryavarta, the 
descendants of the noble Rishis, were in deep 
travail. Their deep wailing and lamentation 
had pierced the heavens, and the Lord of love 
and mercy was moved with compassion for 
them. He yearned to help them, to raise them, 
to restore them to their former glory and 
greatness; but he saw that in the country itself 



there was no force or power that he could 

use as an instrument to work out his divine 

providence. The powers that were and long 

had been in the country had all grown too 

weak and effete to achieve the reform and regeneration 

of India. It was for this purpose 

that an entirely alien and outside power was 

brought in. Thus you will perceive that the 

advent of the British in India was a matter of 

necessity and, therefore, it may be considered 

as fully providential. 

"It is not to be supposed that this change 
of sovereignty from the eastern into the western 
hand was accomplished without any bloodshed 
or loss of life. Even the very change in 
its process introduced new elements of discord 
and disunion; but when the change was completed 
and the balance of power established, 
an entirely new era was opened up on the field 
of Indian social and political life. This transfer 
of power into the hands of your English 
cousins has cost us a most heavy and crushing 
price. In one sense, it took away our liberty; 
it deprived us, and has been ever since depriving 
us, of some of our noblest pieces of ancient 
art and antiquity which have been brought 

R1602: page 377 

over to England for the purpose of adornment 
of, and exhibition in, English museums and 
art galleries. 

"At one time it took away from the country 
untold amounts of wealth and jewelry, and 
since then a constant, ceaseless stream of money 
has been flowing from India into England. 
The cost, indeed, has been heavy, far too 
heavy, but the return, too, has been inestimable. 
We have paid in gold and silver, but we 
received in exchange what gold and silver can 
never give or take away— for the English rule 
has bestowed upon us the inestimable boon of 
knowledge and enlightenment. And knowledge 
is power. It is with this power that we 
shall measure the motives of the English rule. 
The time will come, as it must come, when, if 
our English rulers should happen to rule India 
in a selfish, unjust and partial manner, with 
this same weapon of knowledge we shall compel 
them to withhold their power over us. But 
I must say that the educated natives of India 
have too great a confidence in the good sense 
and honesty of our rulers ever to apprehend 
any such calamity. 

"Our Anglo-Saxon rulers brought with them 
their high civilization, their improved methods 



of education and their general enlightenment. 
We had been in darkness and had well nigh 
forgotten our bright and glorious past. But a 
new era dawned upon us. New thoughts, new 
ideas, new notions began to flash upon us one 
after another. We were rudely roused from 
our long sleep of ignorance and self-forgetfulness. 
The old and the new met face to face. 
We felt that the old could not stand in the 
presence of the new. The old we began to 
see in the light of the new; and we soon learned 
to feel that our country and society had been 
for a long time suffering from a number of social 
evils, from the errors of ignorance and 
from the evils of superstition. Thus we began 
to bestir ourselves in the way of remedying our 
social organization. Such, then, were the 
occasion and the origin of the work of social 
reform in India. 

SOCIAL REFORM NEEDED. 

"Before I proceed further, I must tell you 
that the work of reform in India has a two-fold 
aspect. In the first place we have to revive 
many of our ancient religious and social 
institutions. Through ages of ignorance they 
have been lost to us, and what we need to do 
in regard to these institutions is to bring them 
to life again. 

"So far as religious progress and spiritual 
culture are concerned, we have little or nothing 
to learn from the west— beyond your compact 
and advanced methods of combination, 
co-operation and organization. This branch 
of reform I style as reform by revisal. In the 
second place, we have to receive some of your 
western institutions. These are mostly political, 
industrial and educational; a few social. 
But in every case the process is a composite 
one. For what we are to revive we have often 
to remodel, and what we have to receive we 
have often to recast. Hence our motto in 
every department of reform is, 'Adapt before 
you adopt.' I shall now proceed to indicate 
to you some of the social reforms that we have 
been trying to effect in our country. 

"The abolition of caste— what is this Hindoo 
institution of caste? In the social dictionary 
of India, 'caste' is a most difficult word 
for you to understand. Caste may be defined 
as the classification of a society on the basis of 
birth and parentage. For example, the son or 
daughter of a priest must always belong to the 
caste of priests or Brahmans, even though he 
or she may never choose to follow the ancestral 



occupation. Those who are born in the 
family of soldiers belong to the soldier caste, 
though they may never prefer to go on 
butchering men. Thus the son of a grocer 
is born to be called a grocer; and the son of a 
shoemaker is fated to be called a shoemaker. 
Originally there were only four castes— the 
Brahman, or the priest; Kihateiya, or the 
soldier; Vaishya, or the merchant; and Shudra, 
or the serf. And these four ancient castes 
were not based on birth, but on occupation 
or profession. In ancient India, the children 
of Brahman parents often took to a martial 

R1603 : page 377 

occupation, while the sons of a soldier 
were quite free to choose a peaceful occupation 
if they liked. But in modern India, by a 
strange process, the original four castes have 
been multiplied to no end, and have been fixed 
most hard and fast. Now you find, perhaps, as 
many castes as there are occupations. There 
is a regular scale and a grade. You have the 
tailor caste and the tinker caste, the blacksmith 
caste and the goldsmith caste, the milkman 
caste and the carpenter caste, the groom 
caste and the sweeper caste. The operation of 
caste may be said to be confined principally 
to matters of (1) food and drink, (2) matrimony 
and adoption, (3) the performance of 
certain religious rites and ceremonies. 

CASTE DEFINED AND EXPLAINED. 

"Each caste has its own code of laws and its 
own system of observances. They will eat 
with some, but not with others. The higher 

R1603 : page 378 

ones will not so much as touch the lower ones. 
Intermarriages are strictly prohibited. Why, 
the proud and haughty Brahman will not deign 
to bear the shadow of a Shudra or low caste. 
In the west you have social classes; we in India 
have 'castes.' But remember that 'classes' 
with you are a purely social institution, having 
no religious sanction. 'Castes' with us are 
essentially a religious institution, based on the 
accident of birth and parentage. With a view 
to illustrate the difference between 'classes' 
and 'castes,' I may say that in western countries 
the lines of social division are parallel, 
but horizontal; and, therefore, ranging in the 
social strata one above another. In India 



these lines are perpendicular; and, therefore, 

running from the top to the bottom of the 

body social, dividing and separating one social 

strata from every other. The former arrangement 

is a source of strength and support, and 

the later a source of alienation and weakness. 

Perhaps at one time in the history of India, 

when the condition of things was entirely 

different, and when the number of these castes 

was not so large, nor their nature so rigid as 

now, the institution of caste did serve a high 

purpose; but now it is long, too long, since 

that social condition underwent a change. Under 

those ancient social and political environments 

of India, the institution of caste was 

greatly helpful in centralizing and transmitting 

professional knowledge of arts and occupations, 

as also in grouping, binding together and preserving 

intact the various guilds and artisan 

communities. But centuries ago that social 

and political environment ceased to exist, 

while the mischievous machinery of caste continues 

in full swing up to this day. Caste in 

India has divided the mass of Hindoo society 

into innumerable classes and cliques. It has 

created a spirit of extreme exclusiveness. It 

has crowded and killed legitimate ambition, 

healthy enterprise and combined adventure. 

It has fostered envy and jealousy between class 

and class, and set one community against 

another. 

[Concluded in our next.] 



R1599 : page 378 

ANNUAL REPORT WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 



CONSIDERING the financial depression of 

the year ending Dec. 1, '93, which has 

very generally affected everybody and everything, 

it is not surprising that the work of the 

WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY also has been 

somewhat hindered. 

We have many indications that the spiritual 
condition of the WATCH TOWER subscribers is 
better— their love and zeal stronger— than ever 
before; and this naturally would have meant 
larger donations to the Tract Fund and more 
of them,— had it not been for the financial 
stringency. Under the circumstances, therefore, 
the showing of this report, below, is most 



satisfactory. 
R1600 : page 378 

The fact that the donations aggregated little 
less than for '92 may therefore be considered 
an improvement of one-half over that year; 
and it will be remembered (refer to our report 
of one year ago) that '92 was a marked improvement 
over the several years preceding it. 

Another item which no doubt influenced the 
total was the Chicago Convention. An estimate, 
made at the time, showed that the total 
expense of those who attended that Convention 
was five thousand dollars or more. This 
extra expense no doubt affected the Tract Fund 
receipts to a considerable extent. And while 
we have had many reports of good accomplished 
by that Convention, it is still a question 
whether the same time and money spent 
in colporteuring DAWNS, publishing and distributing 
Tracts, etc., might not have accomplished 
still more good— have yielded still 
greater returns to the King's glory. 

Indeed, we have been favorably impressed 
with a suggestion made by one who was present 
at the Chicago Convention, and who usually 
attends the Allegheny Convention, that 
hereafter our Conventions, held for several 
years past, be discontinued; that thus the interests 
of the general work would be conserved. 
And although we have enjoyed these annual 
gatherings greatly— the personal greetings and 
communions with visiting saints— we feel that 
there is wisdom in this suggestion of their discontinuance 
in favor of the Fund for the propagation 
of the truth by means of tracts, etc. 

Another reason, almost as weighty, and one 
of growing importance to the work, is the 

R1600 : page 379 

item of time. Each year, as the number in 

attendance increases, the demands upon the 

time of the Editors of the WATCH TOWER increases; 

so that the time for preparation before 

these Conventions, and the time spent 

after them in getting caught up on work which 

meantime gets behind, in addition to the time 

spent during the Conventions, means in all 

two months— the one-sixth of each year. We 

of course enjoy this use of our time; and our 

only question is, regarding the best and wisest 

use of that time. It seems to us wisest and 

most to our Lord's praise to use this time for 

the benefit of all the saints in preparing and 



publishing truth in a printed form, at least 

until the MILLENNIAL DAWN series has been 

completed. Together, these considerations 

seem to us a sufficient reason for discontinuing 

the General Conventions heretofore held 

at Allegheny on the anniversary of our Redeemer's 

death. At all events, we can well 

dispense with the meeting next Spring, since 

it is so short a time since the Chicago Convention. 

And this economy will undoubtedly redound 

to the benefit of the work for '94. 

SECRETARY'S ACCOUNT. 



During the year, Dec. 1, '92 to Dec. 1, '93, 
there have been circulated, free, the following: 

Copies OLD THEOLOGY, Tracts, 1 ,082,0 1 1 
" ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 139,577 

Since tracts vary in number of pages it is 
customary to state them in pages. The foregoing, 
so stated, represent 19,893,428 pages. 

TREASURER'S ACCOUNT. 



Receipts from Good Hopes, $5100.40 

" other sources, $2798.86 

Total $7899.26 

Expended for Tracts, TOWERS, etc., 

sent out free, $5794.88 

" Postage on same, 355.80 

" Labor, mailing same, 708.00 

" on Foreign translations of 

M. DAWN, VOL. I, and in 

forwarding the work in 

general, 1519.18 

$8377.86 

This shows a balance of $478.60; but this 
amount is really not yet due, being represented 
by two notes not yet matured. 

We point with pleasure to this showing. 
While our total receipts would not amount to 
one half the salary of a popular preacher, the 
results are large. Our Society has no salaried 
officers, and the item of "Labor" is for mailing 
and other necessary work. Your donations 
go directly for the spread of the truth, according 
to our best judgment. We trust that 
all the friends will be pleased with the showing, 



especially those whose contributions are 
therein represented; and, more than all others, 
we trust that our Lord approves it. 

The "Good Hopes" plan has proved so 
much of a blessing to those who have adopted 
it, that no doubt many will desire its continuance 
(It is not our plan but the Apostle's— 
1 Cor. 16:2), laying by them on the first day of 
each week something for use in the Lord's cause. 

We urge no one to give to this Society (those 
who approve the work and its methods need 
only to know of their opportunity), but we do 
urge all of our readers to follow the apostolic 
rule and set apart for the Lord's service a 
weekly thank-offering. If it be but one cent 
a day, or one cent a week even, it will surely 
bring a blessing. 

It is fair to presume that all Christian people 
set apart some portion of their incomes for 
the propagation of what they believe to be 
truth. WATCH TOWER readers have learned 
that in the past they have unintentionally 
helped to spread error. The question for each 
to decide is, How can I now use time and 
means at my command, to the best advantage, 
in counteracting those errors and spreading the 
truth?— for the glory of God and the blessing 
of his people? To all such we say, Consider 
carefully to what extent the WATCH TOWER 
TRACT SOCIETY can assist you in this matter, 
and act according to your judgment. 

DAWN COLPORTEUR WORK. 



While the colporteur work, for the circulating 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN, is under the supervision 
and patronage of this Society, it is self-supporting 
to a very large degree;— the only 

R1600 : page 380 

liabilities being in the way of credits to Colporteurs 

(the Society now stands responsible for 

about $7,000.00 of such accounts, much of 

which, however, will yet be paid by the Colporteurs), 

and in the preparation of foreign 

translations— on which account an item appears 

above in the Treasurer's account. 

Total number of volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN put into circulation during the past year 
was 120,916. 

The number of Colporteurs engaged in this 
ministry of the truth is one hundred and fourteen: 
of these seventy-two give their entire 



time and the remainder almost all of their time 
to this service. Many of these have started 
quite recently. And besides these there are 
probably two thousand of our readers who do 
what they can, in connection with their ordinary 
duties of life. 

All who report any effort expended in the 
service of the truth report corresponding 
blessings in their own hearts. They that watered 
others were themselves watered. They 
whose hearts burned with love to the Lord and 
his people, so that they were led to service and 
sacrifice, have been kept firm by the power of 
God in the truth. 

Let us each watch, pray and labor during 
the new year. All who do so will be blest. 
He who is most faithful and earnest will be 
the most blest. The "harvest" is great indeed, 
and the laborers are few in comparison. 



page 380 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1603 : page 380 

THE BIRTH OF JESUS. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XIIL, DEC. 24, MATT. 2:1-11. 

Golden Text— "Thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he 
shall save his people from their sins."— Matt. 1:21. 

We have elsewhere presented the Scriptural 
evidences that the date usually celebrated 
as the anniversary of our Lord Jesus' 
birth is incorrect and that, instead of being 
Dec. 25, B.C. 4, it really was about October 
1, B.C. 2*; nevertheless this need not mar 
our pleasure, nor our appreciation of the 
great fact so generally celebrated on the 
wrong date; for its lessons are as appropriate 
to one date as to another. 



The great thought of this lesson is that 
the first-born of every creature left the 
glory of a spirit existence, the glory which 
he had enjoyed with the Father before the 
world was made, and in conformity to the 
divine plan for human salvation "humbled 
himself" to human nature, became a man, 
"was made flesh, and dwelt among us."— 
John 1:14; Phil. 2:7-9. 

But why did he do this? The Scriptures 
reply that he took our form and nature- 
trie form of a servant— for the suffering of 
death. It was for the sin of man that he 
was to atone; and, to do so, to pay our debt, 
to give our ransom price, to be our substitute, 
he must be a man;— that as by a man 
came death, by a man also should come the 
resurrection of the dead. 

No wonder, then, that the birth of the babe 
Jesus, the first step in the divine plan for 
our salvation from sin and death, was hailed 
by angels as well as by the wise men and 
the shepherds as a most notable, a most 
momentous event. And only those who 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., pages 54-62. 

R1604 : page 380 

see quite clearly the necessity for a ransom 
(a corresponding price), before sin could be 
forgiven or one member of the condemned 
race of Adam could be set free from the 
death penalty resting upon all, can appreciate 
the depth of meaning there is in that 
song which the angels sang: "Glory to God 
in the highest; on earth peace, good will 
toward men." 

The great salvation of which the man 
Christ Jesus is the center is all of divine arrangement 
—to the Father of glories therefore 
we ascribe the "highest" glory for all 
the blessings which through it we enjoy. 

The infant Jesus was the first ray of light 
and hope to men; because he would become 
a man, and as the man would give his life 
a ransom for Adam and all condemned in 
him; and thus, by virtue of having paid our 
price, "bought us with his own precious 
blood [his life given]," he would be legally 

R1604: page 381 

qualified before the divine law to be the 



"Mediator of the New Covenant," which 
he sealed or made effective with his own 
precious blood;— "the blood of the New 
Covenant shed for many for the remission 
of sins. "-Matt. 26:28. 

The great plan for human salvation, begun 
by the birth of Jesus, has not yet reached 
completion. It will not be complete 
until his people have been saved from their 
sins and from the penalty of their sins- 
death, which includes degradation mental, 
moral and physical. The ransom, thank 
God, has been paid, and Justice has accepted 
it; and now the Mediator of the New Covenant 
is seeking out "his people." First, during 
this Gospel age, he seeks his peculiar 
people, his "Bride;" and in the age to follow 
this, the Millennium, he will cause the 
knowledge of the divine offer of life under 
the terms of the New Covenant to be made 
general: all shall know, and then "whosoever 
will may take of the water of life 
freely." And all whom he now is or ever 
shall be willing to own as "his people" will 
gladly avail themselves of that New Covenant's 
gracious arrangements and return 
to full favor with God;— all others will be 
wilful sinners, and as such will be cut off 
from life in the Second Death. 

Let us, then, who know the blessed story 
of the love of God in Christ tell abroad the 
gracious message, the foundation for which 
was laid in the birth of Jesus,— "Behold, 
we bring you glad tidings, of great joy, 
which shall be unto all people." "He shall 
save his people from their sins." Let us 
make sure that we have accepted him and 
are "his people." Let us be true wise men 
and present to him our treasures— all that 
we have and are— our hearts. 

page 381 

REVIEW. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XIV., DEC. 31. 

Golden Text— "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ 
be with you all. Amen."— Rev. 22:21. 



R2238 : page 381 



THE ANGELS' SONG. 

"It came upon the midnight clear, 

That glorious song of old, 
From angels bending near the earth, 

To touch their harps of gold: 
'Peace on earth, good-will to men' 

From heaven's all glorious King. 
The world in solemn stillness lay 

To hear the angels sing. 

"And lo, the days are hastening on, 

By prophets seen of old, 
When with the ever-circling years 

Shall come the time foretold, 
When the new heaven and earth shall own 

The Prince of Peace their King, 
And the whole world send back the song 

Which now the angels sing." 



page 381 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write you 
a few lines, knowing that letters from the 
Lord's children are never unwelcome. 

The work in and near New York seems 
to be progressing satisfactorily. For myself, 
I can say that I am encouraged every 
day to new efforts. 

It has been my privilege for about a month 
past to give Scripture readings every Sunday 
morning at a Gospel Temperance mission 
near my home, and some of those who 
attend have ears to hear the truth; and I 
hope a few, at least, will before long be led 
out into the full light. 

Our meetings on Sunday afternoon are 
well attended, and are very profitable to us 
all. We adopted the suggestion in the 
TOWER, and changed our Friday evening 
meeting from a Bible study to a devotional 
meeting, and are delighted with the results. 
We feel that it fills a long felt want, and 
that the Lord has directed his people in this 
matter, giving them meat in due season. 

My attention has been very much attracted 
of late to the manner in which the 
world is being prepared for the truth. The 
people could never accomplish their own 
liberation from the thraldom of sin and 



death, but they are being so thoroughly 

educated by the thousands of methods now 

at work, that I do not doubt that they will 

readily accept the new conditions when 

offered. For instance, the new Populist 

party is growing so rapidly that its adherents 

confidently assert that they will elect 

the President in 1896. One of the fundamental 

doctrines of this party is nationalism, 

or government control of, first, such enterprises 

page 382 

as railroads, telegraphs and banks, and, 
finally, all the industries, for the benefit of the 
masses— a refined socialism— which would 
relieve the people of the burdens imposed 
upon them by capitalists and monopolists. 

Reformers are writing and preaching 
wholesome truths everywhere to the common 
people, while above all the true Church 
is announcing the glad tidings of the Kingdom 
so near at hand. So we see by the 
signs of the present that it is high time to 
awake. The Day Star has already arisen, 
and soon the Sun of Righteousness in full 
splendor will shed his rays over all the earth; 
but the vail is still upon the face of the 
nations, and it will be a little while yet before 
it is removed by the rude hand of experience, 
God's great teacher. "Be wise, 
therefore, O ye kings, and be instructed, ye 
judges of the earth. Serve the Lord.... 
Kiss the son, lest he be angry, and ye perish 
from the way. ...Blessed are all they that 
put their trust in him." 

Yours in Christ, EDWIN C . MOTT . 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-This, Thanksgiving 
Day, seems a fitting time to remember 
the dear friends and servants of our Lord, 
who have been so much to us in the past. 

I have been something of an invalid the 
past few weeks by reason of trouble with 
my eyes— thus precluding the possibility of 
reading or study. So I have tried to digest 
some of the impressions received in the past 
season; and, first, I cease not to give thanks 
to God for the truth (as shown to me 
through the DAWN series and WATCH 
TOWER), which is gradually enabling me to 
see and understand the signs of the times; 
for without this light the recent Religious 
Congress would have seemed altogether 



different. I should have looked upon the 

coming together of the representatives of all 

known religions and creeds upon a common 

platform (i.e., a universal acknowledgment 

of a God), as the beginning of the 

new age or Millennium, and have thought 

that the gospel, through these representatives, 

was being preached to all nations, 

and that peace and righteousness were beginning 

to fill the earth. 

But now the case seems different. These 
representatives seemed anxious to impart to 
others supposed light and wisdom, not 
thinking they stood in need of any themselves; 
and so they seemed to part as they 
came: each more firmly than ever convinced 
that he and his followers alone understood 
God's dealings with the children of men 
—many leaving out our dear Lord and 
Savior, Jesus Christ, and nearly all forgetting 
him as the ransom-price. Verily, they 
are "blind leaders of the blind." 

The enclosed $50.00 is a gift from Mrs. 
P. and myself, to be used for the cause of 
our dear Lord as you may see best. 

With earnest prayers for you both, that 
you may be "kept for the Master's use," 

Yours in our Redeemer, T. PENFIELD. 



DEAR SIR: -I enjoy the DAWNS and the 
TOWER greatly. The last number, containing 
the article on the Religious Parliament, 
is excellent;— a grand, Christian analysis of 
that Babel-like gathering. I sent mine, to-day, 
to one who will thoroughly appreciate 
it. Do you know, Mr. Russell, many of your 
warmest "followers" are Episcopalians- 
born and raised in that great old church— 
and among the number your sincere friend, 
MRS. E. J. BROOKS. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have 
just completed the reading of the November 
TOWER; and the strange doings of the 
great Religious Parliament, held in the name 
of Christianity, must convince any candid 
mind that God has no hand in such strange 
vagaries, other than a hand for chastisement. 
It must inevitably further bewilder the unstable, 
and in its result make the darkness 
ten-fold more dense. 

My heart blesses Him who is the light of 



the world, that I reached the light of his 
eternal truth before the doings and sayings 
of that Congress reached me. Once, in my 
younger days, I barely escaped confirmed 
skepticism by contemplating a compound 
of such strange contradictions; and my heart 
swells with gratitude to Christ that he is 
using you and others of his children in defense 
of the truth and, more, that I also am 
permitted to do something for its spread. 
It is little indeed that I can do, but all I can 
do is done gladly. He has ever held me 
above the sinking point, just able to swim; 
but, thanks be to his dear name, he has ever 
kept me safely amid a cloud of trials and 
dangers; and now, when the "clouds and 
darkness" that are round about him are 
rolling down upon us, my soul rests calmly, 
sweetly trusting his precious blood to save. 
How sweet to lift our eyes above the gloomy 
clouds, and to contemplate the bright morning 
soon to dispel the gloom ! 
Your brother in Christ, W. F. EATON. 



Supplement, Zion's Watch Tower. 
-DEC. 15th, 1893.- 



Officers of the WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 

DEAR FRIENDS AND CO-LABORERS: -My present judgment is that during the year 
189 , by denying myself 

and taking up my cross, I shall be able to lay aside on the first day of each 
week for Home and Foreign Mission work- 
to assist in publishing MILLENNIAL DAWN in other languages, in publishing the 
series of Old Theology Tracts 

quarterly, and in reprinting old ones, in various languages, in the gratuitous 
circulation of large quantities of them 

through the mails as sample copies and by the hands of brethren who have the 
heart and the opportunity so to use 
them, and, in general, as the officers of the Society may deem best— the 

amount of 

per week, as per my letter on the other side. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send you what I shall have 
laid aside for this cause at the 

close of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order, Postal Money 
Order or Postal Note, as I may find 
most convenient, and will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE," ALLEGHENY, PA. 



Signed 

Post Office State 



The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," because nothing is 
actually promised— only your 

generous hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they now appear to 
you. The plan proved not only 

so beneficial to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, last 
year, that we again commend it to all as 

Scriptural and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan can tear out and 
fill both of these memorandums. 

One should be kept for the refreshment of your memory: the other please mail to 
us at your earliest convenience. 



WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 
MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, Secretary: 

DEAR SISTER:— I have read with interest of the openings for the DAWN and 
Tract work in foreign lands 

and here at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in the spread 
of the Glad Tidings of the lengths 

and breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us in God's 
great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, voice, time, money, 
influence, all— to give to others 

this knowledge which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted my own heart 
and placed my feet firmly upon 
the Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, how to use 
my various talents more to my Redeemer's 

glory and for the service of his people— those blinded by human tradition who 
are, nevertheless, hungering for 

"the good Word of God," and those, also, who are naked, not having on the 
wedding garment of Christ's imputed 

righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in the filthy rags of their 
own righteousness. I have decided that so 

far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule so clearly laid down 
for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 

and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according to my thankful 
appreciation of the Lord's blessings 

during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute to the several 
parts of the Lord's work 

specified on the back of this letter. Of course I cannot in advance judge or 
state particularly what the Lord's bounty 

may enable me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the sum 
indicated to be merely my conjecture or 

hope, based upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more than I 
here specify; and should I not succeed 
in doing as well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know of my 



endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to be able to do in 
this cause is to enable those in charge 

of the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to form estimates, 
lay plans, make contracts, etc., with 

some idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this my highly 
appreciated privilege. 

(For my "GOOD HOPES," see over.) 



page 383 

INDEX FOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

VOL. XIV., 1893. 



JANUARY 1. Page 

The Prevailing Type of Preaching 2 

Retrospective and Prospective 3 

The Political Outlook 4 

Exaltation via Humility 5 

AtCloseof Day. (Poem.) 7 

In Our Day 7 

A Momentous Struggle Begun 10 

"Always for All Things." 11 

Bible Study: Joshua the Typical High Priest 13 

" " Zerubbabel the Typical Builder 14 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 15 

JANUARY 15. 

Special Items: Calendars, Memorial Supper, etc 18 

A Word to Methodists— from Bishop Foster 19 

The True Church. (Poem.) 23 

Some Congregationalists Waking Up 24 

Our Lord's Sermon on the Mount 25 

Fulness of Joy 27 

Bible Study: Dedicating the Temple 29 

" " Nehemiah's Prayer 29 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 30 

FEBRUARY 1-15. -Double Number. 

Special Items: The Spring Meeting. Christian Home-Schools 

Wanted 34 

What Saith the Scriptures about Hell. (An examination 

of every Bible expression on the subject.) 35 

Bible Study: Rebuilding the Wall of Jerusalem 62 

" " Reading the Law 63 

" " Keeping the Sabbath 63 



MARCH 1. 

Special Items: Our February Issue, Tracts in Swedish 

and Norwegian, etc 66 

From Glory to Glory 67 

Jesus in the Synagogue 69 

I am my Beloved's. (Poem.) 71 

The Desire of All Nations shall Come 71 

"Live Peaceably with all Men." (A Correction) 74 

Bible Study: Esther Before the King 77 

" " A Temperance Lesson 77 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light. (Letters.) 78 

MARCH 15. 

To TOWER Readers and Colporteurs (Letter by Brother 

Adamson) 82 

The Memorial Supper 83 

Christian Union vs. Unity 84 

Palestine. (Poem.) 85 

The Oneness of the Divine Family 86 

Bible Study: The Resurrection of Christ 89 

" The Book of Job 90 

" Afflictions Viewed Differently 94 

" Job's Confidence 94 

" Job's Confession and Restoration 94 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 94 

APRIL 1. 

The Memorial Celebration 98 

Protestant England 98 

The Resurrection of the Dead 99 

Through Favor of our God. (Poem.) 108 

Israel Returning to the Holy Land 109 

Treasures in Heaven 109 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light 110 

APRIL 15. 

Church Statistics of the U.S. The Outlook 114 

Jewish Riots in Russia 114 

"The Word was a God." 115 

Judge Not. (Poem.) 117 

The Race in Adam 117 

Self-Examination 118 

Romanist Designs on American Cities 119 

Bible Study: Solomon and His Writings— Proverbs, 

Ecclesiastes and Solomon's Song 121 

Bible Study: Wisdom's Warning of Present Danger 122 

" The Value of Wisdom 125 

" Fruits of Wisdom 126 

" Wisdom of Temperance 127 

" A Wise Woman 127 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 1 27 



MAY 1. 

Interesting Items: Clippings, Address Wrappers, etc 130 

The Twelve Apostles 131 

Apostolic Inspiration 140 

" Fallibility 142 

The Growth of Ritualism 144 

MAY 15. 

A Valuable Manuscript Found 146 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, Special Lot 146 

Taking God's Name in Vain 147 

A Gracious Prince. (Poem.) 150 

Resurrection Without Commotion 150 

Practical Questions: Sanctification, Serving on Jury 153 

Grace and Peace Multiplied 155 

Are the Latter Days at Hand 156 

Bible Study: Reverence and Fidelity 157 

" " The Creator Remembered 159 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light. (Letters.) 160 

JUNE 1. 

Further Jewish Expulsion 162 

The Relative Claims of Love and Justice 163 

The Lord's Sheep 165 

Be Ye Wise as Serpents— Harmless as Doves 166 

The Remedy Co-Extensive with the Curse 169 

page 384 

Face to Face with Trouble. (Poem.) 171 

Bible Study: Messiah's Kingdom 172 

" " Quarterly Review 173 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 175 

JUNE 15. 

The Gospel of the Kingdom in Great Britain 178 

Colporteurs, Take Notice! 178 

Baptism and Its Import 179 

Bible Study: Paul called to Europe 191 

JULY l-15.~Double Number. 

Harvest Work Before the Storm 194 

View from the TOWER: Church Union 195 

The Next Religious Conference at Jerusalem 197 

"Religious Riots are Abroad." 198 

Rest in the Lord. (Poem.) 199 

Man and Woman in God's Order 200 

"Be Not Unequally Yoked." 212 

Our Convention at Chicago 216 

Bible Study: Paul at Philippi 218 

" Paul at Athens 218 



" " Paul at Corinth 220 

" " Paul at Ephesus 220 

" " Paul at Miletus 221 

" " Paul at Jerusalem 223 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 223 

AUGUST 1. 

Our Chicago Convention 226 

Brother Rabinowitch in Allegheny 226 

Prosperity in Jerusalem 226 

Special Divine Providence 227 

Keep thy Heart 233 

Lead Me. (Poem.) 234 

Questions about Politics, Voting, etc 235 

Bible Study: Paul before Felix 236 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light. (Letters.) 237 

AUGUST 15. 

Our Convention in Chicago 242 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., in German 242 

Christ in You, the Hope of Glory 243 

Sometime We'll Understand. (Poem.) 246 

The Office of Reason 247 

A Peculiar People 250 

Bible Study: Paul before Agrippa 253 

" " Paul Shipwrecked 254 

" " Paul at Rome 256 

SEPTEMBER l-15.-Double Number. 

Brother Rogers in Great Britain 258 

Missing Cylinders 258 

A Famine in the Land 258 

"The Church of the Living God." 259 

Our Chicago Convention 278 

The Embryo Kingdom of God 280 

"The Sea and the Waves Roaring." 281 

Bible Study: Personal Responsibility 282 

" " Quarterly Review 282 

" " The Power of the Gospel 283 

" " Redemption in Christ 284 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 285 

OCTOBER 1. 

Special Lot DAWNS, DAWNS in Quantities, Envelopes 290 

Blessed Assurances 290 

View from TOWER: The Drift of Religious Teachers 291 

Though Ye Be Established 294 

A Practical Suggestion 296 

"Who is Sufficient for these Things?" 297 

Bible Study: Justification by Faith 299 

" " Christian Living 300 

" " Abstinence for the Sake of Others 302 



Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light. (Letters.) 303 

OCTOBER 15. 

News from Foreign Fields 306 

Unequally Yoked 307 

The True Fold Not a Pen 310 

A Question Concerning the Ransom 312 

Opinions of Baptists Not Baptist Doctrine 313 

Bible Study: The Resurrection 316 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 318 

NOVEMBER l-15.-Double Number. 

Interest in Germany, Special Cloth DAWNS 322 

View from the TOWER: Echoes from the World's 

Great Parliament of Religions 323 

Nominal Church Peculiarities 349 

Bible Study: The Grace of Liberality 349 

" " Imitation of Christ 351 

" " The Christian Home 351 

" " Grateful Obedience 352 

DECEMBER 1. 

Abraham's Age on Entering Canaan 354 

The TOWER for 1894 354 

MILLENNIAL DAWN in Swedish 354 

The Apostle Peter's Exhortation 355 

Disciples of Christ 357 

Healing for Broken Hearts. (Poem.) 359 

A Glimpse of Christianity in Japan 360 

True Christian Liberality 364 

Bible Study: The Heavenly Inheritance 365 

" " The Glorified Savior 366 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 367 

DECEMBER 15. 

Bibles and Bible-study Helps 370 

Christian Home Embellishments 370 

"Good Hopes" Supplement 370 

Renewals for 1894 370 

Mementoes of Jerusalem 370 

Representative or Substitute? 371 

Is Not the Doctrine Dangerous? 373 

The Coming Crash in Europe 374 

Echoes from the Parliament of Religions 375 

Annual Report Watch Tower Tract Society 378 

Bible Study: The Birth of Jesus 380 

The Angels' Song. (Poem.) 381 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers. (Letters.) 381 



