From Our Readers
Hurricane Andrew  What a fabulous article! (“Things Hurricane Andrew Could Not Destroy,” January 8, 1993) Having had the privilege of helping out with the relief work, I especially enjoyed the quotes from the local residents. The seven days I spent there strengthened my trust in Jehovah and encouraged me to love my Christian brothers and sisters more and more.
M. J., United States
Nazi Persecution  Thanks for the article “Keeping Integrity in Nazi Germany.” (February 8, 1993) Our Christian brothers and sisters have gone through so many trials, yet they remain faithful! If ever I suffer a severe trial, I hope to have the strength and perseverance of Josef Rehwald and his family.
D. J. United States
Today I read the life story of Josef Rehwald. I had tears in my eyes as I thought about how Jehovah sustains his servants in times of distress. I could not hold back from thanking Him!
V. M., Italy
Entertainment  The articles on “How Does Entertainment Affect Your Life?” (November 8, 1992) were very timely. I especially appreciated the information on movies. I work at a video-rental store, and the movie Basic Instinct that you mentioned in your article was one of the store’s biggest rentals. I cannot believe how such corrupt movies have become big business!
D. M., United States
Modern Art  Reading the item “Modern Art Fails a Test” (“Watching the World,” November 8, 1992), one could get the impression that acrylic paints are not very useful. That is not the case. Indeed, they have many important advantages over other types of paint. For example, they do not oxidize. Additionally, commercial canvas uses an acrylic primer. The danger of flaking comes when acrylic paint is applied incorrectly, perhaps to a dirty or greasy surface. This may have been the case with the artists named.
J. W., Switzerland
We appreciate this clarification.​—ED.
Wayward Siblings  Thank you for the article entitled “Young People Ask . . . Will I Turn Out Like My Brother?” (December 22, 1992) I appreciated it very much. My sister was a pioneer [full-time evangelizer], and we were close. It was a goal of mine to pioneer with her, but my goal soon faded. Four months after I was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, she was disfellowshipped [excommunicated] from the congregation. This was very hard for me, particularly when friends would ask about her. I was no longer proud of her. The article made me realize that I can (and will) be different!
L. S., United States
I had a difficult time when my brother was disfellowshipped. However, I did not turn out like him. Now I have graduated from high school and am able to pioneer. I also get to help out in constructing Kingdom Halls of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I would like to work hard and persevere in doing what is fine.
K. M., Japan
I have two disfellowshipped brothers. Sometimes I was afraid of getting baptized because I thought I would turn out like them. Jehovah answered my prayers through this article. In January, I was baptized. Thus I was able to demonstrate publicly that I have dedicated myself to Jehovah, and I will be careful not to make the same mistakes as my brothers.
R. C., Italy

