The Perfect Moral Guide
A SHIP navigator needs reliable maps and instruments to chart a steady course. Likewise, humans need a reliable guide in order to make the moral decisions they face daily. A moral guide that is whimsical or inconsistent will not do, nor will a guide that works only in certain cultures or societies. The perfect moral guide must transcend race and culture.
It is ironic that the Bible​—the very book that has been rejected by millions, the book that has been called by some a mere lovely allegory, the book that has been subjected to more criticism than any other book in history—​is that perfect moral guide. The Bible proclaims itself to be the Creator’s moral guide for man, the “lamp” that can light our way in “the tracks of righteousness.”​—Psalm 23:3; 119:105.
Is there any proof to back up such an outstanding claim? Is there evidence that living by Bible standards is superior to living by man-made ethics?
The Bible and Sexual Morality
Consider the matter of sexual morality. The Bible mandates abstinence from sexual relations outside of marriage, saying: “Flee from sexual immorality.” (1 Corinthians 6:18, New International Version; Ephesians 5:5) It counsels married couples: “Let marriage be honorable among all, and the marriage bed be without defilement, for God will judge fornicators and adulterers.” (Hebrews 13:4) The Bible further shows that one who disobeys this command damages himself and violates the rights of another.​—Proverbs 6:28-35; 1 Thessalonians 4:3-6.
The devastating problems of teen pregnancy, the threat of AIDS, herpes, syphilis, and other sexually transmitted diseases, and the rising divorce rate are all proof that this advice is still relevant for life in the 1990’s. The person who adheres to Bible morality is spared many heartaches and much pain. More important, he preserves a good conscience. (1 Peter 3:16) “I have self-respect and the satisfaction of doing what’s right before God,” says 24-year-old Jonathan. He is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. “With many young people dying of AIDS, remaining morally chaste may literally save my life.”
God-fearing couples have found that following Bible morality has had a good effect on their marriage. Says one 23-year-old wife: “My husband and I were virgins when we got married. I feel we had something very special to share together, something few young people can share with a mate these days. I know this has strengthened the bond of love between us.”
The Bible and Business
The Bible also has its own code of business ethics. While it acknowledges that dishonest people may seem to prosper, it still urges us to stay honest. (Psalm 73:1-28) “Two sorts of weights [an accurate one for buying and an inaccurate, dishonest one for selling] and two sorts of ephah measures​—they are both of them together something detestable to Jehovah.” (Proverbs 20:10) Jehovah’s Witnesses thus steer clear of shady business tactics.
True, a Christian may encounter inconveniences in doing so. It may be difficult for him to compete with less scrupulous businessmen. Others may think his honesty strange, even foolish, but he maintains a good conscience​—something more valuable than money. He has peace of mind and can enjoy a good night’s sleep. He is not tormented by a gnawing fear of being caught and punished for dishonesty.​—Compare Proverbs 3:21-26.
Furthermore, many Witnesses have found that one can uphold Bible morality and do well financially. An honest person often gains the confidence of employees, customers, suppliers, and creditors. This can work to his advantage.
Finders Keepers?
As we noted earlier, the finders-keepers mentality has made thieves out of potentially honest people. The Bible, though, told God’s people in ancient times: “When you see a fellow-countryman’s ox or sheep straying, do not ignore it but take it back to him. If the owner is not a near neighbour and you do not know who he is, take the animal into your own house and keep it with you until he claims it, and then give it back to him. Do the same with his ass or his cloak or anything else that your fellow-countryman has lost, if you find it.”​—Deuteronomy 22:1-3, The New English Bible.
Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to follow this principle today. One Witness in Brooklyn, New York, found a bag containing $25,000 lying in the street. During a minor accident, it had fallen unnoticed from an armored car. Even though the money was used bills in small denominations​—hence impossible to trace—​he turned the money over to the police. His fellow workers chided him for his decision. Surprisingly, the police ridiculed him for his honesty. But this Christian man explains: “I try to uphold the teachings of the Bible in my daily life.” The Bible says at Hebrews 13:18: “Carry on prayer for us, for we trust we have an honest conscience, as we wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things.”
Universal Appeal!
The Bible also offers sound guidelines on other moral issues. It encourages kindness, fairness, justice, truth, honor, decency, a sense of responsibility, and humane concern for others. Its moral advice is summed up in the Golden Rule: “All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also must likewise do to them.”​—Matthew 7:12.
Consistent with their Source, the Bible’s moral guidelines work in any land or culture. In the book Christianity’s Contributions to Civilization, Charles D. Eldridge notes: “Books written in one land seldom become popular in other lands; they are like trees which cannot stand the strain of transplanting . . . Not so the Bible: it has been transplanted to every soil under the sun without serious loss of vigor and charm.”
Uniquely, then, the Bible has universal appeal, transcending language, culture, and race. One Bible writer put it this way: “All scripture is inspired by God and is useful for teaching the faith and correcting error, for re-setting the direction of a man’s life and training him in good living.” (2 Timothy 3:16, Phillips) True, sometimes the Bible is hard to understand. In ancient times one diligent Bible reader was asked if he knew what he was reading. He replied: “Really, how could I ever do so, unless someone guided me?”​—Acts 8:29-35.
That man received personal help in understanding the Bible. Today, such personal assistance is available through the Bible educational work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Already they have helped millions of people in over 200 lands to come to a knowledge of God’s Word. And they invite you also to become better acquainted with that Sacred Book by visiting a Kingdom Hall near you.
Interestingly, it has been said that ethical behavior “can be learned through good example, . . . or just ‘being with’ ethical people.” This is yet another powerful reason to become acquainted with those attending your local Kingdom Hall. Not that Jehovah’s Witnesses are inherently better than other people, but their moral success is a testimony to the power of God’s Word.​—2 Corinthians 4:7.
The world’s morals will continue to drift. The Bible predicts: “Wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse.” (2 Timothy 3:13) However, you do not have to be swept along by this destructive tide. God has provided a reliable compass, an infallible guide. Will you follow it?
[Blurb on page 8]
The Bible proclaims itself to be the Creator’s moral guide for man, the “lamp” that can light our way
[Blurb on page 9]
The Bible’s moral guidelines work in any land or culture
[Blurb on page 10]
“All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also must likewise do to them.”​—Matthew 7:12
[Picture on page 9]
God-fearing couples have found that following Bible morality has a good effect on their marriage

