“Let’s Send a Card”
“WHAT a pleasant weekend that was!” Returning home after visiting with friends, you have happy memories of that relaxing time. How hospitable your hosts were! To express your appreciation, you say to your family: “Let’s send a card.”
Off to the local shops you go to buy a card. You find a vast but confusing array. ‘What card should I pick?’ ‘Which one has just the right words?’ Not an easy choice by any means! So why not make your own card?
Making Your Own Cards
This is easier than you may at first think. All you need is a sheet of plain paper or a thin card, a writing instrument, and, of course, a message. With a design of your choice, you can add the personal touch. How? Here are two suggestions.
(1) Choose a picture you like. It may be a scene from a magazine that you can cut out and attach to your card. One wife surprised her husband with a novel card to celebrate their 25th wedding anniversary. She cut out two small photographs of her husband and herself and stuck these on a simple card to convey an expression of her happiness for their shared life.
(2) Use flowers. They are already well designed. After pressing and drying them, attach them to your card to add pleasure and taste.​—See box.
Whatever the decoration you choose, surely it is the message that is most valuable. Making your own cards gives you the opportunity to compose words that truly express your sentiments.
A Fitting Message
King Solomon of old “sought to find the delightful words and the writing of correct words of truth.” (Ecclesiastes 12:10) Such word choice will make your written message “as apples of gold in silver carvings” to the recipient.​—Proverbs 25:11.
Choose words that will have a pleasant effect. You may well include some of the Bible’s inspired words to convey your sincere feelings. They will be most welcome.
How you pen those words on the card also transmits a message. Making them neat and legible says much about you, the sender.
Occasions for Sending Cards
Weddings are happy events to which couples may want to invite their friends and relatives. If they will be having a reception, they can express care for the welfare of those visiting from far away by including in the invitation an indication of the time it will begin and end.
The birth of a child can be another occasion for sending a card. This lets the new arrival’s parents know that you share their joy.
In addition to such occasions, how thoughtful it is to express thanks for kindnesses people have shown you. You can also comfort the sick and those who are in the hospital, reassuring them of your love and concern. Your cheery greetings and the pleasant picture your card brings can help to ease depression and anxiety. Truly, as the ancient proverb says, “a word at its right time is O how good!”​—Proverbs 15:23.
When far away or even nearby, convey your sympathies to those who have lost a loved one in death. A reminder of the wonderful resurrection hope that the Bible offers may be appropriate.
Therefore, whenever you feel moved to convey your feelings to others, why not send a card? This does not, of course, preclude speaking directly to the person when possible. It is, rather, an added opportunity to be kind.
[Box on page 26, 27]
A Distinctive Decoration
  Decorating with pressed flowers can enhance your cards. This is a simple, inexpensive means of giving your cards a distinctive style. You need very little equipment.
Collecting the Flowers
□ Make sure you have permission to pick the flowers you want.
□ Avoid picking in the rain.
□ Do not pick old flowers or leaves.
□ Do not waste flowers.
  Some flowers do not press well if they are fleshy (bluebells, lilies, orchids) or have an awkward shape (daffodils, lilac, large roses, thistles).
Pressing the Flowers
□ Place flowers between sheets of blotting paper clamped between two sheets of plywood. Adding a few layers of newspaper will help absorb the moisture. Tighten the clamps daily as the flowers dry.
□ Wait for at least a week before opening the press.
□ Briefly check to see that the flowers are properly pressed, and if needed, reposition on dry paper.
□ Close the press tightly again, and leave it in a warm, dry place for two or three weeks more before removing the flowers.
Mounting the Flowers
□ Use a minimum of adhesive.
□ Handle the dried flowers with care, perhaps using a pair of tweezers.

