Kingdom Proclaimers Report
They Trusted in Jehovah
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES are commanded by Jehovah to preach the good news of the Kingdom in all the world so that people of all nations will have an opportunity to know of God’s new world. In some countries, often at the instigation of Christendom’s clergy, our work is restricted. Such is the case in a certain country in Africa. But Jehovah’s Witnesses there do as did King David. He said: “In God I have put my trust. I shall not be afraid.” (Psalm 56:11) The experiences of our brothers in that land show that they trust in Jehovah and continue with his important work.
A Witness working as headmaster in a school insisted on obeying “God as ruler rather than men,” declaring his neutrality toward the affairs of State. (Acts 5:29) He was badly beaten and was expected to be judged a traitor. Everyone thought he would be killed. The Witness, however, trusted in Jehovah. He remained faithful and explained the conscientious reasons for his stand. The result? He was acquitted and was returned to his hometown, whereupon the agents of the State who beat him apologized. This faithful Witness was taken back into the teaching profession and promoted to the position of inspector of schools!
The coordinator of one school had a Witness teacher dismissed. One month later this coordinator accepted the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth from a special pioneer and agreed to a Bible study. After completing chapter 6, he resigned as coordinator of the school, and he and his wife began attending all the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses. One Sunday morning the dismissed teacher was pleasantly surprised to meet the man who had dismissed him and to find that he was on the road to becoming a spiritual brother.
Another experience from this same country illustrates how Jehovah’s Witnesses instill respect for Jehovah’s arrangements and work to keep the organization clean. A special pioneer working isolated territory experienced much opposition. Since he was from another tribe and region, enemies of the truth wanted to expel him from the village. However, the village chief pointed out his good conduct and the fine results of his ministry and would not permit his expulsion. The chief had noted that since the arrival of the special pioneer, people were honoring the ruling authorities by paying their taxes and doing community road work once a week.​—Romans 13:1, 7.
Then, one night another Witness was caught in the act of adultery with a non-Witness woman. There was a scandal, and the special pioneer was summoned before the chief, who chided him, saying: “Here is your brother caught in the act of adultery. You Jehovah’s Witnesses are no different from other religions.” The special pioneer, however, explained: “Although being imperfect, we are different from other religions because we do not condone the actions of those who commit gross sins.”
The Witness who committed adultery served a term in prison and paid a fine. Further, he was disfellowshipped from the congregation as an unrepentant wrongdoer. This action impressed the chief and stopped the mouths of those who mocked Jehovah’s Witnesses. The chief remarked: “Do not speak badly about Jehovah’s Witnesses. They have the truth. Such action is not taken by other religions.”
Faithful Witnesses in that land follow the exhortation of Psalm 37:3: “Trust in Jehovah and do good; reside in the earth, and deal with faithfulness.” Will we trust in Jehovah as these Christians do?

