Hearing God’s Word Brings Benefits
1 What benefits can be gained from listening to a reading of God’s Word? The apostle Paul said that “faith follows the thing heard.” (Rom. 10:17) Thus, hearing the Bible read can result in a stronger faith. Hearers who have such faith often become “doers of the word.” (Jas. 1:22-25) And hearers who become “doers of the word” or who “observe the things” heard from the Bible, are assured of happiness.—Rev. 1:3.
2 With this in mind, we are pleased to report that thousands of persons are now taking advantage of the Bible readings recently made available on cassette recordings by the Watchtower Society. As has already been announced, the entire Christian Greek Scriptures are now available on cassette recordings. Over two million cassettes of Bible readings have already been produced in English alone. Other recordings are in Spanish, Dutch, Danish, Finnish, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, Thai and Ukrainian. Additionally, Kingdom Melodies No. 1 has been enthusiastically received. To date more than 300,000 copies have been produced. No record of cassette placements is kept by the congregation or reported to the Society.
3 We have heard from many telling us about using these tapes in an interesting variety of ways. An appreciative blind brother was elated because, as he said, “Now I do not have to wait for visitors to read the Bible for me.” (Cassettes for the blind are produced with Braille labels.) A parent explained that he obtained a cassette player for his youngsters who were anxious to get a stereo. In a short time, listening to the Bible reading became a regular pastime and they even began to memorize their favorite passages! Other parents tell us they have encouraged their children to follow the reading in their own Bibles and this has improved their reading ability, pronunciation and understanding of the text. Many tell us that they play the Bible recordings in their cars where they must spend considerable time each day. Others say these tapes are an effective supplement in teaching interested ones who are studying the Bible. One brother gratefully observed: “I have found that my retention of the Scriptures has greatly increased.”
4 The Kingdom Melodies tapes feature many familiar Kingdom songs, rearranged for personal listening and enjoyment. Many of us are familiar with the words of the songs. “As the melodies are played,” one sister explained, “I hear the words in my mind. What a fine way to keep Jehovah in my thoughts while enjoying music!” Appreciating that the words convey the beautiful Kingdom message, some have been moved to memorize them to heighten their enjoyment of the music and refresh their minds of the reassuring Kingdom hope.
5 Living in a wicked world controlled by Satan the Devil and his demons, we are constantly bombarded with propaganda designed to destroy our faith by filling our minds with wrong ideas and desires. How fine it is that Jehovah has made abundant provisions through his Word and organization to help keep our minds filled with his thoughts! May all of us keep on inclining our ears whenever we have opportunity to listen as God’s Word is read.

