Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 4
Song 3
 7 min: Applicable Announcements from Our Kingdom Service, also local announcements.
18 min: “Increase Praise Through Magazine Distribution.” Question-and-answer discussion. Stress fact that the more times we offer subscriptions the more likelihood there is of obtaining subscriptions. The same is true with placing magazines; they spark interest in the message and on a return visit you may place the subscriptions. Conclude with experiences from distribution of September 22 Awake! on evolution.
15 min: Discuss with audience the following: (1) How can articles about the brotherhood of man in the October 8 Awake! be featured in your presentation? (2) To whom and how do you think it would be appropriate to feature the article on love based on passion (“God’s Word Is Alive”) in the October 15 Watchtower? (3) Other talking points from current magazines. (4) What article(s) in current magazines do you find most appropriate to tie in with Topic for Conversation? Demonstrate presentation on last point, proceeding from conclusion of current Topic for Conversation.
 5 min: Encourage good support for magazine service this second Saturday of the month. If some in congregation have magazine routes, interview them as to how they got them started and the results. Encourage this activity, pointing out how interested ones can be built up spiritually each time we return to place the magazines. This can lead to fine discussions and to Bible studies.
Song 107 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 11
Song 21
 8 min: Local announcements and field service arrangements. Accounts report.
15 min: “Benefiting from Our Service Overseer.” Discuss material with the congregation by questions and answers. Emphasize need for good personal or family schedule for field activity. Good service habits contribute to spirituality. Encourage publishers desiring assistance in service or who cannot get to regular meetings for service to talk to study conductors and the service overseer to see if more help can be given.—2 Cor. 9:6.
15 min: Talk on 10/8/81 Awake! article “The Real Brotherhood of Man Today.” Some audience participation in particularly highlighting scriptures would be good. Emphasize we have found the true religion, God’s organization, and want to help others find it also.
 7 min: How Are We Doing? Secretary to review previous month’s service activity. Encourage brothers to have personal service goals toward which to work.
Song 113 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 18
Song 35
 7 min: Local announcements. Encourage support of magazine service on fourth Saturday of the month. Highlight good talking points from current magazines.
15 min: Getting Enjoyment from Our Field Activity. Audience discussion on what contributes to enjoyable field service. We view householders as potential sheep. (Matt. 10:13) No need to be discouraged or upset because of opposition. Viewpoints change as in the case of Paul. (Acts 8:3; 9:1-22) Good to remember Proverbs 15:1. But opposition is usually the exception. We do not come to argue but to share good news. It helps to be a good listener. Work toward knowing what is in the mind of householder. Take time to listen. Be friendly even in the face of apathy. Have Topic for Conversation well in mind. We know the “sheep” will listen. (John 10:3) Ask congregation to relate what has given them enjoyment in service.
15 min: Review of Topic for Conversation with demonstration. Householder can present common objection on which Witness comments kindly, continuing with topic in way to draw householder into discussion. Ask audience if any have other suggestions on handling similar situation. In second demonstration, after householder refuses magazine offer, have Witness then present tract Is Planet Earth Near the Brink? Householder wishes he could know for sure. Witness points to Bible answer in tract, recommends reading it with Bible and offers to call back later to discuss additional points. Explains to chairman that next time he will review tract to stimulate further interest and offer new magazines. Hopes tract will help person to see crisis earth is facing just as Jesus foretold. Review with audience key points from tract. One can be placed with every householder.
 8 min: Arrange interviews with any who are auxiliary pioneering during the month, or interview those taking lead in service during month as to what has been accomplished.
Song 37 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 25
Song 17
 8 min: Local announcements. Discuss Proverbs 1:5. Encourage congregation to listen closely to get main points for review at close of meeting. As time permits, have publishers who have obtained subscriptions present experiences.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Returning to Visit New Subscribers.” Consider material by question-and-answer coverage. Have demonstration of publisher calling back on person to make sure he is receiving magazines. Highlight appropriate article in November 1 Watchtower to encourage person to read it. Then give brief demonstration, using this material to show how we help people to study the Bible.
12 min: “Hearing God’s Word Brings Benefits.” Discuss material with audience and ask for expressions from congregation as to use of the cassette recordings by the brothers locally.
 7 min: Review highlights of service meeting. Encourage all to have a share in making return visits sometime during the month, whether on subscribers, people who take magazines, or others showing interest. Remind brothers to bring May 15, 1981, Watchtower to service meeting next week. Comment on November literature offer and Topic for Conversation.
Song 44 and prayer.

