VOL. XXVI. AUGUST 15, 1905. No. 16 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 243 

The Church and the School 243 

The Religions of New York 244 

Nominal Christians Described 244 

Fate of the Theological Student 245 

Convention of the Joyful People 245 

The Church of Today 246 

"Not Holding the Head" 248 

Only the Humble are Safe 249 

Burning the Word of God 249 

Persecuted for Righteousness' Sake 252 

Two Questions Answered 254 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 255 

Portland Convention Arrangements 242 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, PORTLAND, OREGON, SEPT. 8-10 



All sessions of the Convention (except the Sunday afternoon 
public service) will be held in the "Woodman's Hall," 
corner of East Sixth Street and E. Alder Streets. Brethren 
arriving over the S.P. line on Friday morning, Sept. 8th, 
should get off the car at E. Morrison St. station and come 
direct to the hall, thus saving carfare as well as any inconvenience 
through transferring. All other brethren arriving on all 
other lines at any time should come to the Union Depot 
where arrangements will be made to meet them and direct 
them to Hall and accommodations. All cars crossing "Morrison 
Bridge" pass within one or two blocks of the Hall. To get 
to Hall from Union Depot:— Take "M" car one block south, or 
"S" car, southbound, three blocks south on Sixth St., ask for 
"Morrison Bridge" transfer when paying fare, get off at Third 
and Yamhills Sts. and take any car crossing bridge. Get off 
at Grand Ave. and look for banner showing location of Hall one 
block north and one east. 

The public service, Sunday afternoon at 3, will be held in 
the First Methodist Church, corner Third and Taylor Sts., 
easily reached from all car lines without transfer. 

Entertainment.— Good rooms can be obtained in the vicinity 
of the Convention Hall for 50c, 75c and $1.00 per night for 
each person, two, three and four in a room. Meals at nearby 
restaurants can be had for 20c and 25c. Special room rates can 
be obtained for families or unencumbered brothers or sisters, 
three or four in a room. 

It is important that all brethren who anticipate attending 
the Convention should notify Wm. A. Baker at Couch St. Dock, 
Portland, Ore., at least two weeks in advance, so that accommodations 
can be secured. 

Letters should state price of rooms desired, number in 
party, etc. Arrangements will also be made for brethren who 
cannot afford to pay for accommodations but who can pay their 
fare to Convention, but in such cases it is also necessary to be 
advised before date of Convention. Some of the brethren have 
already written relative to bringing tents and others as to bringing 
their own blankets, which they can do without extra cost as 
baggage. All who feel it to their advantage to do so will be 
taken care of, and where brethren cannot afford to take furnished 
rooms it is a very good plan. Compliance with the 
above will greatly facilitate work of the Entertainment Committee 



and add to the general harmony of the Convention at 
the opening session. 

Railroad Rates.— The regular excursion rate of all roads 
entering Portland, with tickets on sale at all times, is one and 
one-third fare, with a thirty-day limit. Parties of ten on one 
ticket, ten-day limit, one fare for round trip. "Coach parties" 
from any one locality are made special excursion rates, averaging 
considerably less than one fare for the round trip. It is 
suggested to friends in the northwest that they may be able to 
make joint arrangements with the local committees of the other 
two Associations (National Letter Carriers' Association and the 
"Hoo-Hoos" or Lumbermen) holding their conventions at 
Portland at this time, for "coach parties," and thus get the advantage 
of the lowest possible rate. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 



R3610 : page 243 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE CHURCH AND THE SCHOOL. 



THE endeavor to bring the public school system of 
England under the supervision of the Church of 
England is causing considerable friction, and 
amounts to a modern persecution for conscience' sake 
that reminds of the persecutions of the long ago. Good 
people, whose consciences are perhaps not backed by 
proper knowledge of the Lord's teachings on the subject, 
and who therefore lack some measure of "the 
wisdom that cometh from above," are refusing to pay 
school taxes because such taxes would support schools 
which they disapprove. They thereby bring upon them 
the regular penalties: their goods are sold to meet the 
debt and some, in default of the money, have been 
imprisoned. 

In Canada the same question is up in another form 
—the division of moneys raised by school taxes amongst 
sectarian schools. Many Canadians see in this an attack 
on the public-school system that would favor Romanism. 
They see correctly; but those who see that "the 



time is short," after voicing a reasonable protest may 
safely and quietly leave all in the hands of the Lord. 

The "Churchman" (Episcopalian) makes some sensible 
comments on the subject. We quote: 

"Does not the endeavor to ally the Church and 
Christianity with the public school place the Church in 
just as false a position as would the endeavor to ally 
it with the State? The Church represents Christ infinitely 
more than through a mere code of laws or a 
system of education. She is in the world to convert, to 
inspire, and to furnish the enabling power for the life 
of men and of society in its entirety. 

"Definite religious teaching should be left where it 
belongs, to the Church and to the home. State officials 
could not teach even the Ten Commandments in other 
than a perfunctory way without arousing controversy. 
It is because the Church and Christian parents have 
failed to give the religious instruction, that they ought to 
have given, that the demand is made for such instruction 
in the public schools. With anxiety, it seems sometimes 
almost with desperation, they ask that the State shall 
do what the Church has failed to do. The State can not 
do what they ask, but the Church can. With renewed 
zeal and the best educational methods she must supply 
the religious instruction that the State and its schools 
can not give." 

CHURCH UNION IN THE MAY CONVENTIONS. 



A marked tendency toward Church union characterized 
the May meetings of the various denominations this 
year. Among the definite steps taken were the organizing 
by the Northern and Southern Baptists of a permanent 
body to be known as the General Convention of the 
Baptists of North America; the agreement of the United 
Brethren, at their quadrennial conference in Kansas 
City, to accept the plan of federation with the Congregationalists 
and the Methodist Protestants, looking to 
a complete consolidation in the future; and the action 
of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
toward completing organic union with the Cumberland 
Presbyterians. The vote approving the latter merger 
was taken on May 22. Says a correspondent of the New 
York Herald, in reference to this vote: 

"It was the final action of the General Assembly 
on one of the greatest questions which have come before 
it since the Civil War, and brings back into that 
organization a branch which went out during the war 
because of differences over negro slavery. 

"If the opposition to the union has made any fight 
it has been chiefly at the secret meetings of the special 
canvassing committee appointed last Saturday, but 
there were to-day no signs of such a contest. The 
special committee in its report canvassed the votes 



taken by presbyteries on the question of union. It 
showed 144 yeas to 39 noes. Two took no action, one 
gave conditional assent, and five made no report." 

The same correspondent gives the following further 
details: 

"The special committee in its recommendations 

R3610 : page 244 

asked that the proposition be referred to the Committee 

on Cooperation and Union; that the committee be increased 

in membership to twenty-one; that it have 

power to confer with a committee from the Cumberland 

Church; that it find what details must be worked out 

to consummate the union, and that a report be made 

to the General Assembly next year. 

"This committee is to consider the corporate and 
legal rights of both general assemblies. The purpose is 
to keep the consolidation within legal limits, that all 
civil suits and injunctions may be avoided." 

THE RELIGIONS OF NEW YORK. 



A journal styled Federation has gathered statistics 
of religious conditions in New York City. Its conclusion 
is that "the greatest home missionary field in the 
United States is New York City, and the sooner the 
churches realize it the better it will be for our city and 
our land." The Sun, reviewing the report, says: 

"At present the aggregate of the distinctively Christian 
population of the town is only two-fifths of the 
whole. This includes the whole of the Roman Catholic 
population and the total number of Protestant communicants. 
Besides these the Federation estimates a total 
of about half a million Protestants who attend Church 
more or less regularly and more than a million Protestants 
who are 'churchless,' or outside of any religious 
faith. 

"New York, therefore, can not now be called a Christian 
city. Jews and infidels and the religiously indifferent 
or unattached constitute a majority of the inhabitants. 
The Protestant percentage is becoming less, 
the vast preponderance of the additions to the population 
being of Roman Catholics and Jews. The total of 
Protestant communicants and church attendants, as 
estimated by the Federation, is only about as great as 
that of the Jews alone, and by 1910 it is likely to be 
much less. By that time there will be more Jews here 
than natives of native parentage. The Jewish population 
has increased from only about 3 per cent, of the 
whole in 1880 to nearly 20 per cent, in 1905." 

NOMINAL CHRISTIANS DESCRIBED. 



We hear boasts of the progress of Christianity in 
connection with the project of converting the world. 
We see the estimate of four hundred millions of Christians. 
It is well that we examine the following picture 
of some of this number— the great mass of them. We 
quote from the New York Herald a description of the 
emigrants now coming to our shores. Alas! the name 
Christian has come to be a byword by reason of the 
attempt to count large numbers, and to stimulate the 
hope that some day the heathen world will be converted 
to as good conditions as is Christendom now. Alas! 
Christendom is "Babylon" in God's esteem (Rev. 18:4) 
and really worse than heathendom— more excusable because 
of its grosser darkness, denser blindness. If the 
400,000,000 of Christendom commit more and greater 
crimes and are every way more profane than the 1,100,000,000 
heathen, which most needs converting? 

The Herald says: 

"They are barbarians most of them. Subtracting 
a certain small percentage of fairly intelligent— a percentage 
drawn for the most part from the better class of 
Scandinavians, Scotch, and Germans— the great residuum 
are to all appearances so densely ignorant, so 
utterly alien to all our preconceived notions of what 
constitutes civilization, that it is only with great difficulty 
that we force ourselves to remember that most 
of them have been born and bred in the very strongholds 
of Christendom." 

REV. A. BEET, D.D. 



Some time ago we called attention to Prof. Beet's 
acceptance of the Bible teaching of man's mortality: 
that eternal life is God's gift through Christ to those 
only who become his followers. 

The following, clipped from the London Daily News 
explains the present situation. Prof. Beet's fidelity to 
the truth he has already seen has led him to renounce his 
honorable position and good salary for conscience' sake. 
May he be abundantly blessed and led into the still 
deeper truths now due to the household of faith. We 
quote as follows: 

When a man loves truth better than dignities and emoluments, 
he is a man to be noted. Such a man is Dr. Agar Beet, 
Theological Professor at Richmond Wesleyan College, England. 
For eight years he has been under a cloud and an 
object of suspicion in certain Methodist circles on account of 
his Eschatological views. Under pressure he withdrew his 
book, "Last Things," from circulation, and gave reluctantly 
a promise not to issue another edition, "in order to avoid 
danger to the peace of the Church," and generally to keep 
silent on the dark question of the Doom of the Lost until the 



Wesleyan Conference gave permission for the book to be 
published. 

To an earnest seeker after truth the position became intolerable 
and impossible. It was not a matter of surprise 
that after the last Conference had refused to unseal his lips 
he promptly announced his intention to vacate his chair this 
year and claim freedom of thought and action. It was the 
only course possible. Better cease to be a Professor than be 
placed under an embargo of silence. 

Rev. Dr. Beet said to a reporter: 

"What has brought about this crisis is that I can no longer 
withhold from the world a book that has already brought 
light and comfort to many readers. Even in its present form 

R3611 : page 244 

it has lifted the gloom from many hearts. Not less than a 
hundred ministers and many laymen have thanked me for 
blessings received from its perusal. I owe it to the Church, 
to Christ, and to conscience to place the results of my study 
of this solemn subject in the hands of readers, many of 
whom are groping in darkness. The opinion of Methodists 
on the doom of the lost has completely changed during the 
last half century. They have discarded the traditional belief 
in the literalness of hell-fire and the eternity of future 
punishment, but they have been without guidance as to a 
positive article of faith to put in its place. This overthrow 
of the dogma has been carefully hidden. Godly ministers 
have nursed their doubts in silence, some under a sense of 
guilt for concealing their change of view, until the need for 
concealment has become to them a humiliating and intolerable 
bondage." 

"What is your view, the view to which strong objection has 
been taken?" 

"I hold that the New Testament represents Jesus Christ 
as declaring that for those who reject His Gospel there is 
nothing in the future for them but ruin, hopeless, utter, and 
final ruin, but he does not say implicitly what will become of 
the lost, or in what that final ruin consists. The references 

R3611 : page 245 

to the doom of the impenitent are too uncertain for us to 
dogmatise upon them. The traditional view is that those 
who reject Christ will think and feel for ever and will suffer 
endlessly. That dogma I reject unhesitatingly. 

"That there are some passages in the Scriptures that seem 
to suggest conscious suffering I admit, but there are other 
passages which contradict that view, and in the absence of 
distinct and definite teaching on the subject why should we 
dogmatise? As to the natural immortality of the soul, that 
is not a Christian doctrine at all. It has been incorporated 
in Christian theology from the Platonic philosophers, but no 
proof of its truth is to be found in Scripture." 

FATE OF THE THEOLOGICAL STUDENT 



Rev. Robert Ker contributes the following to the 
Toronto Globe:— 

On behalf of the modern apostasy known as "higher 
criticism," a plea is set up on the ground of liberty so-called. 
But there is no interference with anybody's liberty, that an 
ordinary mind can see, and the Bishops rightly say to those 
wonderfully learned men— professors in colleges and holders 
of Church endowments in various forms— there is a "wide 
open door" through which you can pass, and through which, 
as honorable men, you ought to go, and not stand on the 
manner of your going. We may say to those who take this 
consistent course that we shall be very sorry to see them go, 
particularly so, as they modestly tell us that they carry with 
them all the scholarship and enlightenment of the Church. 
But it can't be helped, and we shall struggle on in our own 
feeble way, wrestling with "the traditional view," while they, 
freed from its oppressive trammels, shall have added to their 
manifold gifts and graces the homely virtue of honesty. A 
man who can deliberately recite a creed without believing it, 
and draws pay for doing so, is as little worthy of respect as 
the man who forges a check, because they are both "getting 
money under false pretences." 

The theological student, as matters are going, will soon be 
as extinct as the Dodo. And need we wonder at it? Let the 
Bible be the hodgepodge which these wonderfully learned 
people represent, a mass of fiction and folly, and every 
honest man will see just one of two courses open before him— 
either plain and unvarnished infidelity, or absorption into 
the Papal obedience. It is astonishing how men pledged to 
honor and honorable dealing can blind themselves to the 
position that they must of necessity occupy in the sight of 
honest men. And what is it all about? Who is the great 
high priest of the new cult? The higher criticism had its 
birth and growth in licentiousness and infidelity. Its 
ostentatious claim to unprecedented scholarship is now ridiculed 
as little more and nothing better than hyper-criticism. 

But there is a side to this question which is less considered 
than it ought to be. I refer to the prevailing and 
widespread indifference of the laity. There was a time in 
the history of the Church when things were very different 
from what they are to-day. I think it was last Christmas a 
clergyman of the city of Montreal sent around a Christmas 
card to the members of his congregation, on which, instead 
of a quotation from Holy Scripture, he treated them to a 
quotation from Harnack. Next year it will likely be a quotation 
from Tom Paine, Bolingbroke or Voltaire. There's 
really no difference. But will it evoke any protest from the 
laity? Do they see that this new apostasy strikes at the root 
of revealed religion? Do they stop to think that this new 
"doctrine of devils" leaves them without Christ and without 
God in the world? "How sweet the name of Jesus sounds," 
has no music for the man who has no faith in the resurrection 
or whose views respecting it, as a college professor avowed, 



were in a state of suspense. It is God-dishonoring to have 
such men in our pulpits leading men and women into the 
deeper condemnation. 

Then what are we to say about the colossal folly of the 
men who, having eliminated the incarnation and the resurrection, 
talk about "a revival of religion?" Better far to call 
things by their proper name and pray for a revival of Paganism 
and the re-introduction of its licentious worship. 

We are reproducing with extraordinary exactitude the 
conditions that prevailed in ancient Rome before she sank 
into the pit of her own digging. It behooves those who are 
sincerely on the Lord's side in these days of alarming apostasy 
to stand fast in the faith. 



R3611 : page 245 

CONVENTION OF THE JOYFUL PEOPLE 

BLESSED are the people who do know the joyful 
sound." (Psa. 89:15.) No Convention yet held 
by us better illustrated this text than the 
Niagara Convention. It was a joyful meeting of happy 
people. Not merely did the association conduce to 
happiness, but nearly all in attendance were happy before 
they came, and merely increased their joys by their 
fellowship there with the Lord and with one another. 

The Boston railway agent remarked to the Brother 
who secured the arrangements for the sixty brethren 
and sisters from that quarter,— "You all seem to be 
anticipating a good time. Every face is happy— not a 
frown, not a vexed or cross word." He was the more 
surprised because the people were of no sect or party— 
merely Christians— and enroute for a Bible Students' 
Convention. He became interested in "the happy people," 
and says he wants to read "DAWN" to find the 
secret. A similar experience attended another party. 

The watchman at the Conservatory had not expected 
arrivals before 10 a.m. Sunday and refused to open 
the building, but finally did open it, inquiring, "What is it 
that makes you all so happy?" He was informed that 
the people were happy because they loved and trusted 
the Lord and his Word. He thought he would attend 
some of the meetings and learn why those people were 
so happy in coming long distances at their own expense. 
He attended, declared it was a different gospel 
from any he ever before heard, and got the DAWN to 
study further. 

The janitor of the building not only noted the joy 
of the Lord in the faces and conversation, but remarked 
also that this was the only Convention ever held in the 
Conservatory, attended by men, that did not litter the 
carpets, etc., with cigar ashes and stumps and tobacco 
quids. A number of the employes, we learn, are now 
reading DAWN as a result of their having read the "living 



epistles" of the Lord's "people who do know the 
joyful sound." 

THE CITY, THE AUDITORIUM, THE PEOPLE 

Niagara Falls, N.Y., is a quiet, clean and beautiful 
city, all that could be desired. Its citizens let us alone, 
and we let them alone; except that the 1,100 conveners 
got their lodgings with them at not unreasonable rates. 
We did not advertise this Convention to the public, 
preferring to have it chiefly a gathering of those already 
deeply interested in Present Truth. No doubt this contributed 
to the general sentiment that this was the 
best Convention yet held under our Society's auspices. 
Hereafter we prefer to follow this plan in respect to the 

R3611 : page 246 

"General Convention" (except perhaps one discourse 
for the public) leaving to the "One Day Conventions" 
more particular appeals to the local public. 

The Natural Food Co., manufacturers of "Shredded 
Wheat Biscuit," granted us the free use of the fine 
auditorium in their extensive buildings. It was scrupulously 
clean, well lighted, well ventilated and seats 
1,000 persons. It was more than full on two occasions, 
on Sunday. The Convention voted its thanks to the 
management and their courteous employes. 

EAST, WEST, NORTH AND SOUTH 

Some in attendance came long distances— two from 
Florida, one from Tennessee, some from Nebraska, but 
the majority, of course, from the more central districts. 
Boston, Chicago and Allegheny churches seem to have 
been most liberally represented— about 60 from each. 

From the opening of the Convention to its close the 
keynote was loving gratitude to God and love and 
sympathy to the brethren and the entire groaning creation. 
About a dozen brethren took part in the public 

R3612: page 246 

services. More than a dozen others present would have 
been quite competent for service had there been opportunity 
for them. No doubt the discourses did good by 
stimulating faith and zeal, but after all the great feature 
of the Convention surely was the heart-fellowship of 
the occasion. No earthly family-reunion compared with 
the gathering of the Lord's family and their loving interest 
in each other's welfare. Introductions were not 
waited for— each knew the other's heart and soon reached 
it. 

Ninety-four brethren and sisters symbolized their 
consecration as being "even unto death." It was a 
beautiful and solemn witnessing. The pastor of the 



Baptist Church, which so kindly granted us the free use 

of their baptistry, was present at the service, we learn, 

and is now reading DAWN. An Episcopal minister and 

his wife, also a Baptist minister and his wife, were conventioners 

with us, having come considerable distances. 

We believe they were favorably impressed and blessed. 

We hope to hear from them further, ere long. 

THE ABSENT ONES REMEMBERED 

We reminded the dear friends that we surely had 
the prayers and blessed wishes of others of "the happy 
people," "the Truth people," all over the world, thousands 
of whom would have been with us had the Lord's 
providence permitted. We remembered you all earnestly 
in our prayers that the Lord would compensate your 
unwilling absence by pouring upon you a portion of 
our blessing; and we exhorted all of the dear friends 
present to endeavor to carry back to their homes some 
of the precious words and experiences of the Convention. 
We doubt not some of them will talk about their experiences 
for a year to come. 



R3612: page 246 

"THE CHURCH OF TODAY." 

BY REV. JOSEPH A. SEISS, D.D., LATE 
LUTHERAN MINISTER IN PHILADELPHIA, PA. 

THERE is nothing in the history of the world hitherto, 

and especially nothing in the present status 

of its affairs, to favor the doctrine of our Modern 

Millennialists, or to make us think it likely, if at all 

possible, that the Church in this dispensation, by any 

human activities or improvements, will ever be able to 

bring about a condition of universal conversion, righteousness 

and peace, such as some say will and must 

come "before" Christ comes. As no preaching of the 

Gospel, or efforts of evangelical workers, the holiest and 

most efficient in all these many centuries, have succeeded 

in making converts and saints of the entire population 

of any city or locality on this earth, it would seem to 

be sheer folly to expect these agencies and endeavors 

to do for the whole earth what they have never done 

for any part of it, however small. In all the ages... 

whithersoever it has come it has taken out a people 

for the Lord, who will live and shine with him in immortal 

glory. ..whilst. .the majority have 

everywhere been on the outside. ..and how can we 

suppose that it will ever be different in the present 

order of things? And when we examine the condition 

in which nearly two thousand years of the Gospel have 

left the most favored nations, not to speak of the regions 



beyond, we look in vain for solid evidences that 

another two thousand years of the same would bring 

the world any nearer the fancied Millennial state [before 

Christ comes] than Christendom is at present... 

Some hold up their hands in holy horror 

at the idea that "Christendom," as it now exists— "this 

chaos of intermingled divisions, antagonistic communions 

and interminable contentions, jealousies and 

strifes"— is to remain. They cannot think that the 

Greek Church, the Papal Church, the disagreeing Protestant 

churches, together with the many sects and 

heretical coteries which "disgrace" the Christian profession, 

are to continue to the end of time. 

But this state of things is exactly what has developed 
under "eighteen hundred years of the Gospel proclamations," 
and what has been is that which shall be, 
unless radical changes come, by the intervention of 
some new power and method of administration, such 
as the coming again of the Lord Jesus to judge and 
rectify will bring.... 

When we look at the evils and the tares that have 
all the while been growing, at the sad estate into which 
"Christendom has been brought" by the spirit of sect, 
human ambition, self-seeking hypocrisy, unbelief, misbelief 
and the super-exaltation of humanitarian goodishness, 
"which makes nought of doctrine," it seems 
next thing to absurdity to say that "this" is the instrument 
and agency to convert "the world" to truth and 
genuine godliness. 

People say, "Oh, yes; but only set the Church aright. 
Put it to work to do as it should; bring it up to what 
it 'ought to be' in enterprise and liberality, and there 

R3612: page 247 

can be no question that it will soon conquer and sway 
the world to Christ and salvation." Be it so; but who is 
to convert Christendom and put it in condition to convert 
the world? Reform, Reform! That is the watchword. 
The whole Church and the whole earth are full 
of reformers laboring at reforms. But the sad fact remains: 
"That which is crooked, cannot be made straight; 
and that which is wanting cannot be numbered," while 
the doctoring is often worse than the disease.... 
To convert the world there must first be a conversion 
of the Church, and that can never be until Christ the 
Judge shall come. 

Yet another thing to be noted in connection with 
our subject, is the character of the times in which we 
live. The Scriptures abound in allusions to the moral 
aspect of the world in its "last" period— the period 
bordering on the time when Christ shall come with 
power and great glory, and everywhere those times are 
represented as full of unbelief, lawlessness, outbreaking 
sin, rampant lust, blasphemous mockery, and reviling 
of sacred things,— a very carnival of bad passions and 



God-defiant crimes. 

The question, therefore, arises, whether our times 
are not of the character thus divinely described and 
fore-intimated. ...Have "we" not withal fallen 
upon a time of extraordinary degeneracy and wickedness? 
Has there not come a grievous falling away from 
the faith, a giving of heed to seducing spirits and doctrines 
of demons, through the hypocrisy of men that 
speak lies? Have not people become lovers of self, 
lovers of money, boastful, haughty, railers, disobedient 
to law and rightful authority, unthankful, unholy, 
without natural affection, implacable, slanderers, without 
self-control, fierce, traitors, headstrong, puffed up, 
lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God, "holding 
certain forms of godliness," but failing to show the power 
of godliness in their lives? Have "we" not plentiful 
examples of those mockers who were to come, walking 
after their own lusts and likes, and saying "Where is 
the promise of his coming?" [Parousia, presence, Diaglott 
translation.] 

Think of the startling multiplication of divorces, 
the breaking down of the sacredness of marriage, the 
shameless prevalence of licentiousness, and the commonness 
of infanticide, and secret bloodguiltiness of 
which physicians tell. Note the growing indifference 
to the solemnity of oaths, to sacred promises, to moral 
obligations, to the laws of God, and to all holy things. 
Observe the rapid accumulations of colossal robberies, 
swindles, defalcations, embezzlements, rascalities and 
false dealings, which disgrace our civilization, much of 
it also in high places, by people of social rank, education 
and refinement. Estimate the increasing killings, 
murders, incendiarisms and lawless and malicious misdoings 
of men and women, and the trampling under 
foot of right and justice in political, commercial and 
banking circles. 

Observe the awful increase of suicides, which, within 
the past few years, have exceeded the number of 200,000 
per annum! Lusts and crimes and fiendish passions 
seem to have reached flood tide, blossoming like trees 
in springtime, filling our "daily journals with their 
stench," and yet, treated and familiarly talked of as 
ordinary and trivial things! And when we consider 
that all this is within the realm of so-called Christendom, 
we may well wonder that we should have Christian 
people singing over it, and telling us that we are on the 
march to a glorious Millennium [before Christ comes]. 
What this state of things betokens is not Millennial 
Glory, but "the day of Judgment, on the margin of 
which the world of to-day is reading."... 

The question whether there is to be a glorious 
Millennium on this earth before the return of 
Christ is not to be decided by what is most agreeable 
to our reason and fancy, nor yet by what we imagine 
the most effective to stir zeal in effort to benefit the 
world lying in sin, but by what the Word of God says. 



What does not accord with the Word must go under, 
without regard to human likes, reasonings or opinions. 
...That many good and sensible people have need 
to examine the question with more thoroughness than 
they yet have done, is abundantly evident; and that 
what we have thus written may help some to right 
conclusions, is our earnest wish. ...Nor can we 
leave the subject without solemnly laying it on the 
consciences of all whom we can reach, not to rest satisfied 
with notions which flatter and please a rationalistic 
fancy, but which they have never critically examined; 
and to beware of giving sanction to a modern popular 
persuasion, which they may find without just foundation 
in Scripture.... 

It is indeed a fact for all to consider, that the side 
which we take on the question will and must make 
serious difference in the whole system of our theological 
thinking. There is scarcely a doctrine which is not 

R3613 : page 247 

more or less affected by the ground we take upon this 
question. Our decision will and must affect our views 
of the Resurrection— of the Kingdom of God— of the 
Second Coming itself— of the Nature and Purpose 
of the Present Dispensation— particularly of the Judgment, 
and what is to come after it, and the whole condition 
and life of the finally redeemed.... 

And it will and must make or unmake to us many 
most pregnant passages of Holy Writ, rendering them 
grandly luminous, or sealing them as meaningless and 
uncertain— mere riddles for interpreters to guess at, 
without agreement as to their clear and certain import. 

A decision so far-reaching and momentous in its 
consequences and effects cannot safely be treated with 
indifference, and certainly demands a very serious, 
candid and thorough examination, that the conclusion 
may be one solidly founded in the revelations given us 
in the sacred Scriptures. 

For our part we are deeply convinced and satisfied 
that the doctrine of a glorious Millennium of Christianity 
triumphant throughout all the world before Christ 
comes, is "groundless" and damaging to the cause it 
would promote. 



R3613 : page 248 

NOT HOLDING THE HEAD. 

-COLOSSIANS 2:18.- 

THE APOSTLE warns us all against a wrong attitude 
which at all times has more or less threatened 
the body of Christ, in its larger gatherings 



as well as in its little handfuls;— he warns us against the 

danger of looking too much to ourselves or to other men 

in the Church and not enough toward the Lord, who is 

indeed "the Head of the Church, which is his body." 

Some members he represents as taking a head position, 

forgetful of the fact that "one is the Head of the Church, 

even Christ," and inclined in consequence of this forgetfulness 

to think too highly of themselves, to imagine 

that the whole weight and importance of the Lord's 

cause devolves upon them, and to assume too much 

leadership. 

The Apostle warns other less prominent members of 
the Church against a recognition and support of such a 
wrong position, assuring them that their condescension 
is extreme, prejudicial to themselves and to the interests 
they would serve; that the angels, that is the messengers, 
the representatives of the Church (Rev. 1:20; 2:1) are 
not to be worshipped, though they are to be highly esteemed 
in proportion to their faithfulness, good works and 
humility. He warns other members that such a humiliation 
as would ignore themselves entirely and cast all 
the weight and responsibility and influence upon these 
angels or elders would be improper, would indicate an 
unfaithfulness to Christ and a failure to rightly appreciate 
his arrangements. 

DANGERS IN OPPOSITE EXTREMES. 

Thus, reproving two classes because of taking opposite 
extremes, the Apostle proceeds to explain that 
the difficulty with both parties is a failure to hold the 
Head in proper esteem— Christ, the only true Head of 
the Church. Whether by exalting ourselves, usurping 
our Lord's place in the Church, and ignoring his words 
and arrangements and being puffed up as his servants, 
or whether on the other hand quietly submitting to such 
things and doing reverence to those who usurp the Lord's 
place in his body, in either case the difficulty is the 
same— a failure to rightly recognize the true Head. 

If we accept the fact that Christ is the Head of the 
Church, let us rest every argument on that basis; let 
us not feel for a moment that everything will go to pieces 
unless we steady the ark— that we are main spokes in 
the divine program in any little quarter of Zion. (1 Chron. 13:10.) 
All such self-conceited ideas are traitorous as 
respects the Captain of our Salvation, for he has told 
us— and we believe his word— "Without me ye can do 
nothing." Every member of the body of Christ, whom 
the Lord has in any sense of the word set in the Church 
to serve his cause, should realize that he is not at all 
essential to the development of the divine plan, that it 
is favor pure and simple that he has been granted a 
share in connection with it, that his blessings day by 
day more than compensate any little service and sacrifice 
he may be able to render. So far from feeling heady he 
should feel humbled by the thought that he is permitted 



to have any part in the great plan of God as a servant 
amongst his brethren, and he should realize distinctly 
that, so surely as the Lord is the Head of his Church, any 
who cease to occupy positions of trust in a humble 
manner will be debased, will lose the privileges and 
opportunities, perhaps with injury to themselves and to 
others. 

Those humble brothers and sisters who quietly permit 
a brother to exalt himself amongst them and to speak 
of the gathering, large or small, as "my Church," "my 
followers," etc., are not only doing the brother an injury 
and encouraging him in a wrong course, but they are 
disloyal to the real Head of the Church. He who submits 
to such conditions and language demonstrates that 
he does not properly appreciate "the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free"— demonstrates either that he is but 
a "babe in Christ" or that he has gone to sleep as 
respects a proper watchfulness for the honor of the 
Church and of the Head of the Church. It matters not 
that such things can be explained away as not having 
meant anything serious. The fact is that such language 
and claims indicate that something serious has already 
taken place, for no truly humble Elder of the Church of 
Christ, loyal to the Head, would think of speaking of 
himself as instead of the Head of the Church, nor think 
of speaking of the Lord's people as his Church. 

Such public offenses should be publicly apologized 
for, otherwise such leaders should be relegated to the 
back seats. No matter if they had all the oratory 
imaginable, no matter if none of the others had any 
talent for public service. The poorest and weakest and 
most insignificant member of the body is, in the Lord's 
estimation, better qualified to teach than is one who 
vaunteth and puffeth up himself and affects to take in 
the Church the position of the Head. Mark the Apostle's 
words, "Vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind and 
not holding fast the Head, from whom all the body 
being supplied and knit together through the joints and 
bands, increaseth with the increase of God."— Col. 2:19. 

SELF FIRST, GOD SECOND. 

In 2 Timothy 2:3 the Apostle assures us that, 
In the last days grievous times shall come. For men 
shall be lovers of self, lovers of money, boastful, haughty, 
railers, disobedient to parents [and higher authority in 
general], unthankful, unholy. ..traducers, heady, 
high-minded... having a form of godliness, but 
ignoring the power thereof. 

This picture certainly fits well to our day throughout 
nominal Christendom, and it is not strange therefore 
that something of the same general spirit at times seeks 
to invade the camp of the saints— the little companies 
of the consecrated who are striving to be overcomers 
of the world and its spirit. The fact that the Apostle 
writes thus forcefully on this question does not prove any 



lack of sympathy on his part, and assuredly our reference 
to his words indicate no lack of sympathy on our part. 

R3613 : page 249 

But the trouble is a grievous one and especially injurious 
to the brethren who may yield to such headiness: 
nothing is surer to sap spiritual vitality and to lead us 
into darkness, both doctrinal and spiritual. 

On the contrary the Apostle James warns us against 
this danger which besets the more talented of the Lord's 
people. He writes, Be not many of you teachers, 
brethren, knowing that a man shall receive the stronger 
testings. (Jas. 3:1.) It is because of our love for the 
brethren, because of our high esteem for them, and because 
we appreciate their services and desire that they 
may be continued in the service of the Lord, not only 
now but also in the everlasting future, that we feel it 
necessary to press this point, not personally, not individually, 
but generally. 

We urge upon all whom the Lord hath set in the 
body, either in a humble position or in a conspicuous 
place, that the Apostle's words be remembered— that 
as our Lord humbled himself and was subsequently 
exalted, it demonstrates a principle at work in the 
Father's program under which all of his Royal Priesthood 
must humble themselves if they would in due time 
be exalted; also the Apostle's concluding argument is, 
"Humble yourselves, therefore, brethren, under the 
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due 
time." Now is not the proper time for exaltation; to 
elevate ourselves or others under present conditions is 
to incur the greater danger of a fall. Hence all who are 
earnest and of humble heart should both watch and 
pray lest they enter into temptation along this line, 
which from the very beginning of the Gospel age has 
been the most serious stumbling block in the pathway 
of this class. We remember that it was amongst the 
apostles themselves that the argument took place as to 
which would be greatest in the Kingdom. Let us also 
remember our Lord's words of reproof to them, "Except 
ye humble yourselves and become as little children 
ye can in no wise enter into the Kingdom." 

ONLY THE HUMBLE ARE SAFE 

Thus our Lord marks humility as one of the prime 
essentials of a place in the Kingdom. And we can see 
the importance, the reason for this. To exalt to the 
glory, honor and immortality of the Kingdom and divine 

R3614: page 249 

nature one who had not thoroughly demonstrated his 
humility of spirit would be to place him in a position 
where he might become another Satan, another adversary, 



who in time under one delusion or another might 

wish to divide the divine honors even beyond the munificence 

of our heavenly Father's provision for all those 

who are truly his consecrated ones. 

It will not be very long, dear brethren— let us have 
patience. Let us have faith, too, not be doubters. Much 
of the endeavor to grasp and wield authority in the 
Church is at first undertaken with the best of intentions, 
with the desire to do and be in the highest interests of 
the Church. In such cases faith is not strong enough to 
realize how unnecessary we are to the divine plan and 
how able the Lord is to overrule every incident and 
circumstance according to the divine will. More faith 
in the Lord's power to regulate the affairs of the Church 
will counteract largely the efforts of some of his people 
to run the Church's interests along lines of their own 
wisdom and ability. Let us remember that he is able, 
he is willing, to work all things according to the counsel 
of his own will. Let us remember that our highest place 
is lying low, that the greatest mastery is self-mastery, 
and that whatever success we might have in usurping 
the place and authority of our Lord and his Word would 
undoubtedly react unfavorably to us in the end. Hence 
in self-preservation as well as in the interest of the Church 
and in honor of the Lord, we need to keep self under. 
Let us remember the words of the poet and apply them 
daily: 

"O! to be nothing, nothing, 

Painful the humbling may be; 
Yet low in the dust I'd lay me 

That the world my Savior might see. 
Rather be nothing, nothing— 

To him let their voices be raised; 
He is the fountain of blessing, 

Yes, worthy is he to be praised." 
Let us keep ever in memory the Apostle's example 
and words: "We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus 
our Lord, and ourselves your servants for Jesus' sake." 
2 Cor. 4:5. 



R3614: page 249 

BURNING THE WORD OF GOD. 

-JEREMIAH 36:21-32.-AUGUST 20.- 

Golden Text:— "Amend your ways and your doings, 
and obey the voice of the Lord your God."— Jer. 26:13. 

KING JOSIAH, of our last lesson, dying in battle, 
made no arrangement respecting his successor 
on the throne, and the elders of the people chose 
his youngest son to be the king of Judah. The king of 
Egypt, on his victorious return from war with Assyria, 



exercised a suzerainty over the kingdom of Judah, and 
took the king a prisoner to Egypt, and exalted to the 
throne his eldest brother, Jehoiakim, who proved to be 
a thoroughly bold and bad man. Under his guidance of 
the kingdom evil of every kind seemed to prosper, 
and the good reforms instituted by his father gave 
way to fresh idolatry. 

This was at the time when Jeremiah was one of the 
principal prophets in the land, who had been hindered 
for some time from prophesying publicly, but under the 
Lord's guidance he wrote out his prophecy respecting 
the coming judgments and chastisements upon the people 
of Judea, his scribe being Baruch. When it was finished 
it was read before certain prominent people of Jerusalem, 
and so deeply impressed them that they desired that the 

R3614: page 250 

matter should be brought to the king's attention. Apparently 
they were friendly to the prophet and the scribe, 
and suggested the necessity for their concealment, lest the 
king should be angry with the prophecy and should seek 
to do them injury. King Jehoiakim, not satisfied with 
the general report given him respecting Jeremiah's 
prophecy, demanded to see the document itself, and had 
his own scribe read it before him. The king was unmoved 
by the message, and after hearing the contents 
of three of the columns of the manuscript he took his 
scribe's penknife and cut them off and cast them into 
the fire before him, and so he continued to do with the 
remainder until the entire manuscript was read and 
destroyed. Thus he emphasized his determination to 
take no counsel from the Lord, or we might say that he 
evidenced his lack of faith in the Lord and his disregard 
for his Word. 

THE BOOK OF JEREMIAH. 

The king ordered the arrest of Jeremiah and his 
scribe, but, in harmony with the Lord's providences, 
they had already secreted themselves and were not 
found. In their seclusion they learned of the destruction 
of the manuscript, and prepared another statement 
of the prophecy, which we are informed had certain 
further additions, and this constitutes the book of 
Jeremiah as found in our Bibles. This gives us a little 
view of the manner in which the Bible came into existence 
piece by piece under the Lord's supervision. 
Doubtless the first manuscript delivered to the king was 
more particularly in respect to his own time and affairs. 
This served its purpose, and then the larger and fuller 
book of Jeremiah's prophecy, as we now have it, was 
prepared— not especially for the people of that time, but, 
as the Apostle Peter points out, it was designed for the 
instruction and edification of the Gospel Church. (Rom. 15:4; 
1 Pet. 1:12.) Even those things which were applicable 



in some measure to Jeremiah's day and to 
Jehoiakim and to the king of Babylon were, as we have 
seen, of two-fold significance— applying not only to the 
literal Babylon of that time but also to the mystic 
Babylon of this Gospel age. 

The Lord declares, "My Word that goeth forth out 
of my mouth shall not return unto me void, but shall 
accomplish that which I please, and shall prosper in 
the thing whereunto I sent it." (Isa. 55:11.) We see 
this not only in the narrative foregoing— that the Lord's 
plans were not frustrated by the king— but we see it 
also in all the various steps of the Lord's providences 
in connection with the giving to us of his Word. Much 
of that Word for centuries has seemed dark and meaningless 
to the Lord's people, but in the light of the 
Millennial dawn it is becoming luminous. Not that we 
should consider that every little item and detail of the 
prophecies of old would contain great value and great 
instruction, for this we do not find. Our understanding 
is that the pearls of truth are scattered throughout the 
Word, here a little and there a little, and that in this 
manner our Lord has hidden the beauties of his plan 
from the casual reader, while his Spirit draws the attention 
of the New Creation to these pearls of thought so 
valuable to us in our spiritual upbuilding, in giving us 
knowledge of the divine plan. It is with this as with 
everything in nature: diamonds are not found in a heap 
together, but scattered here and there in the peculiar 
soil in which they are secreted. Gold is not found in large 
blocks, but usually in very minute grains intermingled 
with tons of sand and dirt and rocks. In the wheat 
field there is a much larger bulk of straw and of chaff 
than of clean grain. 

We have doubtless all noticed this in the quotations 
made in the New Testament from the prophecies of the 
Old Testament, that only a fragment here and there is 
quoted and applied. We have all doubtless noted also 
that frequently the context seems very irrelevant, 
without connection with the part quoted. In other 
words, the Lord and the apostles selected for our nourishment 
the grains of wheat without specially referring to 
the chaff and straw of the connections. And so at the 
present time, as the Spirit of the Lord opens the Old 
Testament before his people more and more, and we see 
in it wonderful things, we need not expect to find every 
item and every verse of every chapter full of meaning 
and spiritual nourishment. We must expect that a 
considerable portion of it will be like the straw and the 
chaff, not suited to our spiritual nourishment though 
necessary to the presentation of the meat in due season- 
necessary and proper in connection with the giving of 
the same, while at the same time hiding it from the 
world in general, especially until the due time. Thus 
the chaff hides the grain. 

Our figure is still more complete when we remember 
that even if we have found the grain it needs a certain 



preparation of grinding or bruising, etc., before it is 
ready for our nourishment. So even after we have 
separated wheat from chaff, spiritual things pertaining 
to our time from other features pertaining to the time 
in which the Scriptures were written, we still require the 
assistances of the holy Spirit and agencies used of the 
Lord for the grinding and preparation of the meat in 
due season. By whatever means it is provided it is 
necessarily of the Lord's provision, and to him we 
render the thanks and praises and appreciation for all 
that has been done under the various instrumentalities 
of the Lord, the apostles and others. 

FIGHTING AGAINST GOD. 

As Jehoiakim found it in the end vain to fight 
against God, and that burning the words of Jeremiah did 
not destroy nor render null and void his prophecy, so 
others are finding the matter to this day. Roman 
Catholics have apparently long been opponents of the 
Word of God, the Bible, and under their direction considerable 
Bible burning has been done. History tells 
us that the first edition of Tyndale's translation of the 
New Testament was bought up in the book-stores of 
London, etc., and burned. Indeed in very recent years 
we have heard of similar proceedings in Spain and less 
than three years ago in Brazil. The Bible may be set 
down as the strongest foe of ignorance, superstition and 

R3615 : page 251 

every wrong doing: it is no wonder, therefore, that many 
hate the book. 

It would not do for Roman Catholics to ignore the 
Bible altogether, since in considerable measure their 
religious system is based upon its teachings; hence they 
have from time to time issued various editions of the 
Bible, various translations, though none of these were 
ever issued by the authority of the Roman Catholic 
Church as a whole, but merely by local Bishops. It 
would not be claimed by any that there is a wide discrepancy 
between the teachings of the popular Douay 
edition of the Bible used by Roman Catholics and the 
common English version of the same books. The Catholic 
version is supplied with elaborate notes on the 
Scriptures, supposed to safeguard the latter from 
heresies, while the Protestant version is usually published 
without note or comment except the marginal readings 
respecting the translation. 

In our day a peculiar anomaly is presented: the 
Roman Catholic Church, which through her popes has 
denounced Bible Societies as being of the devil, has 
within the last few years through its councils at Baltimore, 
and also more recently through the pope's encyclical 
letter to the bishops of America, advocated the 
reading of the Scriptures by its people, and urged that 



the priesthood shall encourage this reading. Probably 
this is merely for effect, merely to counteract the past 
tendencies of the Church, and to seem to imply that 
papacy is loyal to the Scriptures. As a matter of fact 
Roman Catholics tell us that the priests do not urge the 
reading of the Scriptures, but when inquired of on the 
subject treat the matter lightly and rather discourage 
it. Of course only a Douay version is permitted at all, 
and it only to the educated, whom it would be unwise to 
refuse. Furthermore, the price of the Catholic edition 
is rather prohibitive so far as the poor are concerned. 

THE BIBLE-BURNING SPIRIT. 

Those whose eyes of understanding are open have 
doubtless noticed a peculiar change of sentiment amongst 
Protestants respecting the Bible. The division is into 
three main classes: one repudiates the Bible except as a 
work of literature. These are known as higher critics, who 
consider their own judgments respecting all Biblical 
matters to be far superior to the opinions and testimonies 
of the Lord, the apostles and the prophecies. 
Egotistical and self-confident, they assume to be much 
wiser than is written, yet hold that it is not well to break 
entirely with the Bible because it still has a considerable 
hold upon many good people, and by rejecting it in to to 
they would not only lose the respect of these good people 
but also lose their support. The second class still holds to 
the Bible as a fetich, a charm, a book of good luck, which 
they like to have upon their parlor tables and without 
which in the house they would not feel entirely safe; 
they regard it as the Word of God, but do not understand 
it themselves nor do they believe that others understand 
it. They have a special interest in and regard for Churchianity, 
especially for the branch of it to which they have 
given adherence, and they somehow realize that an investigation 
of the Bible might undermine the influence of 
Churchianity and make its students independent of those 
systems of man which have grown so grandly influential 
in social and financial circles. These would not burn the 
Bible itself, but would be in full sympathy with the burning 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN or any other book which would 
remove the dust and smoke of superstition from the Word 
of God and let its true light and beauty shine forth. 
They would not hesitate to burn these, because they feel 
instinctively that such a shining forth of the Word of 
God means a proportionate decline in the luster of their 
earthly systems of Churchianity. 

Thus do we account for the burning of the WATCH 
TOWER publications. In one or two cases the burning 
was done in public; in many instances, on the advice of 
this class of people, timid ones of the Lord's sheep have 
burned their books privately. One sister who attended 
a Canadian Convention not long since, as she shook hands 
with the Editor remarked: "Brother Russell, the Lord 
in his providence sent me MILLENNIAL DAWN several 



years ago, but I hearkened to the voice of those whom I 
supposed to be my religious superiors and proper Christian 
guides and I burned the book. Still gracious to 
me, the Lord sent me another copy: again I listened to 
the voices of darkness and burned the book. The Lord 
in great mercy sent me a third copy, and this time I was 
ready for it— it burned me; it has set me free, and I am 
here to-day rejoicing in the favor of God and in the light 
upon his Word." Her husband at her side spoke up, saying, 
"Yes, and it has burned me, too,"— burned the old 
self-will and sectarianism and opposition to the Way, 
the Truth and the Life, which God has revealed to us 
through his Word, to which Jesus and his redemptive 
work are the key. 

Let us, dear friends, realize more and more that we 
cannot turn aside the divine plan by our puny oppositions 
if we were so disposed, and let us get into such 
heart harmony with the Lord, let us exercise such faith 
toward him, that nothing will be farther from our 
thoughts than to substitute a plan of our own for his, 
or in any wise to alter, change, or amend the gracious 
plan which, rightly seen, includes all the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of love and wisdom 
divine. Let us not fight against God, and be overwhelmed 
and suffer loss of position if not loss of life 
eternal. Let us on the contrary receive the great blessing 
which comes to all those who are children of the 
light, who receive it into good and honest hearts, and 
who rejoice in it. 

THE GREATEST OF BOOKS. 

Many of the world's best and noblest characters have 
acknowledged the grandeur of God's Book, even those 
who, like Presidents Lincoln and Grant, were not themselves 
professedly consecrated Christians. We are all 
familiar with General Grant's declaration that he esteemed 
the Bible to be the corner-stone of the liberties 
enjoyed in the United States. President Lincoln said, 

R3615 : page 252 

"Take all of this book upon reason that you can, and the 
balance on faith, and you will live and die a better man." 
Coleridge said, "The words of the Bible find me at greater 
depths of my being than all other books put together." 
John Ruskin said, "Whatever I have done in my life has 
simply been due to the fact that when I was a child my 
mother daily read with me a part of the Bible, and daily 
made me learn a part of it by heart." Huxley, the 
agnostic scientist, declared, "The Bible has been the 
Magna Charta of the poor and the distressed." Gladstone 
declared, "What crisis, what trouble, what perplexity 
of life has failed or can fail to draw from this inexhaustible 
treasure-house its proper supply?" President 
Roosevelt said, recently, "If we read the Bible 



right, we read a book which teaches us to try to make 
things better in this world." 

These testimonies come to us from the outside 
rather than from the inside— mainly from those who 
understood very little of the true Divine Plan of the 
Ages. How much deeper and more meaningful is the 
testimony of our hearts to the value of this book as we 
come, step by step, to a proper appreciation of the glorious 
and wonderful words of life which it contains and 
the true meaning of its exceeding great and precious 
promises, by which in the Lord's plan it is designed that 
a little flock may become partakers of the divine nature 
and be prepared to be the Lord's instruments for the 
blessing eventually of all the families of the earth. 

THE BIBLE INDESTRUCTIBLE. 

In an early edition of Wyclifs Bible there was a 
frontispiece representing a fire of true Christianity 
against which its enemies, Satan, the pope, and infidelity, 
were blowing with all their might, trying to put 
it out; but the more they put themselves out of breath 
the more brightly did the fire burn. This is still true. 
The enemies of the Lord's Word, whether great or small, 
those who are doing their utmost against the spread of 
the Truth and to oppose the Helps for Bible Study which 
the Lord is now sending forth, are really in some respects 
at least spreading the flame of the Truth. We may be 
sure that eventually the object, the purpose, of the 
divine Word will be accomplished— the elect Church will 
be called, schooled, prepared for the Kingdom and gathered 
into it to do the work promised, the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. 

As illustrating that the Bible has stood the test of 
time where other books have failed, we note the fact that 
while other books have no particular opposition, no 
attempts having been made to destroy them, nevertheless 
they sink out of sight— while the Bible, with all the 
opposition which has been brought against it for centuries, 
is more widely circulated to-day than ever. It is 
estimated that "there are more than a million volumes in 
the imperial library at Paris gathered in since the fourteenth 
century; yet of this immense catalogue, 700,000 
are out of print... Mere fragments of all the literary 
wealth of Greece and Rome have made their way down 
the centuries, while the riches of Solomon and David and 
Moses, prophets, scribes, have held their steady place." 
"Not a manuscript of the classics is a thousand years 
old, but at least fifty manuscripts of the Greek New 
Testament are more than one thousand years old." 

Our experiences in the study of the Word in this 
harvest time, the new beauties and rich depths of the 
divine wisdom, love and power which our wondering 
hearts behold, are illustrated well by the experiences of 
the French electrician, Ampere. He was shortsighted 
without being aware of it. When he became conscious of 



his defect of vision, through the casual use of a friend's 
eye-glasses, he burst into tears as he realized how much 
he had missed throughout his life of the wonderful beauty 
of the world around him. 



R3616 : page 252 

PERSECUTED FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS' SAKE. 

--JEREMIAH 38: 1-13. -AUGUST 27.- 

Golden Text:— "Blessed are they who are persecuted 
for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of 
Heaven. "-Matt. 5:10. 

INCIDENTS of our last lesson— the writing of his 
prophecy, etc.— brought the Prophet Jeremiah 
into special prominence. Our present lesson 
finds him in the reign of Zedekiah, the last king 
of the house of David to sit upon the throne: the 
one of whom it is written, "O thou profane and 
wicked prince of Israel, whose time is come, when 
iniquity shall have an end. Thus said the Lord God: 
Remove the diadem, and take off the crown. ...I will 
overturn, overturn, overturn it: and it shall be no more, 
until he come whose right it is; and I will give it unto 
him."— Ezek. 21:25,26. 

How accurately this prophecy has been fulfilled! 
With the captivity of Zedekiah the Kingdom of David 
was overturned but not destroyed. To all human appearances 
it has been destroyed, for no heir of his has 
occupied the throne of Israel from Zedekiah's day to the 
present time— over twenty-five hundred years. If 
Israel were to-day exalted to place and power in the 
world, and desired to re-establish the kingdom of David, 
no Jew could prove his title to the throne as being of the 
lineage of David. All such records have long been lost. 
There is just one who could claim title to that throne, 
namely, he who was the man Christ Jesus. Born of 
Mary, he was of the seed of David, and adopted by Joseph 
who was of the same stock. Although he surrendered 
his life as a ransom for sinners, he was and still is heir of 
all the promises made to Abraham and to David, and 
soon, according to the Scriptures, will take to himself his 
power and great glory and reign as the antitypical David 
upon the throne of the Kingdom of the Lord, to bless 
Israel and every nation, people and tongue. 

R3616 : page 253 

The long interregnum of 2520 years, the "seven 
times" of Israel's disfavor and of Gentile rule, will soon 
be complete and usher in the glories of the Kingdom of 
God. The overturning of the diadem was not to be 



perpetual, but "until he come whose right it is." This 
was not completely fulfilled in our Lord Jesus at his first 
advent. True, he came to be a King, but the great Prophet, 
Priest and King of the divine plan was not the man 
Christ Jesus, but the glorified Christ— Jesus the Head, 
and the Church, the members of his body. He whose 
right it is by divine sanction is selecting from amongst 
his brethren a little flock to be his associates, and this 
Gospel age is the period of their testing and 
development. 

THE REMOVAL OF THE DIADEM. 

The captivity of Judah was in two sections: the 
first included Daniel and others with the King Jehoiakim. 
The king of Babylon left Zedekiah in control as 
his vassal under tribute, but on account of the latter's 
treachery and league with Egypt, the Babylonian army 
came again against Jerusalem and besieged it. Famine 
and pestilence resulted, and ultimately the city of Jerusalem 
was captured and utterly destroyed, and King 
Zedekiah, with his eyes put out, was taken a prisoner to 
Babylon, with all the people except a few of the very 
poorest and least competent. Jeremiah, given his 
liberty, chose to remain with the poor of the land who 
subsequently went down into Egypt, so that Jerusalem 
and the country round about lay desolate without inhabitant 
for seventy years, according to the word of the 
Lord at the mouth of Jeremiah.— 2 Chron. 36:21. 

OBEYING GOD, OPPOSED BY MAN. 

Our lesson particularly relates to the period at the 
beginning of the siege of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar's 
army. Jeremiah had prophesied the success of the enemy 
and recommended the Israelites to surrender speedily and 
save themselves from the great trouble, famine, etc., 
which otherwise would surely come upon them. He 
pointed out that their troubles were the result of disobedience 
to God, and that the proper course now was 
to repent and accept the situation and learn the lesson 
and profit thereby. 

Certain princes of the kingdom soon learned of the 
prophesying and appealed to the king that it must be 
stopped, as it had a demoralizing effect upon the defenders 
in proportion as the prophecy was believed. 
They requested the death of Jeremiah, and the king responded 
that the matter should be in their hands. But 
perhaps fearful of the consequences of the act, or perhaps 
deterred by the Lord's providence, instead of putting 
Jeremiah to death they put him into a dungeon, 
which was probably a water cistern. Its bottom was 
foul with accumulated mud, and the prophet sank into 
this and would soon have perished of hunger had it not 
been for the interposition of a colored man, an Ethiopian 
eunuch, one of the king's servants, who appealed to the 



king against the injustice and was commissioned to take 
Jeremiah out from the dungeon or cistern by means of 
cords, his tender heartedness and care for the prophet 
being indicated also by his supplying cast-off rags to keep 
the ropes from cutting the prophet's body. 

Surely we may conclude that this Ethiopian of 
kindly heart was used of the Lord in this emergency; 
that whilst the Lord could have delivered his prophet 
with equal facility in some other manner, he was pleased 
to use a person of kindly heart who was at hand. And 
yet we have people of sufficient intelligence to write 
books who claim that the "Negro is a Beast," and that 
he is everywhere condemned in the Scriptures. This 
Ethiopian evidently had a cleaner heart than the majority 
of the chief men in Israel— a heart much nearer to 
the divine likeness than theirs. Similarly, an Ethiopian 
eunuch, a Jewish proselyte, was amongst the first to be 
established and blessed with the Gospel, under the 
special providence of God, through the ministries of 
Philip.-Acts 8:27-38. 

Jeremiah's experiences illustrated a general principle, 
namely, that where the will of God and the plans 
of man conflict, those who are faithful to God are likely 
to be in the minority and to be considered public enemies, 
because out of accord with those who are out of 
harmony with the Lord and his plan. It was this that 
brought upon Jeremiah his imprisonment, as it has 
brought upon the Lord's people of every age the frowns 
and opposition and persecution of those who are not the 
Lord's faithful people, of those who are not guided by 
the divine counsel, but are walking in their own ways 
under the leadership of the prince of this world. 

"IN IGNORANCE YE DID IT." 

Since Satan is still the prince of this world it is 
reasonable to suppose that those who are in accord with 
him to-day will be found similarly opposed to God, 
opposed to all who are loyal to the teachings of his Word. 
It is for this reason that the Scriptures assure us that we 
must expect to suffer now, to be misunderstood, misrepresented 
—"Marvel not if the world hate you; ye 
know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were 
of the world the world would love its own, but ye are 
not of the world, for I have chosen you out of the 
world." 

Looking back all through the Gospel age, from 
the days of Jesus until now, we find that those who have 
been loyal and faithful to him in every time have been 
called upon to prove, to witness, to testify to their 
faithfulness to the Lord by the trials and difficulties 
which they would endure for his sake. And this expression, 
"for his sake," means much the same to-day 
as it did in the day of Jeremiah, namely, for the sake of 
the Word of the Lord. It was because Jeremiah was 
faithful to the Lord's message and the others unfaithful 



to it that they persecuted him. And this is still the case: 
the Word of the Lord is his representative in the world 
still. Our Lord places himself and his Word side by 
side when he said, "He who is ashamed of me and my 
Word, of him will I also be ashamed." 
The test is upon us to-day as it has been upon the 

R3616 : page 254 

Lord's people in the past. Are we ashamed of him, of 
his message? All who are of the overcoming class, all 
who will constitute the "very elect," the "Kings and 
Priests unto God," all who will be associated with Jesus 
as overcomers of the world and his joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom will have these characteristics. They will be 
loyal to the message, not ashamed of it. The words of 
the Apostle well voice their sentiments, "I am not 
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ." 

Not being ashamed of the Lord and his message 
implies that they will be faithful in the presentation of 
the same when convenient to themselves or when inconvenient. 
To the best of their knowledge and ability 
they will speak forth the words of truth and soberness— 
as wisely as possible, as inoffensively as possible, but 
they must speak. As the Apostle said, when forbidden 
to declare the good tidings, "We cannot but speak the 
things we have seen and heard."— Acts 4:20. But 
it is only those who have heard something and seen 
something who have any testimony to give; those who 
know nothing may as well keep quiet. Until by the 
Lord's grace the eyes of our understanding are opened, 
until we shall have seen something of his grace exhibited 
in his divine plan, we are not prepared, not qualified to 
tell others. We must first receive the living Bread 
before we can dispense it; we must first know the truth 
and be set free by it before we can become its bond servants, 
before it could be true of us as it was of the Apostle 
"Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel of Christ." That 
is to say, he would be unhappy if not permitted to tell 
the glorious message of God's redeeming love and 
mercy exhibited in his divine plan. 

"GOD KINDLY VAILS OUR EYES." 

As the poet has declared, "We know not what 
awaits us." That is, we know not with distinctness what 
to expect. In a general way we are informed by the 
Lord's Word that a great time of trouble is impending. 
It is not our duty to make this our central theme. 
Rather the good tidings of great joy which shall be unto 
all people, secured through the precious blood of Christ, 

R3617 : page 254 

is our central theme; and in connection with this is the 
proclamation of the terms and conditions upon which 



we hope to be accepted of the Father as joint-heirs with 
Christ— members of his body. Occasionally, and only 
occasionally, need we enter upon the role of Jeremiah to 
be announcers of the evil conditions coming upon the 
world. Perhaps as we get down in the stream of time, 
nearer to the actual trouble, we may see it to be our duty 
to call attention to it more particularly, and to urge the 
people to take the course which would save them from 
the severity of that trouble— the course of harmony and 
accord with the Lord. When that time shall come such 
advice will doubtless run counter to the wishes and ambitions 
of some who will then be in power, and it may 
be that we shall be imprisoned or otherwise maltreated, 
after the example of Jeremiah. The Lord knoweth 
what is necessary for us to know. It is sufficient that we 
have the gracious promise that all things shall work 
together for good to those who love him, and that we 
should be able to trust him, come what may. 

Our Golden Text is especially appropriate and 
should always be remembered, not only in severe 
persecutions but also in the lesser ones, when our names 
are cast out as evil, "when men shall separate you from 
their company," when they make all kinds of misrepresentations 
against you falsely because of your faithfulness 
to the Lord and to his Word and to the principles 
of righteousness. Then remember this Golden Text, 
and assure your heart in harmony with it and with other 
statements of the Lord's Word, that all these experiences 
of opposition the Lord is willing to overrule for your 
highest welfare, causing them to work out for you a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. All who 
will be of the Kingdom of heaven class must pass through 
some such experiences for the development and testing 
of their characters. 



R3617 : page 254 

TWO INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
ABOUT HOLY THURSDAY 



Question.— Your suggestion that we might celebrate 
our Lord's Last Supper on the Thursday nearest to 
present calculations pleased some of us, but we have 
heard nothing further. What is your thought? 

Answer.— We have no thought of making any 
change in the method of calculating the Memorial date. 
There would always be some who would prefer the 
present method anyway, and we would needlessly endanger 
hurting their feelings; and there will be but 
few celebrations more if our expectations are happily 
realized. 



We suggest to all the dear friends that the main 
thing to contend for is the annual celebration. We are 
not Jews bound by the Law nor are we bound by any 
word of the New Testament on the subject to an exact 
day and hour; but let us continue to celebrate our 
Memorial in harmony with the Jewish calendar, and 
when the date happens to fall on a Thursday we will 
merely have that much more complete a celebration. Still 
let us not forget that we must daily partake of the 
bread from heaven and drink of our Lord's cup to 
accomplish the real celebration. 

ABOUT THE AMMUNITION. 



Question.— We note marginal comments on the 
margin of this season's Volunteer matter. Whose comments 
are these supposed to be? 

Answer.— We got the idea from a Colporteur who 
was laboriously writing such comments on all the tracts 
he distributed; because he found that they had the 
better attention. Assuming that all Volunteers would 
be glad to write such comments, we did it for them. 
We assumed also that Colporteurs going in every direction 
would like to be announced as coming, and therefore 
so stated. But by error the latter got P— for 
Pilgrim instead of C— for Colporteur. 



R3617 : page 255 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

For some time I have intended writing you with respect to 
my recent experiences in re-reading DAWN. It has been my 
custom for several years past to devote my private study 
more especially to the TOWERS, but during this year I have 
been studying DAWN more closely and I can assure you I 
have been much surprised and chagrined, as well as edified 
by my reading. Although I have read Vol. I. probably six 
times, Vols. V. and VI. at least four times, yet I have been mortified 
to see how much I had forgotten. In fact many passages 
seemed entirely new, as though I had never seen them 
before. I fully realized the force of the Apostle's remarks 
about this "earthen vessel," and how "we ought to give the 
more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest 
at any time we should let them slip," or as the margin puts 
it, "run out as leaking vessels."— Heb. 2:1. 

And that I am not alone in this experience of having let 
some of these things "slip," I was convinced by an incident 
which occurred in one of our congregations not long ago. A 
brother had preached a funeral sermon, and at the close of 
the service a sister came to him and said, "I wish my husband 



could have heard your remarks, they were fine." Several 
others made similar remarks, and were much surprised when 
the brother told them he had done "little more than read 
the few thoughts given by Bro. R. in Vol. VI." 

My experience has led me to the determination that, by 
the Lord's grace, I will make it the rule of my life to read 
as many of the DAWNS every year as possible, more especially 
Vol. I., so that every detail of the "Divine Plan of the 
Ages" may be made more and more clear to my mind year by 
year, and kept so. 

Praying the Lord's continued blessing upon your efforts to 
serve him and his people, I remain with Christian regards, 
Yours in the love and service of the King, 
G. W. S.-Pa. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

I feel so thankful for the question lessons which we received 
in last number of TOWER that I thought I must write and 
tell you of it. 

As our little company have chosen me for leader for several 
terms it seemed as though it was hard for me to work out a 
lesson where all could take active part, and, as you said in 
TOWER, either I did not have the time or the talent to do so, 
but now as these splendid questions came I quickly passed 
them around, and you do not know how glad I was yesterday 
when we had our meeting. Nearly everybody took such interest 
and had studied their questions so well that we had 
a most interesting and blessed hour of study and seemed to 
enjoy it so much. 

I also want to express my thanks and appreciation of the 
little "Heavenly Manna" book. We consider it so helpful in 
keeping our thoughts more on spiritual things and feel so 
much more enabled to avoid things displeasing to our Father. 

Although our secretary had already sent in report of our 
meetings while our dear Brother McPhail was here last I 
feel that I must tell you that it was one of the grandest feasts 
I ever enjoyed and I know that that was the sentiment of 
all present. How we always look forward to the good times 
when a Pilgrim comes our way and how thankful we feel that 
we may have such dear Brethren so able to present everything 
clearly and harmoniously. Wishing you and all the 
dear co-workers in the TOWER Office the Father's richest 
blessing, 

I remain, your brother in our Dear Redeemer, 
J. P. ESKELDSEN-Iowa. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A little more than a year ago I was very nearly an infidel. 
I was brought up by strictly religious parents, and when 
16 or 18 years of age, I was the teacher of a Bible Class in 
a Sunday School in Michigan. The more I studied the Bible 
under the light in which I was supposed to teach it, the 



more perplexed I became, until at last I was nearly ready 
to say that the Bible was a farce. A year ago I got hold of 
a book which explained some points in the Bible so clearly 
that it set me to thinking that perhaps that some man of 
reason that was not bound down by his little 2x4 church 
might explain the whole thing in a rational manner. Six 
months ago a cousin came here on a visit from Ohio. When 
the station agent gave him several of your publications, 
and he gave them to me, I became very much interested in 
them, for I at once saw that the explanation was on the lines 
of reason, not put up for fame or money. I wrote to ask you 
to send me the WATCH TOWER, which you kindly did. You 
also sent me some tracts which I read, and then gave out 
where I thought they would do the most good. 

As soon as I read the WATCH TOWER I send it to some one 
that I think will read it. Through your instrumentality I 
am a believer and will try to let my light shine, so that others 
will see that there is a reality in the Bible, 

Wishing you much success, I remain yours truly, 
H. B. TALBERT-Texas. 

R3618 : page 255 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I thought I would write you a few lines to tell you how I 
came to the knowledge of the Truth. I was born and brought 
up in the Catholic faith in Syria. At the age of eight I was 
brought to this country and sent to a Catholic school and 
Church. Being religiously inclined I wandered off into different 
denominations and sects, Episcopal, Baptist, Spiritualism, 
Seventh Day Adventism, etc. 

At last (about a year ago) I became disgusted with everything 
and didn't go to any church. At that time I was working 
in a bakery. In delivering an order I found, in a pile of 
old paper and rubbish, the first three volumes of DAWN. I 
read the DAWNS and became deeply interested. Then another 
day, as I was taking a short walk, I picked up a circular 
advertising a course of lectures to be delivered in a certain 
hall. I attended, and to my surprise, I found out that the 
people there were all readers of MILLENNIAL DAWN, like myself, 
and just as deeply interested. 

So you see, I have been led all the way. Five thousand 
miles across the Mediterranean Sea and Atlantic Ocean, 
tossed about and seasick, and then across Babylon, tossed 
about and almost drowned, but rescued by the Lord, 
through MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

I have been doing colporteur service for the last two months, 
and would like to continue the work. I have sold 170 
volumes and have 75 orders unfilled at the present time. I 
am now 1 8 years of age. I think I will do better work 
hereafter. 

May the Lord bless you and all the brethren in Allegheny. 
I remain, Yours in the Blessed Hope, 

ABRAHAM OBREY--N.Y. 



DEAR SIRS:- 

I have just read one of your periodicals called "The Divine 
Plan of the Ages." I consider it fine. I was an orthodox 
minister for 18 years. The subjects you treat on were 
always stumbling blocks to me, the fall of Adam especially; 
the billion of dead in their graves; why they should all be 
forever lost. It is as plain now to me as the nose on my face. 
I want you to send me "What say the Scriptures about Hell?" 
I never preached a sermon on Hell in all the 18 years I did 
preach. I could never make myself believe that a good God 
would punish the vast majority of mortals endlessly. I am now 
a recluse. 

I lately wrote an article for one of our city papers, why I 
did not attend churches. I told the people I could no longer 
subscribe to the creeds formulated in the 16th century. I told 
them some of the best men I ever met, while I was a preacher, 
didn't belong to any church. So some one who believes in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN sent me the periodical I mentioned. It 
is the finest thing I ever read, and it is God's truth too. 
Yours faithfully, , Ohio. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 