Cleanliness Honors God
1 The Mosaic Law contained strict requirements to ensure cleanliness. They set Israel apart as a people who were required to keep themselves physically and spiritually clean. (Lev. 11:35, 36; 15:1-11; Isa. 52:11) This clean condition brought honor to God and contributed to the health of the nation.
2 Today too, cleanliness is an identifying mark of Jehovah’s people. But while this identifies Jehovah’s people as a group, is it true of each of us individually? The extent to which we are concerned about neatness and personal cleanliness reflects how much we appreciate Jehovah’s requirements.
3 What about the appearance of our home? Does it detract from the Kingdom message we bear? Is it possible that some may question our sincerity if we speak about transforming the earth into a paradise while our own home is unkempt and the yard is overgrown with uncut grass or weeds? If our home gives the appearance of being disorderly or there are disagreeable odors because of unsanitary habits, can it be said that we have developed the “patterns of cleanness that will fit in with the new world under God’s Kingdom”?​—om pp. 130-1.
4 What about the car we use for field service? Is it reasonably clean, inside and out, so that its appearance does not detract from our work? What about our clothing, book bag, and personal grooming? Are they neat and presentable, giving no cause for offense? It is reasonable that we keep ourselves and our clothing clean by regular bathing and laundering.​—w89 6/1 pp. 16-19.
5 What if a brother has become careless so that his personal hygiene or surroundings have become a cause for reproach to the congregation? Perhaps he simply needs some loving assistance because of age or infirmity. If so, it would be a kindness to help him. Someone may have the problem and not even be aware of it; kind admonition may prompt him to correct the situation. Individuals who consistently set a poor example in this respect would not qualify for outstanding privileges in the congregation. Of course, elders should guard against imposing their own personal standards or preferences.
6 Newly interested persons are invited to enjoy spiritual feasts at our Kingdom Hall. Usually, we are eager to extend an invitation because the hall is so attractive and neat. It takes work, though, to keep it that way. Look around your hall. Are the chairs, floors, and walls clean? Are the rest rooms scrubbed regularly? When we become accustomed to looking at a soiled carpet or walls with peeling paint, we may soon view that as acceptable. However, strangers visiting for the first time may be left with an unfavorable impression. We should do our best to maintain an appealing and attractive hall, doing our share when the time comes for cleaning or refurbishing.
7 Without speaking a word, we can glorify God by our personal appearance and the neatness of our homes, automobiles, and Kingdom Halls. Our good example will not give any cause for stumbling but will bear testimony that our worship is clean and upright.​—1 Cor. 10:31, 32; Jas. 1:27.

