Offer the Best Magazines in the World
1 The stated purpose of The Watchtower is “to exalt Jehovah God as Sovereign Lord of the universe.” Awake! is “for the enlightenment of the entire family. . . . This magazine builds confidence in the Creator’s promise of a peaceful and secure new world.” These quotes are from the magazines themselves. Pursuit of these goals has made them a source of comfort to millions of readers.
2 We will be featuring these journals in our ministry during April and May. To be effective, we need to be well acquainted with their contents. Read each issue, noting points that you may be able to use when offering them. Think about what concerns people. What social, family, or emotional issues dominate the thinking of most of your neighbors? Try to think of something you can say that will touch their hearts and stimulate a desire to learn more.
3 Highlighting the April 1 Watchtower: Most people yearn for a better world, one without the many problems that too often now rob them of their joy.
After introducing yourself, you might say:
▪ “I’d like to show you an interesting comment made in this article entitled ‘A Better World​—Just a Dream?’ It says: ‘This world, our world, is certainly not an ideal place. . . . The list of present woes seems endless.’ This situation makes it difficult to be optimistic about the future, doesn’t it? Let me show you, however, what Psalm 37:11 says about the future.” After reading the verse, ask the householder how he feels about this promise. If he responds favorably, turn to the article “A Better World​—At Hand!,” page 4, and say: “A number of Scripture texts are cited, including the one we just read from Psalm 37:11. I believe you would enjoy reading these articles and looking up the references in your Bible. I’d be pleased to leave them with you.” If appropriate, mention that our work is supported by voluntary donations and that you would be willing to accept a small donation.
4 Highlighting the April 15 Watchtower: The article on page 4 asks: “Where Can You Find Trustworthy Guidance?”
After introducing yourself, you could say:
▪ “There are so many problems in the world today, such as [mention something that currently concerns the community or a news headline]. It makes us wonder if anyone can ever find a way out of this mess. Happily, 2 Timothy 3:16, 17 assures us that the Bible is a guide to a happy and secure way of life.” After reading these verses, show how The Watchtower helps us to understand why the Bible is a trustworthy guide.
5 If you prefer to feature Awake!, you might use the May 8 issue and the article “Real Hope for the Children?” Likely you will find that parents are touched by the needs of children and want to know what can be done to help them.
6 If we are enthusiastic about our magazines, the best in the world, we will be anxious to place them with others so that they too can embrace the Kingdom hope and share in exalting Jehovah as the Sovereign Lord of the universe.​—Ps. 83:18.

