Service Meetings for April
Week Starting April 4
Song 16
10 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Remind all about special talk that will be given on April 10, entitled “True Religion Meets the Needs of Human Society.” A special effort should be made to assist new ones to attend.
15 min: “The Watchtower and Awake!​—Journals of Truth.” Questions and answers. Invite audience to tell about methods they have used to increase magazine placements. Have some relate experiences as time allows.
20 min: “Offer the Best Magazines in the World.” Discuss material with audience, stressing special benefits of the magazines. In covering paragraph 2, ask an effective publisher to explain how to become familiar with contents and how to prepare presentation. Arrange for two demonstrations showing ways to offer the April 1 and 15 issues. Conclude by offering suggestions on articles that might be used in presenting the current issues of Awake!
Song 69 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 11
Song 80
10 min: Local announcements. Discuss main points in Question Box.
15 min: “The Service Meeting Equips Us for Every Good Work.” Questions and answers. Include demonstration showing how a family prepares for meeting; emphasize importance of (1) advance preparation, (2) paying close attention, and (3) participation.
20 min: “Serve Jehovah Without Distraction.” Insert. Questions and answers. Cover paragraphs 1 to 6.
Song 90 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 18
Song 100
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and any donation acknowledgments from Society.
15 min: “Follow Up on Magazine and Brochure Placements.” Discuss with audience. Invite comments on why there is need to be well acquainted with contents of the magazines and to analyze carefully previous response of householder to determine what approach would be best. As time permits, have capable publishers demonstrate suggested presentations.
20 min: “Serve Jehovah Without Distraction.” Insert. Questions and answers. Cover paragraphs 7 to 12.
Song 51 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 25
Song 70
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. “Help in Overcoming Everyday Problems.”
15 min: Faith. Based on Reasoning book, pages 129-32. Discussion between elder and group of youths. Elder discusses definition of faith, then asks questions of group. Why do many not have faith? What is the basis for our faith? How can we maintain strong faith? How do we demonstrate such faith? Elder concludes by commending and encouraging group.
20 min: “Cleanliness Honors God.” Elder discusses article with audience. Conclude with brief talk that reviews the counsel given in June 1, 1989, Watchtower, pages 15-20.
Song 75 and concluding prayer.

