The Service Meeting Equips Us for Every Good Work
1 The purpose of the Service Meeting is to motivate and equip us to share more fully in the preaching and disciple-making work. (2 Tim. 3:17) However, if we do not properly prepare for the meeting or we fail to apply what we learn, the benefits will be minimal.
2 Preparation in advance will help you to absorb the instruction more fully. Review the publications that will be used, and bring them with you so that you can follow along and be able to participate. Be an attentive listener, and take notes for later use.
3 The presiding overseer reviews the scheduled meeting parts carefully. Capable, qualified elders and ministerial servants are assigned to prepare them. (om p. 70) Congregations having few elders and ministerial servants may assign other qualified brothers to assist them. (km 10/76, Question Box) Each speaker should prepare thoroughly, adhere closely to direction provided, and make sure that he does not go overtime.
4 The meeting usually begins with announcements. The brother assigned should contact the presiding overseer in advance to find out what matters need to be mentioned. These may include letters from the Society or reminders about service arrangements or monthly reports. We may learn that there are sick ones who need to be visited or hear details of congregation activities planned for the future. Pay close attention so that you will be informed and ready to do your share.
5 When a meeting part calls for audience participation, prepare by reading over the material and looking up the scriptures. Think about how you plan to apply the suggestions and what kind of comments you can make to encourage others. You might illustrate the practical value of the instruction by relating a brief experience.
6 When there is a demonstration, try to picture yourself in similar circumstances, and think about what you would say. Note the arguments used and the line of reasoning. Try to recall what you said the last time you were in this type of situation, and consider how the points demonstrated can help you get better results in the future.
7 Participants in demonstrations and interviews should be well rehearsed in advance. Each one should know what he is going to say and what he is supposed to do on the platform. Unrehearsed parts rarely motivate or encourage the audience. Some come prepared to rehearse their part at the conclusion of the Watchtower Study so that they can practice on the platform and let the brothers handling the microphones know what will be needed.
8 The program will sometimes include a talk dealing with a specific congregation need or a timely Watchtower article. Listen closely, take the counsel to heart, and try to apply it.
9 We want to be “prepared for every good work.” (2 Tim. 2:21) The Service Meeting is one of the provisions Jehovah makes to aid us in doing that. Faithful attendance and a sincere effort to use what we learn will surely help us so that we can “fully accomplish [our] ministry.”​—2 Tim. 4:5.

