The Watchtower and Awake!​—Journals of Truth
1 The January 1, 1994, issue of The Watchtower, page 22, reminded us that our magazines publish “timely articles that have come to grips with the real needs of people.” We want to give these journals wide distribution. During the months of April and May, The Watchtower and Awake! are the featured offer, as well as any brochure except the School brochure.
2 The house-to-house work gives us our best opportunity to place these magazines. Effective informal witnessing and return visits also result in regular placements. Doing street work and calling on business establishments in our territory are likewise productive ways to increase distribution.
3 Subjects to Discuss: The April 1 issue of The Watchtower considers the subjects “A Better World​—Just a Dream?” and “A Better World​—At Hand!” This is certainly in keeping with the magazine’s objective to announce the Kingdom of God. The second article concludes by showing how an eternal paradise will become a reality under the rulership of Christ Jesus.​—Luke 23:43.
4 “Where Can You Find Trustworthy Guidance?” is the question discussed in the April 15 issue. The May issues will explore this subject further in the articles “Is Religion Filling Your Needs?” and “Why Read the Bible?” We should be able to start conversations readily with people who feel their life lacks meaning and purpose.
5 Increasing Placements: The January 1 Watchtower offered four suggestions to increase placements. We were encouraged (1) to be magazine conscious. When we read them, we should give some thought to which articles might be most appealing to people in our territory. Also, if we regularly carry copies with us, we may be able to place them with coworkers, neighbors, teachers, schoolmates, or shoppers.
6 We were reminded (2) to keep our presentations simple. Pick out one interesting point, and put it in a few words. If you can get the magazine into the home, it can do the “talking” to the person you met or others in the household.
7 Another need is (3) to be flexible. It is good to have different articles in mind to discuss​—one for youths, another for men, and something else for women.
8 Finally, we need (4) to set a personal goal for placements. While the congregation cannot set a certain quota, we can individually set a goal for ourselves. This may give us more incentive to be enthusiastic in offering the magazines. If we place a standing order for magazines, we may be prompted to do more.
9 We want others to know about God’s Kingdom. Let us take full advantage of the fine help the magazines provide in spreading the Kingdom message.​—Matt. 10:7.

