Be Bible-Study Conscious
 1. What is involved in fulfilling Jesus’ commission at Matthew 28:19, 20?
1 Jesus gave us a commission to “make disciples . . . , teaching them.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) Therefore, we want to be Bible-study conscious at all times, not just on the one weekend day that is specially set aside to offer Bible studies. The following suggestions may be helpful.
 2. To whom may we offer a Bible study?
2 Offer It: The more we offer a Bible study, the more opportunities we will have to obtain one. (Eccl. 11:6) Have you tried the direct approach? One congregation in the United States made a concerted effort to do this for an entire month. How thrilled they were to start 42 new Bible studies! Do not assume that interested ones you call on know that you give Bible lessons. When you return the next time, why not offer a study? If they turn you down, no harm is done. You can continue to cultivate the interest. Have you asked your neighbors, relatives, workmates, and schoolmates if they would like to study the Bible with you? You can also ask your Bible students if they have friends or relatives who would enjoy a study of the Bible.
 3. What helpful tool for starting studies do we have, and when may we use it?
3 Helpful Tool: A valuable tool for starting Bible studies is the tract Would You Like to Know the Truth? You may give it to householders whether they accept other literature or not. It may be used when working business territory, when doing street work, when sending letters, and when making return visits. It may also be left at not-at-homes. Why not carry it with you when using public transportation, when shopping, and while at work? The back page briefly explains our Bible study arrangement and introduces the Bible Teach book.
 4. How may we use the Know the Truth tract to start a study?
4 After handing the tract to the person, you might point out the questions on the front page and ask him, “Which of these questions are you most interested in?” Then consider together the answer from the tract, and read or paraphrase the back page, which explains our Bible study arrangement. You could then show him where more information on the subject is found in the Bible Teach book, offer the book, and make arrangements to return and continue the discussion.
 5. Why should we be Bible-study conscious?
5 Our territory still contains those yearning to learn what the Bible really teaches. By being Bible-study conscious, we will have increased opportunities to experience the joy of helping others onto the road to life.—Matt. 7:13, 14.

