Is Your Eye Simple?
 1. What does it mean to have a ‘simple eye’?
1 What our eyes focus on influences our actions. How appropriate are Jesus’ words: “If, then, your eye is simple, your whole body will be bright”! (Matt. 6:22) When our eye is spiritually “simple,” it is focused on a single purpose—the doing of God’s will. We put the Kingdom first and are not distracted by unnecessary material things or activities that interfere with the ministry.
 2. What could distort our view, but what will help us?
2 Need for Self-Examination: Our perception can be distorted by what the advertising media tells us we need or by what others have. Before pursuing an endeavor or a purchase that will require an investment of considerable time, money, or energy, it would be good to “calculate the expense” by asking ourselves, ‘Will this improve my service to Jehovah or hinder it?’ (Luke 14:28; Phil. 1:9-11) It is also wise to consider periodically how we could further simplify our life so as to do more in the ministry.—2 Cor. 13:5; Eph. 5:10.
 3. What do we learn from one sister who made adjustments to simplify her life?
3 When one sister began regular pioneering, she chose to keep her full-time job although part-time employment would have provided sufficient funds to care for her needs. She eventually concluded: “No one can slave for two masters. I had to sacrifice my wants to take care of my needs. I realized that material things just get old and I would wear myself out trying to get them.” Her circumstances permitted her to make adjustments to simplify her life and to change employment, allowing her to continue in the pioneer ministry.
 4. Why is it urgent that we maintain a simple eye now?
4 The urgency of our times makes it even more important that we maintain a simple eye. Every day that passes brings us one day closer to the end of this system of things and the start of God’s new world. (1 Cor. 7:29, 31) By focusing on the preaching work, we can save both ourselves and those who listen to us.—1 Tim. 4:16.

