From Our Readers
“From Bitterness to Love for God”
I really appreciated the article about Colette Regnier. (July 8, 1983) It gave practical suggestions on how to handle self-pity and provided her encouraging example. I have been using such experiences to help others appreciate that Jehovah is real. Other religious organizations don’t fully acquaint you with this tenderhearted God, Jehovah.
T. H., Rhode Island
I really enjoyed the experience in the article “From Bitterness to Love for God.” I liked this because some people don’t even preach their faith when they are perfectly healthy. This lady is in a wheelchair and yet she puts forth every effort to preach the good news. I’ll always remember that point when I am in the preaching work, and when I’m older I’ll try as hard as I can to follow her example.
J. D., Massachusetts
Laserite Versus Bread
I have just read your report on the installation of the Laserite and Autokon at your main offices. (June 22, 1983) When so many of our fellow humans are dying each day through lack of the most basic necessities of life, it seems very strange that a so-called Christian organization should spend vast sums of money on machinery, the only benefit of which is that they can produce more quickly your propaganda material. To respond glibly, “The people have no bread or water, let them read The Watchtower” is, to say the least, heartless. How Christlike!
C. R. D., England
We are surely not insensitive to the material needs of people. Many private and government organizations are helping to meet those needs, and this is commendable. Few, though, are helping with the very essential spiritual needs of mankind. Jesus emphasized the importance of such when he quoted the following from God’s Word: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matthew 4:4) Material assistance is at best only temporary. Jesus said: “Work, not for the food that perishes, but for the food that remains for life everlasting, which the Son of man will give you.” (John 6:27) We believe that it is Christlike to follow Christ’s teachings, and we will continue to spend our time, strength and money, not for propaganda, but to preach the good news of God’s Kingdom. This will help people not only to improve their life now but also to get a hope of everlasting life on a Paradise earth.​—ED.
Help in Marriage
Thank you for the fine articles on marriage. (July 22, 1983) I experienced some marriage difficulties, and if it were not for these fine articles I would surely have taken a wrong course.
R. P., Florida
I really appreciated the timely articles on marriage. (July 22, 1983) A problem arose in my marriage after I was told by my husband of two homosexual situations he had found himself in. I was greatly distressed, but with the help of counsel from God’s Word I decided I must make a go of it. I was helped to make the best decision for my happiness and that of my husband. It has made me appreciate that everything God tells us is for our own good.
G. D., United States

