Young People Ask . . .
How Can I Keep a Job?
“Blessed is he who has found his work; let him ask no other blessedness.”
DO YOU agree with those words of the 19th-century British historian and author Thomas Carlyle? Most youths would. A recent poll found that, of many teenagers surveyed, 84 percent rank steady work as a major life goal.
Yet it is becoming more difficult for youths to find and keep jobs.a From North America to Europe to Asia the total number of people who are now unemployed is higher than at any other time since World War II. As the world economy slides down, unemployment jumps up. Employed youths are among the first to suffer. Why? Because in tough economic times the working world says: “Last hired, first fired.” But do these words always have to ring true for you?
No, because job loss could be for reasons other than economic conditions, which latter you cannot control. What are they? Poor job attitude is one. Loss of value to the employer is another. These two can be changed. So even during an economic downturn, you may be able to hold onto your job if you
Have a Willing Attitude
“People who retain jobs are people who are willing to work and who show a willing attitude to do whatever the employer asks,” says Cleveland J. Jones, an employment specialist who helps people find and keep jobs.
“Let your employer see that not only can you follow instructions but you can do more than what is required without constant supervision,” advises Mr. Jones. “Because in a tight labor market, the workers who remain are not necessarily those who have been there the longest, but those who produce.”
Young Sal found this to be true. He says: “I always tried to accommodate my employer. I was willing to bend my schedule when necessary, follow instructions and be respectful to my supervisors.” This reminds one of the Bible verse: “Slaves, your job is to obey your human masters, not with the idea of catching their eye or currying favour, but as a sincere expression of your devotion to the Lord.” (Colossians 3:22, Phillips) Though the employee-employer relationship is different from that of slave and master, this principle still holds. Such attitude may keep you on the job, while others who are less cooperative are dismissed.
What is meant by “attitude”? It is your state of mind​—how you feel about your job, the people you work for and work with. A positive, cooperative attitude improves your chances of staying on the job; a negative, indifferent one reduces them. Your attitude will reflect on the quality of work you do. Your boss will judge your worth not only on your work output but also on your attitude.
Your attitude is not fixed forever as if it were cast in concrete. Attitudes are contagious. A wise proverb warns: “Keep company with the wise and you will become wise. If you make friends with stupid people, you will be ruined.” (Proverbs 13:20, Today’s English Version) Beware! A good attitude can turn into a sour, complaining one if you allow yourself to “make friends” with faultfinders. Avoid them like the plague, especially if you are a new employee!
If you are new on the job, fear​—fear of the unknown—​is a common emotion for the first few days. You may wonder: ‘Will they like me? Can I do the job? Will they like my work? I hope I will not look stupid.’ Here you need to be careful or your fears will nibble away on your positive outlook.
You can quicken your adjustment and calm your nerves by learning more about the company. Look, listen and read. Ask your supervisor reasonable questions about your job and your performance at the proper time​—it will not make you look dumb. Ask yourself, How does my job fit in with my department, with the overall company objective? The answers can help you to develop good work habits and job satisfaction, keeping your interest at a healthy level. This will also make it easier for you to
Get Along With Co-Workers
Skill alone does not guarantee a job. It takes a combination of skill and the ability to get along and work well with others. All jobs involve dealing with other people. Know the importance of good human relations and how to practice them. Nobody is an island. Even if you work in a room by yourself, sooner or later you will come in contact with people​—your supervisor will visit, and you will meet co-workers as you go to and from your work room. Following this advice helps: “If possible, as far as it depends upon you, be peaceable with all men.”​—Romans 12:18.
Do not think that someone is inferior because he is different. Respect his right to be different. No person likes to be treated with lack of respect; it makes him feel as if he is a nobody. Everyone likes to feel wanted and needed​—a somebody. Your fellow employees, your supervisor, yes, even the boss need to feel that they are somebody, and they will feel that way if you give them proper respect. This contributes to good morale and helps you to
Avoid Gossip
“It’s a bad pitfall,” says Sal, “because gossip could give you a poor impression of the boss or others.” The grapevine is not the best source of information. It may result in sour grapes for you. Rumors grow on the grapevine. They usually exaggerate a small truth into a distortion. So many rumors are false! Therefore, smother the urge to gossip.
No one appreciates a complainer. If something is bothering you on the job, don’t broadcast it through the grapevine. Go and talk to your supervisor. But before doing that, check to see if your attitude may be at fault. If the thing still bothers you, then make an appointment to talk with your supervisor, rather than burst into his office in a heat of rage and be sorry later for rash words. While there, avoid the snare of personal attacks. Keep to the facts. Be as clear and honest as you can be in describing the problem. Maybe you could begin with an opening statement such as, “I need your help . . .” or “I may be wrong, but I feel this way about . . .”
One very important thing required to keep a job is to
Be on Time
Two big reasons why people fail to keep a job are: being late for work and missing days from work. An employment and training director for a large industrial city said about youth workers: “They need to learn to get up in the morning, to learn how to take orders. If they never learn these things, it just perpetuates the unemployment syndrome.”
Sal learned the lesson of punctuality the hard way. “I lost my first job after just three months because of tardiness,” he sighs, “and this made it more difficult to find other jobs.” So to keep a job be at your work station ON TIME, and
Be Honest
Mr. Jones, job recruiter, says: “Honesty will help a person keep the job.” It prevents him from stealing not only material things but also time by taking needless breaks. An honest employee is trusted. For example, Morris is a 17-year-old witness of Jehovah who works at an exclusive clothing store that caters to the wealthy and the famous. He tries to follow Bible principles in his day-to-day life, even at work. This has helped Morris become more valuable to his employer.
“One day,” Morris begins, “the manager found an item in the stockroom, hidden inside some other clothing. One of the workers was stealing from the store. At closing time I went upstairs to the manager’s office and to my surprise all the employees were there. All the employees were kept there to be searched. I was the only employee excused from the search. That made me feel very good.”
Therefore, if you have a job, be thankful. Work hard to keep it!
[Footnotes]
“How Can I Get a Job?” and “How Do I Handle a Job Interview?” were considered in the January 22 and February 8, 1983, issues of Awake!
[Box on page 23]
What an Employer Looks for in Employees
● Punctuality and regularity
● Giving notice if expecting to be late or absent
● Compliance with company rules
● Honesty and dependability
● Amount of work compared with others
● Quality of work compared with others
● Respect for supervisor and co-workers
● Regard for company equipment
● Taking initiative
● Following directions
● Not a complainer
[Picture on page 22]
Which worker is more valuable to his employer?

