Who Will Care for the Refugee?
“SHARE your food with the hungry and open your homes to the homeless poor.” Thus spoke God by the mouth of his prophet Isaiah to those who were keen on religious ritual but dull of feeling for their fellowman. (Isaiah 58:7, Today’s English Version) However, few nations today can or will do this. Succumbing to selfishness or cultural, racial and religious prejudices, they shut not only ‘the door of their tender compassions’ but also their jealously guarded national borders. (1 John 3:17) Yet callously closing one’s eyes to the plight of millions will not make the problem go away. As long as there is political strife, as long as there is oppression, as long as there is starvation and poverty, there will be refugees. What, then, can be done?
World Government​—The Real Answer
A change in earth’s rule is the only real solution. And by this we do not mean some political change that would likely send still more millions fleeing. Rather, we refer to the Bible’s promise that God through Christ will take over the management of the earth. (Matthew 6:10) Does this seem incredible?
Not when you consider that God has a personal interest in the future of this earth. “He the true God, the Former of the earth and the Maker of it, He the One who firmly established it, who did not create it simply for nothing, who formed it even to be inhabited.” (Isaiah 45:18) In his due time he will intervene and strip earthly governments of their power to ruin.​—Daniel 2:44.
The effects on earth of this heavenly rule will be astounding. War and war weapons will be disposed of. (Psalm 46:8-11) “Plenty of grain” will be provided to feed all of earth’s populace. (Psalm 72:16) And there will be no more homeless ones. Earth’s inhabitants will “certainly build houses and have occupancy.” (Isaiah 65:21) No one will ever feel obliged to flee God’s benevolent rulership!
Jehovah’s Witnesses already give evidence of the Kingdom’s influence in their lives. For one thing, they practice neighborly love as part of their worship. (Matthew 19:19) During the recent Nigerian exodus Jehovah’s Witnesses in Ghana shared in feeding and providing overnight accommodations for the returnees.
But while such humanitarian efforts produce good, Jehovah’s Witnesses know that far more lasting good is accomplished by helping others to learn about and develop a faith in God’s Kingdom. God “will wipe out every tear from [our] eyes.” (Revelation 21:4) And never again will man suffer the agonies of the refugee.
[Pictures on page 11]
Under God’s Kingdom, never again will there be homeless people

