Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 2
Song 128
12 min: Local announcements. Call attention to information in article “Increase Magazine Distribution During April and May.” Invite publishers and pioneers to increase personal orders for these four issues of The Watchtower. Encourage all to share in magazine work the second Saturday of the month.
20 min: “Sharing Fully in March and April Activities.” Discussion of article with some audience participation. In discussing paragraph 3, inform congregation of last year’s local Memorial attendance. In conjunction with paragraph 4, inform congregation about the number who shared locally in auxiliary pioneer work in March and April of 1985 and encourage all who can to enroll as pioneers this year. In considering paragraph 5, tell brothers what older publications are on hand locally to feature in the field in March.
13 min: Making Good Use of the Topic for Conversation. Have brief demonstrations of effective use of current topic, showing how it can be tied in with the March literature offer. Encourage all to bring Reasoning book with them to next Service Meeting.
Song 181 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 9
Song 65
 8 min: Local announcements, accounts report, and Theocratic News.
12 min: “The Congregation Book Study.” Question-and-answer coverage, handled preferably by an elder who is a study conductor. Develop points needing attention locally.
25 min: Using Reasoning From the Scriptures on Return Visits. Talk and demonstrations. Paul compared our work to farmer who not only plants but also waters, then waits for God to ‘make it grow.’ Paul planted by bringing the good news; Apollos nourished and cultivated the field by further teaching. Apollos powerfully used the Scriptures to ‘water,’ and so do we by taking further Scriptural information to interested ones.​—1 Cor. 3:5-7; Acts 18:27, 28.
Young brother in audience raises hand, is glad he can now use Topic for Conversation in field but has not yet made return visits; unsure, not experienced in using Bible. What if householder has questions he cannot answer? Chairman invites brother to stage. Explains that Jehovah understands our needs and has provided assistance through organization. Shows how Reasoning book covers variety of subjects and questions. Explains how to locate information by use of index as well as list in front of book. Chairman briefly takes part of householder who expresses belief that when Jesus Christ returns, all will see him visibly. (Rev. 1:7) Chairman then helps locate information on pages 342 and 343. Young brother uses information from book, reasons with householder, and expresses satisfaction at being able to give answer, has more confidence now.
Chairman continues talk. Many people simply take literature without asking questions or showing particular interest. In many cases we can lay groundwork for return by raising a question. Demonstration: After offer is accepted, publisher refers back to topic and asks: “How can we know for sure that these conditions promised by God will come in our lifetime? I would like to stop by in a few days and point out the answer that Jesus gave to that question.” Householder readily agrees. Chairman asks publisher what is planned for return visit. Publisher refers to material under “Last Days” in Reasoning book and some points that will be used to build on what was previously discussed. Following these suggestions in the field may lead to a Bible study.
Conclude by pointing out that a return visit need not be a lengthy discussion, may use just two or three Scriptural points. May take several visits before householder’s spiritual appetite is awakened sufficiently for Bible study. (Matt. 5:3) Reasoning book can assist because it contains many points that people often wonder about and uses the Scriptures to answer. Encourage all to schedule time for return visits. Trust in Jehovah to draw honest-hearted ones to the truth.​—Acts 16:14.
Song 156 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 16
Song 197
10 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Emphasize Memorial week Bible reading. Outline local arrangements for the Memorial and encourage use of any invitations not yet distributed. Encourage all to share in magazine activity fourth Saturday of month.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Thorough Territory Coverage.” Questions and answers. Highlight points that apply to local territory. Include one or two good local experiences on working not-at-homes.
20 min: “True Peace and Security.” Five-minute talk on paragraphs 1-4. Have four short demonstrations using points in paragraphs 5-8. For paragraphs 5 and 6, take up demonstrations after Revelation 21:3, 4 has been read. Review demonstrations with audience as time permits and conclude with points in paragraph 9.
Song 97 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 23
Song 84
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs. May review appropriate counsel and suggestions received during last visit of circuit overseer or build up anticipation for next visit, if scheduled soon. Or talk based on article in January 1, 1986, Watchtower, “Jehovah​—Simply Grand!” Involve audience in discussion.
15 min: 1986 Yearbook. Elder conducts discussion with three or four exemplary publishers who review some interesting field experiences. Select from the following: See yb86, p. 16, par. 1; p. 18, pars. 4, 5; p. 21, pars. 1, 3; p. 22, par. 3; p. 29, par. 2; p. 33, par. 2; p. 44, par. 2. (May use other experiences too.) Encourage all to read entire 1986 Yearbook for great spiritual benefit.
10 min: Special Activity in April. Stirring talk by service overseer. Outline arrangements for field service. Remind congregation of how many are auxiliary pioneering in April and that it is not too late to turn in an application. Include comments from audience on how they are enjoying True Peace book and why they feel it will be beneficial for the territory.
Song 16 and concluding prayer.

