Presenting the Good News​—By Thorough Territory Coverage
1 As the number of Jehovah’s Witnesses continues to grow, we find that we are working our territory more and more often. In some areas, territories are being worked as frequently as once a week. This gives people more opportunities to hear and respond to the truth as we preach the good news of the Kingdom.​—Rom. 10:13-15.
2 Consider the island of Guadeloupe in the Caribbean. There is a ratio of one publisher to every 81 persons on that island. Obviously, they are covering their territory often, and they are getting results. They ended the last service year with a new peak of 4,064 publishers, and a total of 5,092 studies were conducted. For the past service year, they had a 14-percent increase.
REALLY COVER THE TERRITORY
3 While we may work the territory often, what can we do to ensure thorough territory coverage? For one thing, we can keep an accurate record of not-at-homes. If possible, try calling on these later the same day, as some people may be out for just a short time. As for others that we do not find at home on that day, endeavor to contact them on a different day and perhaps at a different time of day. Some have found that by making not-at-home calls, it takes about twice as long to work the territory. This means they are not calling so frequently on the same individuals. Nevertheless, they are doing a more thorough job of covering the territory.
4 If we are not able to make such calls soon, we should give the list to someone who can, maybe an individual who takes the group out on a different day. Thus, those who are not at home on weekends could perhaps be called on during the week.
5 Some houses that were formerly single-family homes have been converted into multiple dwellings, and we should endeavor to contact someone from each family. In some localities, separate homes are located behind houses fronting the streets, and we must be sure to call on those too. Thorough territory coverage would include contacting people who work in business establishments that may be in the territory.
6 Another aspect of thoroughly covering our territory is to follow up interest diligently. Where brothers have limited territory, they are more inclined to do this. They call back on everyone who shows interest, with a view to starting Bible studies. Do we also keep in mind such objectives?
COVERING UNASSIGNED TERRITORY
7 The Society sent to all congregations in the United States a letter dated January 1, 1986, explaining the matter of unassigned territory. If you are interested in working some of that territory and you have not already written to the Society, discuss this with the elders right away. While much of the unassigned territory is worked each summer by individual publishers or by congregations who make special arrangements, there are some areas that have not been covered for several years. How fine it would be if all unassigned territory in the United States could be worked this summer!
8 As we cover our territory repeatedly and strive to do so thoroughly, some householders may complain or ask why we call so often. By using one of the suggestions on page 15 of the Reasoning book, we may arouse their interest; otherwise, they might be disturbed by our frequent calls.
9 Thoroughly covering our territory with the good news will result in salvation to some who listen to us. (1 Tim. 4:16) In time, we will rejoice in saying, in the words of the apostle Paul, that we “no longer have untouched territory in these regions.”​—Rom. 15:23.

