Sharing Fully in March and April Activities
1 The apostle Paul exhorted the Corinthian congregation to be steadfast and always to have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) That counsel also applies to Christians living in this 20th century. In the spirit of Paul’s words, let us consider how we can share in the many theocratic activities arranged for March and April.
THE SPECIAL TALK
2 During the week of March 9, congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses around the earth will assemble to hear the special public talk entitled “The World’s Insecurity​—Is There a Solution?” A question on the minds of many people today is, How can true peace and security come to this earth? Since many view as hopeless the world situation with its violence, terrorism, and war, the information that will be presented is most enlightening. So make a special effort to invite all interested persons to hear this timely talk.
THE MEMORIAL
3 After sundown on Monday, March 24, anointed Christians around the earth, along with their faithful companions, the other sheep, will commemorate the death of our Lord Jesus Christ, remembering all that his death means in the lives of those serving the Grand Creator, Jehovah God. The worldwide Memorial attendance in 1985 was 7,792,109, and this year we expect to have many more honest-hearted ones associating with us on this most important occasion. Use your supply of printed invitations and put forth every effort to continue helping the many new ones who attend. Perhaps a study can be started with some. All can be encouraged to associate with Jehovah’s people on a regular basis.
PIONEER ACTIVITY
4 Year by year, March and April have proved to be excellent months in which to share in the auxiliary pioneer service. During March of 1985, over 45,300 enrolled. In April that figure rose to 100,145, the largest number ever in the auxiliary pioneer service in any one month in the United States. A few necessary adjustments in your schedule may allow you to enjoy this field of activity along with others in your congregation. Each week the congregation should be informed of how many have been approved to serve as auxiliary pioneers. This may encourage others to enroll. No doubt many elders and ministerial servants, along with some of their family members, will be able to share in this feature of the service, thereby setting a fine example for others.
THE LITERATURE OFFER
5 During March, efforts will be made to distribute certain older books that the congregation may have on hand. These will be offered at the reduced contribution of 50¢ each. (See announcement in January Our Kingdom Ministry for details.) This campaign gives congregations the opportunity to get the older books into the hands of people who will benefit from reading them.
6 In April we will be offering the book True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? The contribution for this publication will be $1.00. With 1986 having been designated by the United Nations as the “International Year of Peace,” the message found in the True Peace book is very timely, since it focuses attention on the real means for bringing peace.
7 As you can readily see, March and April offer us “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” Bearing in mind the yeartext for 1986, “Go . . . , declare abroad the kingdom of God,” all of us have our assignment of work to perform in declaring abroad God’s Kingdom in the hands of Christ Jesus, the genuine hope for true peace and security.​—Luke 9:60.

