True Peace and Security
1 Last summer at our “Integrity Keepers” Convention, it was announced that the book True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? would be used in the field campaign for April and May. In this way a mighty shout of praise would go up earth wide to Jehovah, “the God who gives peace,” and to his Son, the “Prince of Peace.”​—Rom. 15:33; Isa. 9:6.
2 How appropriate that we will have this publication to offer during the United Nations-proclaimed “International Year of Peace”! The subject of peace and security is on the minds of many people. Some expect the United Nations to bring it about. But Jehovah’s servants know that God’s Kingdom in the hands of Christ Jesus is the instrument Jehovah will use to bring in true peace and security.
3 Do not overlook the word of caution included in the convention announcement. We are not suggesting that the UN proclamation for 1986 is in fulfillment of 1 Thessalonians 5:3, which states: “Whenever it is that they are saying: ‘Peace and security!’ then sudden destruction is to be instantly upon them.” We do not know how long Jehovah will permit the nations to campaign for peace and security; however, this may be a significant step leading to further developments as we draw closer to the “great tribulation.”​—Matt. 24:21.
PREPARE TO OFFER THE BOOK
4 Before the April campaign, we should read portions of the True Peace book to acquaint ourselves with its overall content. If we read the material in the first two chapters, we will no doubt find several excellent points to use as we offer the book in April and May.
5 After discussing the Topic for Conversation with a householder, we might say: “This happy future is very near when there will be true peace and security. I have with me a timely publication on that subject. Notice this comment in the first paragraph of the book.” We can read paragraph 1 and then continue by saying: “The illustration here at the start of chapter 1 gives an artist’s conception of what the earthly Paradise will be like. Wouldn’t you like to live with your loved ones in such a peaceful and secure environment? [Allow for response.] This publication will help you to see how you can find such peace and security, and it is yours for a contribution of just $1.00.”
6 As another presentation, after reading Revelation 21:3, 4, we could turn to page 19 and say: “There is an interesting paragraph that drives home how much we need that happy future promised by God.” After reading paragraph 24, we could continue by saying: “Note also the thought on the next page in paragraph 28. [Read the paragraph.] This book has been published to help you to learn about God’s solution to world problems and to understand better what the future holds. It is yours for a contribution of $1.00.”
7 Be sure to call back on people who have previously shown interest and offer this book to them. We might find it appropriate to remind the householder of previous conversations about God’s promised New Order and then say that we have a book that outlines what we have to do to find true peace and security. We could turn to page 91, read paragraph 12, and then say: “What else is required to assure survival? This book goes into detail as to God’s requirements from this point on. It is offered for a contribution of $1.00.”
8 This would also be a fine publication to place with individuals who have studied in the past but who have not yet taken a stand for Jehovah. We could read paragraph 1 on page 175 and then point out that the book will help them to understand what they must do now to make the right choice, so as to find true peace and security.
9 Let us make plans now to offer True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? during the special campaign in April and May. We will be helping others to find true peace and security from “the God who gives peace.”​—Rom. 16:20.

