They Did Jehovah’s Will
A Father Who Is Ready to Forgive
IT HAS been called the greatest short story ever written—with good reason. Jesus’ parable of a father’s love for his lost son is like a window through which we obtain a magnificent view of God’s compassion for repentant sinners.
Lost and Found
A man had two sons. The younger one said to him: ‘I want my inheritance now, instead of waiting until you die.’ The father complied, likely giving him a third of all that he owned—the legal share for the younger of two sons. (Deuteronomy 21:17) The youth hastily gathered his possessions and traveled to a distant land where he spent all his money pursuing a life of debauchery.—Luke 15:11-13.
Then a severe famine occurred. In desperation, the young man accepted work as a swineherd—a despicable occupation to a Jew. (Leviticus 11:7, 8) Food was so scarce that he began craving the carob pods that served as food for the pigs! Finally, the young man came to his senses. ‘My father’s servants are better fed than I am!’ he thought to himself. ‘I will go back home, confess my sins, and beg to become as one of my father’s hired men.’a—Luke 15:14-19.
The young man trudged back home. No doubt his appearance had changed considerably. Still, his father recognized him “while he was yet a long way off.” Moved with pity, he ran to his son, embraced him, and “tenderly kissed him.”—Luke 15:20.
This warm reception made it easier for the young man to unburden himself. “Father,” he said, “I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy of being called your son. Make me as one of your hired men.” The father summoned his slaves. “Quick!” he commanded. “Bring out a robe, the best one, and clothe him with it, and put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet. And bring the fattened young bull, slaughter it and let us eat and enjoy ourselves, because this my son was dead and came to life again; he was lost and was found.”—Luke 15:21-24.
An elaborate feast got under way, including music and dancing. The older son heard the commotion while returning from the field. When he learned that his brother had come home and that this was the cause of the festivity, he became indignant. ‘I slaved for you for many years, and I never disobeyed you, yet you never gave me a young goat to enjoy myself with my friends,’ he complained to his father. ‘But now as soon as your son who wasted your wealth returns, you put on a feast for him.’ ‘Child,’ his father tenderly replied, ‘you have always been with me, and all that is mine is yours. But we just had to rejoice because your brother was dead and came to life. He was lost and then was found.’—Luke 15:25-32.
Lessons for Us
The father in Jesus’ parable represents our merciful God, Jehovah. Like the lost son, some people for a time leave the security of God’s household but later return. How does Jehovah view such ones? Those who return to Jehovah with sincere repentance can be assured that “he will not for all time keep finding fault, neither will he to time indefinite keep resentful.” (Psalm 103:9) In the parable, the father ran to welcome back his son. Likewise, Jehovah is not only willing but eager to forgive repentant sinners. He is “ready to forgive,” and he does so “in a large way.”—Psalm 86:5; Isaiah 55:7; Zechariah 1:3.
In Jesus’ parable, the father’s genuine love made it easier for the son to summon the courage to return. But consider: What would have happened if the father had disowned the boy or in an angry outburst told him never to come back? Such an attitude likely would permanently have estranged the lad.—Compare 2 Corinthians 2:6, 7.
In a sense, then, the father laid the groundwork for his son’s return at the time he departed. At times, Christian elders today must remove unrepentant sinners from the congregation. (1 Corinthians 5:11, 13) In doing so, they can begin paving the way for the sinner’s return by lovingly pointing out the steps that he can take for future reinstatement. The memory of such heartfelt entreaty has later moved many spiritually lost ones to repentance and has prompted them to return to God’s household.—2 Timothy 4:2.
The father also showed compassion when his son returned. It did not take long for him to sense the boy’s sincere repentance. Then, instead of insisting on extracting every detail of his son’s transgressions, he went about the business of welcoming him back, and he expressed great pleasure in doing so. Christians can imitate this example. They should rejoice that a lost one has been found.—Luke 15:10.
The father’s conduct leaves no doubt that he had long anticipated the return of his wayward son. Of course, that is only a shadow of the yearning Jehovah has for all who have left his household. He “does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Peter 3:9) Those who repent of their sins can therefore be assured that they will be blessed with “seasons of refreshing . . . from the person of Jehovah.”—Acts 3:19.
[Footnote]
While a slave was viewed as being part of the household, a hired servant was a day laborer who could be dismissed at any time. The young man reasoned that he would be willing to accept even the lowliest place in his father’s household.

