Kingdom Proclaimers Report
The Cleansing Power of God’s Word
IT IS reported that most drug addicts return to their habits following release from rehabilitation centers. But God’s Word can accomplish what clinics usually fail to do. (Hebrews 4:12) Many have been helped by God’s Word and spirit to overcome drug addiction and apply the counsel: “Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God’s fear.”—2 Corinthians 7:1.
This is exemplified by an experience from Myanmar. A man who struggled with drug addiction for many years relates: “I became a drug addict while in my teens. Many times I tried to break free, but I could not. In order to support my drug habit, I turned to stealing. As a result, in 1988, I was sent to prison for one year.
“Following my release from prison, I resumed contact with former friends. Soon thereafter I returned to the drug habit. This self-destructive course led family members to cut off all association with me. Additionally, my rebellious attitude caused many in the community to be afraid of me, and they too began to avoid me.
“Then one day the inevitable happened—I suffered a drug overdose. I was sent back to prison, this time for three years. Although life in prison was very harsh, somehow I managed to survive.
“After returning home from prison, I asked my family for forgiveness for past mistakes. They graciously accepted me back, but once again, friends induced me to return to my former ways.
“Finally, my grandmother recommended to a local pastor that I attend a certain Bible school. The pastor agreed. However, before I started attending, my aunt, who is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, said that if I really wanted to learn the Bible, I should study with the Witnesses.
“I went to the Kingdom Hall and was introduced to a man who agreed to study the Bible with me. Many in attendance greeted me warmly and made me feel welcome.
“After I began to study the Bible and attend Christian meetings, the craving for drugs was replaced by a desire to draw close to God. One year later I had progressed to the point of dedicating my life to Jehovah God, and I symbolized that dedication by water baptism.
“Recently, while going from house to house, I met one of my former drug associates. He could not comprehend my dramatic turnaround. This opened the door for a witness, and I was able to speak to him about the Kingdom hope.
“At last I have found true purpose and meaning in life. Thanks to God’s help and counsel from his Word, I am now able to help others rid themselves of the demoralizing habit of drug abuse.”

