From Our Readers
Hormones  I appreciated the article “Hormones​—The Body’s Marvelous Messengers.” (April 22, 1992) You succeeded in describing one of the most important and complex of all life-​sustaining functions in simple terms. Knowing these things makes me appreciate the Creator of our marvelous body even more!
L. F., Italy
I found the article very helpful, as I just started studying this subject in school. The article was well developed and presented in a way that made the functioning of hormones easily understood. Awake! is truly an educational magazine.
D. A. J., Côte d’Ivoire
My friend, who is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, supplies me regularly with your literature. Your article on hormones was of special interest to me. I am in my second year of training to become a nurse, and as we are currently studying the hormones, I was particularly pleased to have your article at hand. I am very grateful to have found Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Y. L., Germany
Curfews  Your article “Young People Ask . . . Why Do I Have to Be Home So Early?” struck home. (May 8, 1992) I used to stay out until late into the night and try to creep into the house​—only to find my mother waiting for me on the porch. At times she scolded me with tears in her eyes. When I think back, I regret being disobedient. I know now that anyone who does not pay attention to Jehovah’s counsel is bound to suffer calamity.
T. A., Japan
Virginity  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Is It Normal to Be a Virgin?” (March 22, 1992) I remember being pestered by my classmates, asking if I had had sex. Even today, workmates ridicule me when they find out the Bible condemns sex before marriage. However, promiscuous conduct results in unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases. Following Bible principles to avoid sex before marriage is a protection.
G. I. I. L., Brazil
I am 17 years old and am an expectant mother. I failed to listen to the Bible’s counsel. My mind really opened when I read your article. I had never looked at virginity as being ‘a badge of honor.’ Now I wish I had listened to the Bible’s counsel.
M. R., United States
Thank you so much for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Stay a Virgin?” (April 22, 1992) At a very tender age, I wandered from one meaningless relationship to the next, searching for love. I was bitterly disappointed for many years. You cannot imagine the heavy load of guilt, shame, and despair I carried all those years. As I read your footnote on page 27 about God’s forgiveness, I was scarcely able to contain the great flood of emotion and gratitude that flowed from my heart toward God.
A. M., United States
Incredible Insects  Just a short note to express my appreciation for the article “Incredible Insects Put Man’s Flying Machines to Shame.” (May 22, 1992) I work in the research division of a high-​tech company, and the pride man takes in his achievements is all too clear. The complexities of nature, however, are seldom acknowledged as the handiwork of the Creator. I once overheard two scientists discussing the geometric beauty of a eucalyptus tree seed. Their conclusion? “Isn’t Mother Nature wonderful?” Their minds are truly blinded.
P. G., United States

