Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Steadfastness Brings Rich Rewards
JESUS foretold that his followers would be persecuted, and so did the apostle Paul, as stated at 2 Timothy 3:12: “In fact, all those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.” But steadfastness in serving Jehovah God brings rich rewards.
□ This was true in a town on the northeastern coast of Malaysia. Though he was a staunch Buddhist who lectured his children severely, a father was unable to prevent his three daughters and three sons from studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Even his wife showed interest in the truth. Then one day a neighbor mocked him: “How can you lose control over your children and let them become Jehovah’s Witnesses? All my children stick with me and our ancestral Buddhist religion. You are pitiful!”
The father rushed home threatening to beat up the sister who conducted the studies with his children. However, the children calmed him down and continued studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses and attending meetings with the support of their mother.
Finally, however, the father summoned the whole family before him. “Choose,” he demanded, “between me and staying at home and becoming Christians and leaving the house.” The oldest son, a very soft-spoken boy, immediately began packing to leave. “No!” shouted the father. “Since you are all rebellious children, it’s better for me to die.” He then rushed out of the house, pursued by the family, who begged him not to kill himself. Impressed by their pleas, he went back home.
Time passed. The father began noticing the good effect of Bible truth on his children’s behavior. One day he met his mocking friend, now a rather sad man, who said: “I am very disappointed with my children. They are cheating me and stealing from me.” But the father whose children were studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses said: “Oh, my children are different! They are very kind to me and have even helped me to pay my car loan while I was unemployed.”
Today, three daughters and the mother are baptized. One son is a special pioneer. And the formerly staunch and irate father? He is now friendly and has attended the Memorial.
Jehovah rewarded the son and his three sisters as well as their mother for their steadfastness to Him. They are now zealous Kingdom preachers, making Jehovah’s heart glad.​—Proverbs 27:11.

