Young People Who ‘Trust in Jehovah’
YOUTHS do not have a monopoly on beauty, nor have the elderly cornered the market on wisdom. (Compare Proverbs 11:22; Ecclesiastes 10:1.) Rather, those who possess lasting beauty and genuine wisdom are the ones who trust in Jehovah and wholeheartedly say about him: “You are my God.”​—Psalm 31:14; Proverbs 9:10; 16:31.
Around the world there is a growing multitude of beautiful people, both young and old, who show their wisdom by serving God and preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom. For example, consider eight-year-old Sabrina.
Sabrina lives in Germany and is in the second grade. She is the first one of Jehovah’s Witnesses to attend her school. Sadly, she was the target of her schoolmates’ insults until the day the teacher asked the students to bring their favorite book to class. Sabrina decided to bring My Book of Bible Stories. The night before, although nervous, she prepared well for class. Since there were 26 students in her class, she knew that she might not have much time. But she was determined not to let anyone interrupt her presentation and was certain that Jehovah would help her. On the appointed day, the teacher asked who had brought along a book and would like to be the first to show it. Surprisingly, only Sabrina had brought one. She stood before the class and began speaking, reading and showing pictures from the book and explaining that everything was based on the Bible. In closing she asked: “Who would be interested in having this book?” She gave one copy to the teacher, and during the next few days, she gave ten additional books to some of her classmates. The teacher’s only comment on her presentation was: “I have never seen anything like it.” She gave Sabrina an A for her work.
In fact, many young Witnesses are happy publishers of the good news at school. Another example is Erika, an 11-year-old publisher in Mexico. She has been taught from infancy to love Jehovah. Her schoolwork is outstanding. One of her assignments was to prepare material on AIDS and addiction to tobacco and alcohol. She prepared well, using the Awake! magazine, and received the highest marks. Her teacher asked where she got the information and was given the magazines that contained articles on those subjects. Later, the teacher used these magazines to discuss the subjects with the entire class. Because of Erika’s conduct, her respect for her teachers, and her high grades, she has qualified for gifts, diplomas, and partial scholarships. Nevertheless, she feels that her greatest achievements have been that she has identified herself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, has been able to place Bible literature, and has exalted God’s name.
Then there is Shannon, a ten-year-old boy who lives in New Zealand. He has only one good eye; the other was lost to cancer when he was a baby. When Shannon was seven, his mother began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. However, not long after she started her Bible lessons, she began living with a man without the benefit of marriage and decided to stop her studies. Shannon begged that his Bible study continue. His wish was granted. The Witnesses kept calling, and eventually all three members of the household studied the Bible and made spiritual progress. After getting legally married, Shannon’s mother and stepfather were baptized.
One day Shannon and the circuit overseer’s wife were in field service together. A householder asked Shannon: “What happened to your eye?” “I got cancer in it, and it had to be taken out,” he answered. “Soon Jehovah is going to give me a new one in Paradise, and that’s what we are here to tell you about.”

