Announcements
“IT IS NEARER THAN YOU THINK” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The month of October has been designated “It Is Nearer than You Think” Testimony Period. Do you believe, as do the majority of the readers of The Watchtower, that the final end of all wickedness is very near at hand, much nearer than the uninformed think? If you do, you will undoubtedly desire to join with us in the activity to which this October Testimony Period is to be devoted, namely, the taking of subscriptions for the Awake! magazine. Awake! the companion magazine to The Watchtower, is issued on the 8th and 22nd of every month. It plays a very important part in awakening the people to the nearness of the expression of God’s wrath at Armageddon. You will want your friends and neighbors to have the timely information it presents, and you can aid them by offering a year’s subscription for Awake! at the regular rate of one dollar. We shall be pleased to send you instructions and also helpful forms on which to report your activity as well as to secure the essential information so that the subscriptions you obtain will be correctly addressed.
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY ANNUAL MEETING OF CORPORATE MEMBERSHIP
The annual meeting of the members of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society will be held on Sunday, October 1, 1950, at ten o’clock in the forenoon. The place of the meeting will be at the registered office of the Society located in the Wabash Building, 410 Liberty Avenue, Pittsburgh 22, Pennsylvania. The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society is a nonprofit Pennsylvania corporation, and at this, the 1950 annual meeting, regular business of the corporation will be transacted. Those who are members of the corporation will receive the regular notice of the meeting together with proxy forms by mail in the usual way, and this announcement supplements the letters of notification. As soon as convenient after receiving the regular notice and proxy form each member should fill out and mail his proxy to the office of the secretary of the Society, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn 2, New York. This should be done by every member whether attending the meeting in person or not, and we should like to have all of the proxies in not later than September 15, 1950.
NEW PUBLICATIONS RELEASED
Watchtower readers will be interested in learning that several new publications were released at the recent International Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses in New York city. So that our friends not associated with a company of Jehovah’s witnesses may obtain personal copies, these publications are here listed, together with a brief description and the contribution necessary to obtain each.
The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures is a completely new translation of the Greek Scriptures, accomplished entirely by consecrated hands. It is accurate to the latest Bible research and contains many splendid study helps. $1.50 a copy.
“This Means Everlasting Life” is a new 320-page bound volume which clearly sets forth the prospects of everlasting life as based upon the promises of God. Publishers’ edition 50c.
Can You Live Forever in Happiness on Earth? is a new 32-page self-covered booklet. It contains the text of the public talk delivered by the president of the Watchtower Society, N. H. Knorr, at the International Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses. 5c a copy.
Evolution versus The New World. This is a 64-page, colored-cover booklet which presents the evidence for both evolution and the Bible’s new world. 5c a copy.
Defending and Legally Establishing the Good News. This new 96-page booklet provides a review of the laws and helpful suggestions to those interested in the guarantees of freedom. 10c a copy.
Songs to Jehovah’s Praise. This new 96-page songbook contains 91 songs, many of which are new. The music is beautiful and the words are in complete harmony with God’s expressed purposes. 15c a copy.
Any of the above publications will be mailed to you postpaid. Send your order and contribution to Watchtower Society, 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn 1, N. Y.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 8: Taking in Life-giving Knowledge, ¶1-19.
Week of October 15: Living According to Superior Knowledge, ¶1-20.

