“Stick to Your Work”
WORK that is worth while is very profitable. The expending of energy and time in doing things and accomplishing tasks, if they are of the right sort, in the end proves to be beneficial. But if you do not know what work is worth while and of the right sort, then pick out a noble example of a profitable workman and follow him. Look to the perfect example Christ Jesus! He became the slave-servant of his Father Jehovah God. “My Father has kept working until now, and I keep working,” he said. (John 5:17, NW) Jesus’ ministry was great and marvelous, his work was righteous and good and of enduring value. Profitable to him? Indeed so, for when it was completed he was exalted to the highest position in the universe next to the Most High God. In addition, his work was most beneficial to all others who will love and serve Jehovah God.
And how did the Model Workman go about his praiseworthy task? “Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the people.” (Matt. 9:35) This noble Example showed his disciples how to put to work their faculties, talents and abilities in God’s service work. On one occasion he sent them out on a preaching tour with instructions to cover the territory, town by town, place by place, and to stick to it until they had completed the circuit.—Luke 9:1-6; Matthew 10.
But that did not complete the work; more of the same thing must follow. Disciples of Christ as workers would have to go to “all nations” before this important work would be finished. (Matt. 28:19, 20; Acts 1:8) That meant there was still much work to be done. A lot of territory would have to be covered. Much time would be required. Those privileged to engage in it would therefore have to stay with it and not walk off the job.
But how is one today able to stick to this work begun nearly two thousand years ago? An important question, especially in these “last days”, when the Devil is furiously attacking the Lord’s servants in an all-out effort to drive them from their Kingdom work. (1 Pet. 5:8, 9) Make no mistake about it, Satan and his demons will use every trick in the bag in an effort to turn you away from serving Jehovah God. If persecution from the world fails, he may bring opposition from your close relatives. If these snares fail to catch you the wicked one may bait the trap with material things—money, position, glittering entertainment, worldly lusts and vanities. But if you want to get on with your Theocratic work never take time out to sample these attractions. Keep your hands on the plow. Look straight ahead. Never “look back”.—Luke 9:62; 17:31, 32.
Answering the question directly: Stick to your work of gospel-preaching by following the wonderful patterns set by Christ and his disciples. Your time, strength and opportunities are limited. Use them as a true follower of Christ should. Be diligent in attending the instructive assemblies provided for you in the Kingdom Halls of Jehovah’s witnesses. Be regular in your preaching work from house to house. Call back on people that are interested. Start Bible studies in the homes of these people of good will. “Watch yourself and watch your teaching; stick to your work; if you do that, you will save your hearers as well as yourself.”—1 Tim. 4:16, Mo.
How profitable is this work! Not only will you and your hearers have joys with contentment and peace of mind now, but you will gain life in God’s new world.

