From Our Readers
Cosmic Disaster?  I am ten years old, and I enjoyed the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Will a Cosmic Disaster Destroy Our World?” (December 8, 1998) It helped me to see that no cosmic disaster will destroy our planet because Jehovah wants us to live on a paradise earth.
J. P., United States
Bloodless Surgery  I want to thank you for your article “Doctors Take a New Look at Bloodless Surgery.” (December 8, 1998) I was quite excited about reading it, since I had great success with such treatment when I had a total hip replacement. I shared a hospital room with someone who had the very same procedure but with blood. I was able to leave the hospital in less than a week. But he had to stay, since viral complications had set in.
N. H., United States
Quit Smoking!  The article “You Can Quit—We Did!” was special to me. (December 8, 1998) I have just finished studying the Bible with a smoker. She comes to all our meetings, but she has hit a spiritual roadblock because of her addiction. I have given her other articles on quitting smoking, but I pray that this article will finally help her to overcome her obstacle.
E. C., United States
Chemicals and Health  I recently started a chemistry course, and when I saw the December 22, 1998, issue, it immediately captured my attention. As always, you know how to present a complicated subject in such a way that everyone can understand it. Since pollutants and chemical products recognize no borders, there would need to be international agreements in order to solve the pollution problem once and for all. But man’s selfishness and greed prevent this from happening. Thankfully, Jehovah knows how to solve this problem for good.
C. V., Canada
Loss of Parents  Thank you for writing such a wonderful article, namely, “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Survive Without My Parents?” (December 22, 1998) It helped to reassure me of Jehovah’s ability to protect us young ones if we lose our parents. I have not lost my parents in death, but I often wonder what would happen to me if they died. The fine example of Horacio encouraged me greatly.
M. J., Trinidad
Repetitive Strain  It is hard to express what you feel when you find an article that deals with a problem that you have. That was the case with the article “Repetitive Strain Injuries—What You Should Know.” (December 22, 1998) I had this type of injury involving my wrist, and only now do I realize what caused it. The advice on how to deal with this problem helped me a lot.
S. T., Yugoslavia
I work at a firm that produces equipment to protect workers against repetitive strain injury (RSI). RSI has aroused curiosity and controversy, but your article was first-rate. It dealt with the subject in an unbiased and independent manner. Our board of directors was so impressed that it ordered copies to be sent to our representatives throughout Brazil.
J. P. M., Brazil
I am a housewife with an outside job that involves loading heavy wooden boxes. Right from the start, I damaged my back, arms, and wrists. About two years ago, I started stretching my muscles for ten minutes before getting up. I thought that those exercises would help, but this article gave me far more helpful methods of coping. In the future, I will give my coworkers a copy of this magazine.
K. Y., Japan

