They Are Determined Not to Give Up
THE October 22, 1998, Awake! had a short article about 17-year-old Matt Tapio’s long battle against cancer. It was entitled “He Did Not Give Up.” Matt eventually died on April 19, 1998, while the article was being prepared.
The article quoted what Matt said in a recorded interview that was played at a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and this proved particularly moving to young readers. Here are some of their sentiments.
Deseree, a 20-year-old from Canada, wrote of the impact it had when she and her partner in the full-time ministry read how much Matt loved Jehovah: “We burst into tears. We proceeded to weep for quite a while. . . . How all of us, especially young people, can learn from Matt to ‘do what you can now! . . . Whatever happens, don’t ever stop witnessing about Jehovah’!”
Erin, from Kentucky, U.S.A., wrote: “I couldn’t help but cry as I read his experience. Being a healthy 16-year-old girl, I want to do as much as possible for Jehovah while I can, so that one day, when he is resurrected, I may personally tell Matt how much his experience encouraged me.” Similarly, Maria, a 15-year-old from Texas, U.S.A., explained: “I am determined to do all I can for Jehovah while I still have my health. Matt’s advice has been very helpful.”
Jessica, a youth from South Carolina, U.S.A., wrote: “I’m 13 years old, and I personally found it extremely encouraging to see another youth full of so much zeal and love for Jehovah. Just reading about Matt Tapio’s condition made me realize how blessed I am to be healthy. I’ve added Matt’s name to my list of brothers and sisters I plan to greet in the new system!”
Sara, from San Severino Marche, Italy, wrote: “The article moved me to tears. I am 17, the same age as Matt. Since I am in good health, my desire is that I never stop speaking about Jehovah, just as Matt never did, even during the most difficult moments of his life. Thank you for publishing experiences like this, which motivate us to give the very best of our lives, of our time, and of our energies to Jehovah.—Ecclesiastes 12:1.”
Sustained by the Resurrection Hope
Whether one is young or old, it is common today to face the reality of death. A 19-year-old named Heidi observed: “In the last two weeks, I have lost two people close to me in death, and the only thing that has kept me going is the hope of seeing them in the resurrection.
“I am very proud of Matt and his firm resolve to keep witnessing to others despite being so sick. He is a true example for all, and I look forward to giving him a hug in the resurrection.”
A mother named Nancy wrote: “I read the article amid my tears. Our daughter Rachelle passed away from a brain-stem tumor on January 11, 1996, just two days before Matt realized his goal of getting baptized. Rachelle was only six years of age when the tumor took her life, but like Matt, she was a fighter, and she always tried her best to please Jehovah.
“It will be a glorious day when Jehovah will give us the blessing of seeing our daughter healthy and able to enjoy her childhood to the fullest. Like Jairus and his wife, we will be beside ourselves ‘with great ecstasy.’”—Mark 5:42.
Shannon, from Georgia, U.S.A., wrote: “This story showed me that you can be strong for Jehovah even if you are sick. Even though I don’t have a major sickness now and have always had good health, I will save this to read later on.
“I hope that Matt’s parents will find comfort in the resurrection hope. I too lost someone very close to me in death—my grandmother, in 1995. I’m so thankful that I know Jehovah and that I have the hope of seeing my loved ones again.”
A Spanish teenager wrote: “My parents instilled in my four sisters and me the value of attending Christian meetings. But after reading this experience, I realize that we could come to view them as routine. I would like to congratulate Matt’s parents on giving him such a good spiritual education. They are an example for all of us. I would like them to know that although it is difficult to cope with this kind of emptiness, Jehovah is always by our side.
“I hope to meet Matt in the new world. I would like to say to him that he is a great example and that we all remember him in our hearts. Jehovah is a God of the living, and Matt is now in the same place as my sister who died four years ago—in Jehovah’s memory. (Luke 20:38) Matt, my sister Eva, and many other faithful servants of God are present there. Jehovah is wonderful, and he will never leave us.”
Truly, the hope of the resurrection is marvelous. May we treasure it, and may we show our appreciation for this grand promise by remembering our Creator daily, even as his dear Son, Jesus Christ, did.
[Picture on page 24]
Deseree
[Picture on page 24]
Erin
[Picture on page 24]
Maria
[Picture on page 24]
Jessica
[Picture on page 25]
Sara
[Picture on page 25]
Heidi
[Picture on page 25]
Nancy, with her husband and daughter Rachelle
[Picture on page 25]
Shannon

