R72 : page 1 

VOL. I. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., FEBRUARY, 1880. 

NO. 8. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KErrH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
H. B. RICE, . . . W. OAKLAND, CAL. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R72 : page 1 



"THE LAW SHADOWS." 

The numerous sacrifices and observances of the Mosaic Law as 
recorded in the first five books of our Bible were given in 
minute detail and observed with scrupulous exactness; not 
because there was really any good in them, "for by the deeds of 
the law shall no flesh be justified in God's sight," and "the blood 
of bulls and goats could never take away sin," but these were 
used as pictures or shadows of realities which were future. (Heb. 
1:10) The amount of reliance which can be placed in the 
accuracy of these pictures can be judged from the strictness with 
which the Jews were obliged to obey them, and the severe 
penalties (generally death) administered in case of violation; and 
also from the words of our Lord; "One jot or one tittle shall in 
no wise pass from the Law until all be fulfilled" (Matt. 5:18). 

This being true, how anxious should we be to closely read the 
meaning of these pictures which required years for their 
execution, and which shadow forth minutely all the various 
features of the work of at-one-ment between God and all 
sinners. 

It is not all one picture but there are quite a number. We find 
them, so to speak, all grouped together. There are usually three 
or four pictures to each group, related to each other as being 
views of the same subject from various standpoints of 
observation; and then all the various groups of subjects are 
related to each other, and when all are properly arranged before 
our mental vision, each shows some special feature of the work 
of atonement and each adds value to the other. But why the 
mixture- why not told in plain words that all might understand? 
For the same reason has the spirit chosen to cover and hide 
beauties of truth under these types that he has in the book of 
Revelation and elsewhere hidden truth under symbols, i.e., that 
it might be known only as it becomes due, and then only to 
those "to whom it is given to know the mysteries of the 
kingdom, but to those that are without (not disciples) all these 
things are spoken in parables" and symbols and types. Luke 
8:10. Let us, asking wisdom of Him who giveth liberally, 
endeavor to arrange before our minds some of these pictures and 
try to drink in their true meaning and thereby be refreshed. 

Anointing the High-Priest 

This, under the "Law," was the ceremony for the installation to 
God's service as high-priest. The form is described in Exod. 29 
and Lev. 8. Aaron was anointed to his office with a peculiar oil 
not used on any one except the high-priest, and not lawful for 
any to have or to make under penalty of death. Exod. 30:25-32. 
This doubtless typified the Holy Spirit. 

For this service Aaron was washed and attired in the holy 
garments of "glory and of beauty." Exod. 28. Then the anointing 



oil was poured upon his head. Thus was Jesus, our High-Priest, 
robed and anointed. He needed not the washing as did the type, 
for he was "holy, harmless, undefiled." The linen "coat" 
represents him as pure and righteous; the girdle is the symbol of 
a servant; the linen girdle showing him to be a "righteous 
servant. " The robe of blue of one piece shows his heavenly 
nature (blue is the color of the peaceful heavens). The Ephod, 
made of two separate pieces, suspended the one before and the 
other behind him by two golden clasps which rested upon his 
shoulders, representing, we think, the two great covenants, the 
front one the Abrahamic and the back one the "new" covenant. 
These, though separate and distinct, are both seen to be 
dependent on him for their support and accomplishment. (It 
should be remembered that we are in him heirs of glory, not 
under the "new covenant," which is still future, but in the 
"Abrahamic covenant.") They were made of "gold, blue, purple, 
scarlet and fine twined linen," representing the blessings 
contained in those covenants: gold -spiritual blessings; blue- 
heavenly peace; purple— royalty of earth; scarlet— the 
unchangeable character of the covenant (scarlet was regarded as 
the most enduring of all colors); and linen- that righteousness 
was one of the conditions. As there was "none righteous" but 
Jesus, humanity would have failed to be benefited by these 
glorious covenants had not God "laid help upon one who was 
mighty." Both covenants would have fallen to the ground had 
not the golden clasp given them a resting on him. 

There was a "curious girdle" of the same materials as the ephod, 
which bound these two pieces (covenants) to him around the 
waist. This designates him a servant of a "curious" or peculiar 
kind; a servant combining the various qualities expressed by the 
gold, blue, purple, scarlet and linen. Yes, he was the Royal 
servant the "messenger (servant) of the covenant." 

Over the front part of the ephod was the breastplate; It was 
suspended by a golden chain from the gold clasp of his 
shoulders and was fastened to the ephod below by a lacer 
through golden rings-this fastening being so concealed 
underneath, that to the observer it might appear to be part of the 
ephod. This breastplate represents beautifully The Mosaic Law. 
It is not a part of the Abrahamic covenant "It was added. " Gal. 
3:18. As the Jew regarded them, not seeing the hidden 
connection, the covenant to Abraham and "the law which was 
430 years after" were all one. But Paul shows that God 
according to the covenant intended to justify all in his "seed." 
The Law emblem, was one of the most beautiful of the High 
Priests garments, made of the same materials as the ephod. It 
had in it, set in gold, twelve precious jewels, in which were 
engraved the names of the twelve tribes. It was bound on his 
heart, indicating that he was able to carry the Law as a covering 
of his inmost affections and that as a breastplate of 
righteousness," it covered him. "The Law of his God was in his 



heart." Psa. 37:31. That which condemned all others was his 
pleasure, "I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea thy law is 
within my heart." Psa. 40:8. 

This breastplate was two spans long and one wide folded in the 
middle so it really was a span long and a span wide double. The 
size- a span indicating that the law was the full measure of a 
perfect man— his ability. Jesus was the only perfect man who 
ever kept "The Law." Being double, of the same size and same 
measure represents the Jewish and Gospel ages. Fastened at the 
fold or center to the golden clasps illustrates how his cross-his 
death— was the dividing point and how we are "justified in him 
from all things." So that borne by him we are in God's sight 
justified. It illustrates too what we have found frequently 
elsewhere taught, viz: That the two ages are of equal size and 
equal measure. " The Jewish, a perfect type or picture of this age. 

The breastplate was studded with jewels set in gold 
representative of the true Israel. "They shall be mine saith the 
Lord in the day that I come to make up my Jewels." Thus 
fastened in gold— imbedded spiritually in Jesus we his jewels, 
have "The righteousness of the Law fulfilled in us." Rom. 8:4. 
Aaron as he stood forth clothed in these "garments of beauty and 
glory" was a beautiful figure of our High-Priest who appeared 
among men clothed by the Father with power and authority, as 
his representative to carry out his covenant promises. 

As he stood there, beside him stood the animals for sacrifice 
showing that the sacrifices were as much a part of God's pre- 
arranged plan as the covenants or any other feature. He was 
anointed with oil as Jesus was "Anointed with the oil of 
gladness above his fellows." "He giveth not the spirit by 
measure unto him. " John saw and bore record that Our 

R72 : page 2 

High-Priest was thus anointed. (John 1:32, Luke 4:1.) The holy 
oil was poured upon the head but "ran down even to the skirts of 
his garments." (Psa. 133:2.)-thus representing how we, the 
members of his body, are all to be partakers of the same 
anointing after our head. This oil began to reach the body on the 
day of Pentecost and flows on down the ages anointing all who 
are truly his- covered by his robes. 

The sons of Aaron-"his house" represents us-"whose house are 
we"— as they were washed and clothed in a linen coat and 
girdled, we are taught that if we be of his house we are justified 
thereby and reckoned of God-Righteous. They had bonnets 
while Aaron had none, (He wore a mitre on his forehead and a 
gold crown inscribed "Holiness to the Lord. ") Their heads were 
covered to illustrate that they were not the head, but "under 
authority; " illustrating how God gave Christ "to be the head over 
all things to the church which is his body." 1 Cor. 1:22 and 4:15. 



They were girdled showing that we are servants under him and 
reckoned as anointed in him. 

Aaron as he stood robed and anointed represented the entire 
church, head and body-Jesus and his church. "The seed" in 
whom "all the families of the Earth shall be blessed." They are 
covered with the covenants and authority of their position and 
anointed for their work. But remember, -the anointing oil must 
flow down and cover every member of the body and this 
requires the entire gospel age for its accomplishment. 



R73 : page 2 

Consecrating the Priests. 

This work under the Law (Lev. 8:14-35.) was typical of a work 
done for and by our High Priest and those who are members of 
his body or family. It illustrates our entire consecration-how 
Jesus was obedient, even unto death and how all who are his 
must be crucified with him. 

The bullock for the sin offering was brought "and Aaron and his 
sons laid their hands upon the head" of it. Thus saying, this 
sacrifice represents us. From that moment, all that happened to 
the bullock— represents what was to be done to Jesus, and his 
body-the church. The bullock is delivered up to "the Law" - 
(represented by Moses) to meet its demands. To thus meet the 
demands of the law it must be slain. "And Moses slew it." Then 
he applies the blood to the horns of the altar. The "finger" of the 
"Law" thus pointed out that the altar of earthly sacrifices was 
acceptable to God by reason of the shed blood (the life given), 
and that all who realize the power of the altar (horns are 
symbols of power), must recognize first the blood which 
sanctified it. 

The blood poured at the bottom of the altar doubtless represents 
that through his blood spilt, (life given) even the Earth was 
purchased back from the curse which sin brought upon it. (See 
Eph 1:14. "Unto the redemption of the purchased possession.") 

And Moses took the bullock, his hide, flesh, &c, and burnt them 
with fire without the Camp. (Ver. 17.) Thus Jesus freely gave 
himself up and submitted to entire destruction of the flesh. 
Though his flesh was holy, harmless, undefiled, yet he was 
"made a sin offering on our behalf," (2 Cor. 5:21. "Diaglott") 
and his flesh suffered the destruction, which otherwise would 
have come upon all men. And we, if we would be indeed 
members of his body must share with him the ignominy. 

But while the flesh, &c, was destroyed for sin, God accepts of, 
first, the blood (life), and second, parts of the inward life- 
producing organism and the fat, representative of love. In the 



sacrifice God recognizes the love that prompts the sacrifice and 
though the law took a part and burnt it, yet it must offer the 
balance as unto the Lord. It shows too that love and obedience to 
God were the motives that prompted the sacrifice "Lo, I come to 
do thy will O God, I delight to do thy will O my God." 

There are two Rams. These both represent as did the bullock, 
Christ Jesus and his body, the Church, but are different pictures 
and call our attention to other features of the same sacrifice. 

First as a burnt offering: Aaron and his sons laid their hands 
upon its head; it represents them. It is killed, its blood sprinkles 
the altar, and Moses "cut the ram into pieces, and washed the 
inwards and legs in water," and "burnt the head and the pieces 
and the fat. " Thus Jesus and his church-head and body are 
being presented during the entire Gospel Age before God on the 
altar -the head was laid there first, and since all who are "dead 
with him," (Col. 2:20, and 2 Tim. 2:2) are "cleaned by the 
washing of water through the word," and are reckoned as with 
him on the altar before God; its being burnt on the altar shows 
how God accepts this "as a sweet smelling savor" or perfume. 

The second ram— "of consecration" —shows what effect the 
sacrifice will have upon us, as the first showed how God 
received it. Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon its head-it 
represented them. And Moses slew it, and took its blood- 
(consecrated life) and put it upon each separately-(Consecration 
is an individual work— we must each stand forth and be 
consecrated to God.) And he put it upon the tip of the right ear, 
thumb of right hand and great toe of right foot. Thus by our 
consecration, we are enabled to have the "hearing of faith" and 
appreciate God's promises as none but the consecrated can. Our 
hands are consecrated so that whatsoever our hands find to do, 
we do it with our might right as unto the Lord. Our feet are 
consecrated so that henceforth we "walk not as other gentiles," 
but "walk in newness of life," "walk in the light," and even "as 
ye received Christ, so walk in him. " 

The choice portions of the ram, inwards and fat, representing 
our best powers and all our inward and outward (fat) affections, 
are taken in our hands, and waved, passed to and fro, before the 
Lord, representing the fact that a consecrated offering is not 
given the Lord for the moment, or day, or year, but continually 
we keep our affections and powers uplifted before our Father 
never ceasing until accepted of him as having finished our 
course. And Moses took them off their hands, God's acceptance 
being shown by fire. Fat probably typifies Love. When the love 
of our inmost being is laid upon the altar, it helps to increase the 
fire of God's acceptance. The more love (fat) there is connected 
with our consecration to God, the more quickly will it be 
accepted by Him as entire consecration. 



Upon this wave offering, while in their hands, was laid three 
cakes from a basketful which they were to eat (representative of 
all their bread.) It was necessary that these three- the 
unleavened cake, the cake mingled with oil, and the wafer made 
of flour and honey and anointed with oil-should be upon and 
thus recognized as rendering acceptable our offering. By these 
we acknowledge Christ, as we present ourselves to the Father; 
by the first we acknowledge the purity (no leaven) of "The man, 
Christ Jesus." The second cake mingled with oil shows him as 
our High-priest, "filled with the Spirit" (oil). The third wafer 
shows our appreciation of Him as our Glorified Lord. (Wafer 
made of fine flour mingled with honey, sweets of paradise.) 

These acknowledgments of Him are necessary to the acceptance 
of our consecration. 

And upon him as our heavenly food —manna we his priests feed 
during the gospel age. The cakes were only warmed but not 
burned- living bread, "of which a man may eat." (God never 
allowed honey to be used in sacrifice. [Lev. 2:2] There was no 
leaven in any of these cakes- "He knew no sin.") 

The anointing oil mingled with the blood of consecration was 
sprinkled over them [Ver. 30], showing how we may know that 
our consecration is accepted. 1 John 5:8, says: "There are three 
that bear record [witness] : the spirit and the water and the blood, 
and these three agree in one" [testimony]. And here are the three 
in the type bearing harmonious testimony that these consecrated 
ones are accepted in the beloved. Water is the symbol of the 
"word" ["washing of water by the word."] And in the type 
Moses takes the place of water as representing "The Law," the 
oil representing The Spirit, and the blood representing "the price 
of our peace. So through the word's testimony the blood is 
applied and with it comes the Spirit-sealing us sons of God and 
joint heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 

The boiling [Ver. 31] of the flesh of consecration was no part of 
the sacrifice, it was merely the preparing of the portion which 
they ate. It was all to be disposed of [Ver. 32] showing how we 
are entirely consecrated and none of our time or powers wasted- 
-all used as consecrated. 

The seven days of consecration [Ver. 33 and 35,] shows again 
that we are consecrated to God's service, not a part of our time 
only, but all of it, for seven is the complete number in scripture 
and signifies all or the whole of whatever it is applied to ("Seven 
Seals," "Trumpets," "Plagues," "Stars," &c.) Vs. 36 shows the 
completion of the work of consecration. 

There never was, perhaps, a time when it was more necessary 
than the present, for seeing to it that we "be dead with him," and 
our every ability waved before Him that he may accept and 
make use of our talents to His glory. Especially is it of interest 
to us to examine if it be true (as we believe) that very soon all 



the members of the body will be accepted with the head— a sweet 
savor, and all the members be consecrated and the work 
finished. And if we fail to be among the priests now during the 
time of consecration, we cannot expect to be one with them 
when they begin their service for the people in the "ages to 
come"— when these same Priests (now despised of men but a 
"sweet savor to God.") shall have the title of King added, and 
with their head-Jesus, rule and bless all nations. Do you wish to 
be amongst those who shall sing to the praise of our great High 
Priest? "Thou hast made us unto our God Kings and Priests and 
we shall reign on the Earth. " If so, be fully consecrated now, for 
"If we suffer with him we shall also reign with him. " 2 Tim. 
2:12. 



R73 : page 2 

A Plain Way of Stating It. 

Here is a sentiment from a man of God, who was never thought 
to be either fanatical or heterodoxical: "Any man who does not 
desire Christian perfection, and who does not constantly make it 
his aim to attain it, may set it down as demonstrably certain that 
he has no true religion. " 

These are the words of Albert Barnes. We hardly know of any 
more emphatic or radical statement concerning Christian 
perfection than this. Had it come from some modern preacher of 
holiness, or "high priest of sanctification," it would have been 
thought extremely ultra, and inexcusably uncharitable. 



R74 : page 3 



THE SCULPTOR. 

I saw a sculptor all intent 
Upon his marble white, 
And all his energies were bent 
To mould it day and night. 

With mallet hard, and tools of strength, 
And many strokes severe, 
The block was made to feel at length 
That skillful hands were near. 

And I beheld a child look on, 
And gaze with wondering eye; 
She saw the splinters, one by one, 
In all directions fly: 



The doubts that tilled that simple mind 
Were hard to understand, 
Like curious things that children find 
Upon the ocean's strand. 

The marble chips, at every stroke, 
Were scattered one by one, 
When childish doubt broke out and spoke, 
"Father, why waste the stone?" 

"It is," he said, in accents mild, 
"By strokes and heavy blows, 
That as the marble wastes, my child, 
The more the statue grows." 



—Selected. 



R74 : page 3 



Province of Faith. 



The province of faith is to apprehend truth. Truth is 
independent; error is a perversion of truth. To believe a lie, 
never makes it true, but is a fraud on one's self. To believe a 
truth, does not make it true; to disbelieve it, cannot destroy it. It 
is independent of us, but we are dependent on it. 

Truth is the proper food of man (Matt. 4:4.), and a large share of 
it must be received by faith, whether it pertains to the past, 
present or future. Thus it is true that we must live by faith. Faith 
is to truth, as eating is to bread. Without eating, man will die; 
but if he would have good health, he must do more than eat. 
Exercise is essential to life. So while we live by faith, it is not by 
faith alone. All faith and no work, will kill spiritually, as truly as 
all eating and no work will kill naturally. We greatly value faith, 
"For without it, it is impossible to please God; he that cometh to 
God must believe that he is, and that he is the re warder of them 
that diligently seek Him," (Heb. 11:6.) We please God when we 
obey him, and by this means we form a character like His own. 
In an important sense it is the Christian's life-work to come to 
God, and success is to the diligent seeker. He is revealed in one 
sense in the statements of His word, but he is revealed to the 
heart, when his statements are understood, and the spirit of 
obedience is essential to understanding. (John 7:17.) We are to 
grow in grace and in knowledge. 

Faith is fundamental; it is the basis of character and life, and 
also of hope. The death and resurrection of Christ are primary 
facts of the gospel, and, rightly understood, are a key to the plan 
of salvation. He was put to death in the flesh and quickened by 
the Spirit into a new and immortal life. The cross was to him the 
turning point between the natural and the spiritual. It was thus 



the key of hope for the world. When He died He met man's legal 
necessities, or removed all legal encumbrances. He destroyed 
the enmity between the world and God's law, which enmity was 
represented in the typical dispensation by the law of carnal 
ordinances. That law was the "middle wall" between Jew and 
Gentile-a typical distinction which is not recognized under the 
gospel. As soon as it is out of the way, the Jew and Gentile are 
alike before God, and both are reconciled to God by the cross. 
(Eph. 2:16.) The death of Christ thus met the legal claim on 
universal man, and secured his deliverance from the legal curse, 
which was death. Christ arose a conqueror, leading captivity 
captive. He brought life and immortality to light, as He had also 
made both possible for man. When He rose, it was the dawn of 
light on our dark world, the key of hope, a glimpse of 
immortality. These great facts of the past we receive by faith, 
and the past and the future are linked together. What has been 
done for Jesus is God's promise unto us. "He that raised up the 
Lord Jesus shall raise up us also, by Jesus." (2 Cor. 4:14.) He 
has given him the key— the power over death, and in addition, 
"the power of an endless life." (Heb. 7:16.) 

Faith is thus shown to be the foundation of hope, and hope 
maketh not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in 
our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto us." (Rom. 
5:5.) We can thus see the relation of faith, hope and love; "the 
greatest of these is love. " Without faith, neither hope or love 
would be possible; but love, by which faith now works, will 
continue when faith is ended in sight, and hope has been 
realized. Faith and hope are temporal, but love is eternal. Faith 
as a foundation is essential, but without love as a working 
power, a faith that could even remove mountains is worthless. (1 
Cor. 13:2.) 

"Through faith we understand that the ages (worlds) were 
framed by the word of God." These and "all things were made 
by Him (Christ) and for Him. " All that God has done is in 
reference to the plan of the ages, of which, as we have seen, the 
death and resurrection of Christ is the key. So by faith we grasp 
the fullness of Christ in the work of the ages, which is a glorious 
expression of the infinite wisdom, power and love. "Faith is the 
substance (basis) of things hoped for; the evidence of things 
unseen." Faith deals with the future and with the invisible. The 
future is our hope, our reward; the invisible is our strength for 
the work of life. It makes the invisible as if it were visible, and 
the future as if it were present. We are enabled to "look not at 
the things which are seen, but at the unseen." (2 Cor. 4:18.) 
Faith explains this paradox, and by the presence of the invisible, 
strengthens us to bear the afflictions of this life, which are but 
for a moment, and enables us to lay hold upon the eternal. There 
are given us in the Bible and also in the Christian's experience, 
many illustrations of the action of faith in reference to the 
unseen, present and future. The examples of faith given in the 



eleventh of Hebrews show the combination. They acted because 
they believed in the invisible God, and because they looked 
forward for the fulfillment of his word. They believed "that God 
is, and that He is the rewarder." Faith works; work secures 
reward. We observe that God did not say to the ancients, 
"believe." but he gave them something to do; and yet their 
obedience was the best possible evidence that they did believe, 
and their faith was approved. By faith Abel offered the sacrifice, 
which was valuable because it pointed forward to the sacrifice 
of Christ, for which his body was prepared. 

Enoch walked with God; he did not stand still, but walked; 
grasping by faith the presence and companionship of the 
invisible God, and was rewarded by translation, "that he should 
not see death. " Abraham obeyed God, on account of his faith, 
both in going out to the unknown land, and in the offering of his 
son Isaac. In both cases he grasped the future, seeing Christ and 
the heavenly country. (John 8:56 and Heb. 11:16.) The Lord's 
appearing to Abraham and others in human form doubtless 
illustrated the presence of the invisible. 

Moses refused royal honor in the court of Pharaoh, choosing to 
suffer affliction; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches 
than the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect unto the reward, 
and endured as seeing Him who is invisible. (Heb. 11:23-27.) 

The unseen world is the source of wisdom, strength and comfort 
to the pilgrims as disciples, as soldiers and as afflicted ones. The 
ministration of angels, under the all-wise and loving care of our 
Lord, is a great revealed truth, and full of comfort. 

We do not believe in the ministration of departed human spirits, 
but regard that idea as a perversion of the Bible teaching. The 
angels are not disembodied men. Man, when created, was "made 
a little lower than the angels." The angels rule in this world; "but 
unto the angels hath He not put in subjection the world to 
come.. .but what is man that thou art mindful of him?" "Thou 
hast put all things in subjection under his feet." (Heb. 2:5-8.) If 
angels are disembodied men, the above statement cannot be true, 
for in such a case the "world to come" would, as well as the 
present, be subject to angels. While we believe Paul, then we 
must discard the ministration of human spirits. But angelic 
ministration is a great and important fact in God's plan for the 
development of the ruling element of the future world. It 
doubtless deserves more 

R75 : page 3 

implicit faith than it often receives. When we are permitted from 
the standpoint of future glory to look back, we may see how 
much more fully they served us than we realized. In hours of 
danger and affliction their services are needed, and freely 
tendered. Their services might be not only more fully realized, 
but more common, were they expected. Unbelief, self- 



confidence and self -protection by foul means, doubtless grieve 
our angels, "which do always behold the face of our Father in 
heaven." (Matt. 18:10.) We cannot doubt that in hours of deep 
affliction, comfort and strength are often experienced, coming 
from the invisible, though not expected and its source not fully 
acknowledged. Our Savior himself in his earth life needed and 
received the help of angels. In His mental agony, in view of the 
coming ordeal, while he was in the garden praying that if it were 
possible the cup might pass from him, and sweating, as it were, 
great drops of blood, "there appeared an angel unto Him from 
heaven, strengthening Him." (Luke 22:43.) It was not possible 
for the cup to pass. He must drink it to the very dregs. His life 
was needed, but it was not enough; He must be obedient unto 
death, even the death of the cross," and he obeyed. (Phil. 2:8.) 
He could not escape, but He could receive strength to endure; 
and it seems that as soon as His help was withdrawn, He died. 
His death, not the pain He endured, met the legal necessities of 
the race. "The wages of sin is death. " Many followers of Christ 
have found help in time of need by coming to the throne of 
grace. He who suffered and was supported by angels is now 
their Lord, and, as His servants, they now minister to the heirs of 
salvation. (Heb. 1:14.) 

The importance of faith cannot be over-estimated, unless other 
things of importance are in our estimate crowded out. The past, 
present and future, we grasp by faith; we work by faith; we live 
by faith; we walk by faith; we endure by faith, as seeing the 
invisible; and waiting for our reward, are carried forward, so 
that all we expect to realize in the eternal life is now, by faith, 
possessed and enjoyed. 



Thanks be to God for the earnest of our inheritance. 



J. H P. 



R76 : page 3 

The ascending grade of the ages is obvious, each having better 
secular and spiritual facilities than its predecessors. And- 
strange infatuation —each has been jealous of the next to come, 
insisting that it had exhausted infinite mercy, grace and skill. 
What a lift forward the brief visit of Messiah gave the world. 
Though so humble, what fertility and power of growth in his 
gospel, infusing inconceivable vigor in every field of human 
enterprise and all under hostile gentile authority. What may be 
expected in the next age, when government shall co-operate 
with grace? The cross and the crown; Jesus condemned as a 
felon, mocked, spit upon, and crucified, then crowned and 
adored King of all the earth, suggest the contrast.— Selected. 



R75 : page 4 



The Cross of Christ. 

In the cross of Christ I glory, 
Towering o'er the wrecks of time; 
All the light of sacred story, 
Gathers round its head sublime. 

The cross as the representative of the death of Christ and plan 
of redemption, has always been to the Christian the center of 
attraction, and to glory in the cross the chief mark of the 
Christian's joy. The estimate in which it has been held by men in 
general has marked this line between the Church and the world; 
so that while the Church clings to it as the ground of all its 
hopes, it has been to the world the stumblingstone or the butt of 
contempt. What is precious in the sight of God and the hearts of 
His chosen, is foolishness to men in general. 1 Cor. 1:22-31. 

[Because some of the children of God have, under peculiar 
influences, and for a time, undervalued the cross, it does not 
change this general principle.] 

The value of the cross as the center of interest, the basis of hope 
and the key of truth is beautifully illustrated by the two equal 
cherubims, looking inward to the Mercy Seat, where God's 
presence in mercy appeared; representing, as they do, the 
equality of the Jewish and Gospel dispensations, between which 
at the "Fullness of time" our Lord came, and, meeting the claims 
of both, as the great antitypical Offering, was slain for us. Under 
the former dispensation those who understood the typical 
offerings, looked forward to the cross, and in the gospel 
dispensation we, by faith inspired by the Spirit and aided by the 
simple ordinances of the gospel, look back to the same central 
point. There, at the cross, the Church, old and new, meet by 
faith, and, bowing before Christ, our "Mercy Seat," witness the 
manifestation of the infinite mercy; for in Christ as the "Mercy 
Seat," God meets with man, and there they taste the sweets of 
grace and begin to "rejoice in hope of the glory of God." 

To remove from the Bible, if it were possible, the cross of 
Christ, and its relative teachings would virtually destroy it. He is 
the golden thread extending through it as a web from end to end, 
giving it strength, beauty and its real worth. Without him it 
would be an uninteresting arrangement of words, an empty case, 
a comb without the honey, a shell without the kernel, or the 
body without the life; and we, poor, sinful, dying men would 
pass on without one ray of light or hope to the future, dark and 
all unknown; and the cross is the center of interest and hope, 
around which, as bees around the honey, God's people have 
always clustered, drawing from it their joy, strength and life. 
The cross is also the key of truth in all that pertains to man, his 
nature, his life, and his relation to God. It is the basis of the 
atonement, the resurrection and restitution, and, while it does 
not of itself secure eternal life to any, it makes that life possible 



to all. God, in the gospel, provides for man's necessities, both as 
a sinner and a mortal. Because He was mortal, sin killed him, 
and "so death passed upon all men." Rom. 5:12. Mankind being 
dead (so counted even before execution), one died for all. 2 Cor. 
5:14. The man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all. 1 Tim. 
2:5,6, and so receives the right and power to deliver the 
captives. Heb. 2:14,15. If the gospel did not provide for man's 
necessities, it would not be what the angels announced: "Glad 
tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all people." "Testified in 
due time. " 

As a treasure-house containing all we need— resurrection from 
death, pardon for sin, and immortality for our mortality-the 
gospel becomes a glorious expression of the Father's love. The 
wisdom, power and love of God are all engaged for man's 
salvation, and all find expression in the gospel of Christ, the 
center of which is the cross. We do not take the ground that a 
perfect knowledge of the relation the cross sustains to the other 
elements of the gospel is necessary in order to have a share in 
the benefits of the atoning sacrifice. The primary benefits are 
universal and unconditional, as was the curse through Adam. 
"As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." It 
is doubtful, too, if one in ten of the saints of God have even 
understood that much, and yet they have secured and enjoyed a 
share in the great and special salvation, by the impartation of the 
Holy Spirit, the salvation which the atonement makes possible 
for all. It is not necessary to understand the philosophy of 
atonement in order to be reconciled to God, any more than it is 
necessary to understand the science of astronomy in order to 
enjoy the benefit of the light of the sun. It is, however, the 
privilege of a child of God to learn all he can of what the Father 
has revealed. And we freely take the ground that no theory of 
man's nature, loss in Adam, restitution, hope and destiny, can be 
true, that ignores or belittles the doctrine of the cross. Such 
theories dishonor Christ, though not always purposely, and by 
casting into the shade certain comforting truths of God's great 
plan, they certainly hide many rays of Father's love, and 
therefore greatly mar the enjoyment of the Christian's life. As 
God has revealed nothing in vain, the more perfectly we can see 
the relation of His various truths, the better we will understand 
Him, and thus, by sympathy with Him, or rather fellowship of 
His Spirit, we shall be enabled to cultivate and grow up into the 
qualities of character most pleasing to Him, and which will best 
fit us for His purposes here and hereafter. 

The doctrine of the cross underlies the doctrine of atonement, or 
loss in Adam and gain in Christ, both being unconditional, and 
hence the price or ransom paid by the man Christ Jesus, must 
determine both the nature and extent of the loss to mankind by 
Adam. More than was needed would have been useless, and that 
God's wisdom would not give; less than was needed would not 
redeem, and God's love could not withhold. 



The darkness of the theological dogmas of the Church has 
doubtless for many reasons cast a mist over the simplicity of the 
teachings of the cross. Life was the nature and extent of the 
forfeit of Adam, and in him of all. "For the wages of sin is 
death. " "Dying thou shalt die, " was a process culminating in 
death. "Sin, when it is finished (not when it commences) 
bringeth forth death. " But what kind of death, natural or 
spiritual? we are asked. The mother church and nearly all, if not 
all, her daughters answer, spiritual death. The theological 
writings are full of such teachings. That is nothing new, and for 
some of us to accept it would be to take a long stride backward. 

But to answer the question, "What kind of life, " we resort to the 
Divine key-the cross, and ask, what kind of life did the "man 
Christ Jesus" lose? That must settle it, and the fog will clear 
away from all minds who will look at the facts. Mark, it is not, 
"what kind of life did the pre-existent Word lose (if He lost any) 
in becoming a man?" for it was the "man Christ Jesus" that gave 
His life a ransom for all. "He died for our sins." He took man's 
nature for the express purpose "that He, by the grace of God, 
should taste death for every man," "Even the death on the cross." 

This gives us clearly to understand that it was human life he 
gave as a 

R76 : page 4 

ransom. Hence it was the same kind of life that required 
redemption. It was not in Christ's case a necessity as in the case 
of a sinner, but by voluntary offering as a Redeemer. Spiritual 
death is a state of sin. "You hath he quickened who were dead in 
trespasses and sin. " But Christ was not a sinner, and could not 
therefore die a spiritual death. In his obedience lay the divine 
efficacy of the price. Sinners need conversion, but Christ did 
not, and "As in Adam all die so in Christ shall all be made alive, 
Christ the firstfruits" &c. 

So this passage can have no reference to conversion, or coming 
to the knowledge of the truth. 

This is evident also from the further statement, "They that are 
Christ's at his presence" [parousia] Christ's are not then counted 
but raised to immortality, hence this passage can have no 
reference to conversion, but is a positive declaration that all 
mankind will be restored to life by the Lord Jesus Christ. 

The ransom paid secures to Christ the power to raise the dead. 
Life restored is the proper basis of hope, the ground on which 
man must build, hence the cross is the basis of man's hope of 
glory. No wonder then that Paul should say: "God forbid that I 
should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

J. H P. 



R76 : page 4 

The Wedding Garment. 

The wedding garment is the end and object of Christian effort. 

If Christians are represented as running a race, it is that degree 
of swiftness which enables them to secure the prize, if, as 
fighting a battle, it is that ability which secures to them the 
victory. It is, in short, that preparation which renders them fit for 
the kingdom. 

Some teach that it is the creed, written or otherwise, the articles 
of faith to which men subscribe, that constitutes that covering. 
Hence the degree of purity of a man's belief would be the index 
to his fitness for the kingdom. But it is written, "Without 
holiness no man shall see the Lord. " Such teachers must then 
define holiness as a perfect theology. 

Others teach that the wedding garment is a character "without 
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing," such as God will build in us 
if we hold our hearts in obedience to Him. 

Both sides must agree that the wedding garment is 
righteousness. The Bible so defines it. Rev. 19:7-8. What then is 
righteousness? The word means a condition of being right. 
Humanity naturally is in a condition of being wrong, and 
because faith has power to change that condition and make them 
right, it is accounted for righteousness. Thus Abraham was 
justified by faith, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness. 
Although, perhaps, not blameless in character at the time, yet 
Abraham possessed that which would result in holiness, and 
God counted the work begun in him, as already finished. "To 
him that worketh not, but believeth in Him that justifieth the 
ungodly, his faith is counted to him for righteousness." Rom. 
4:5. That is, the seed sown is viewed in the light of its unfailing 
results, and the possessor is thus freed from guilt. 

Articles of belief differ from faith, In that faith describes a 
condition of heart as well as mind. The one may produce fruit; 
the other must. If truth be believed and obeyed, it becomes faith, 
and is therefore a means of obtaining righteousness. Truth 
sanctifies, Truth cleanses. It does not cleanse itself, but us. 
"Now ye are clean through the words I have spoken unto you," 
said Christ. Hence the cleansing of the church is not the 
cleansing of its theology, 

R76 : page 5 

but of its members by means, perhaps, of its theology. 

I think the statement not too broad, that the entire purpose of 
Revelation is to purify, elevate and establish the character of 
God's children. Truth is the great means used in the attainment 
of righteousness. The word of God is profitable... that the man 



of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good 
works. 2 Tim. 3:17. Thus holiness is still the object and must not 
be confounded with the means; for truth must be obeyed to 
make us righteous, and it is not the amount we believe, but the 
amount we obey that benefits us. Hence we cannot make a man's 
creed the index to his character, for God above can read the 
heart. 

Righteousness is Godliness, or God-likeness, and Christ has 
said, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father in heaven is 
perfect. " 

Christ came to illustrate to our bedimmed conscience the 
Father's perfection, and in Him is fulfilled all righteousness. 
Does not His life thus amply define and illustrate the subject? It 
gives us an idea of what Godliness is, of what God is, of His 
relations toward us and of what our relations are toward Him 
and toward our fellow-beings. Righteousness, however, is more 
than right doing. It is right being, which includes the other, and 
this is the wedding garment, for "to her it was granted that she 
should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, for the fine 
linen is the righteousness of saints." 

L. A. A. 



R76 : page 5 

The Song of Moses and the Lamb 
Rev. 15. 

This scene is very evidently laid at the end of the gospel 
dispensation, as it is when the wrath of God is being completed, 
by the pouring out of the seven last plagues. Without discussing 
the merits of different views in regard to the Sea of Glass, as it 
were; and the condition of those who are said to stand on it; I 
would call attention briefly, to the song. 

Some think that by the song of Moses, is meant the song of 
deliverance, sung by the children of Israel, after crossing the 
Red Sea, in coming out of Egypt. But notice that the song is as 
here given. Does it not evidently refer to the harmonious 
teaching of Moses and Christ, as found in the scriptures; and 
those who have attained to the condition represented, having 
learned, they sing to, or teach others? The song, as given in the 
"Emphatic Diaglott," reads: "Great and wonderful are thy works, 
O Lord God, the omnipotent! Righteous and true are thy ways, 
O King of the nations." (Ethnon means nations; not saints, as in 
the authorized version.) 

Who shall not fear, O Lord, and glorify thy name since thou 
alone art bountiful? for all the nations shall come and worship in 
thy presence; because thy righteous acts were made manifest. 



The Greek word rendered judgments, in the fourth verse, by 
King James' translators, is not Krisis nor Krima, which are 
rightly rendered Judgment; but Di-Kaiomata, properly rendered, 
righteous acts. 

It occurs in Rev. 19:8. "The fine linen is, or represents the 
righteous acts of the saints. The force and beauty of the 
expression: For his righteous acts are made manifest, is seen, 
when we remember that the great mass of the gospel church, for 
centuries have taught, and the majority are teaching that the 
nations, except a comparatively few individuals, have been 
"turned into hell," in a condition of hopeless misery, without 
even having the gospel preached to them, giving them an 
opportunity to repent, and thus escape the awful doom. 

Such teaching makes God appear very unrighteous; and has 
driven the multitudes of those who have heard it away from 
God; and the Bible. Even if the sentence be eternal death, as 
many believe, still it has been without a knowledge of truth. But 
now many have learned, and many more will learn, and teach, 
the glorious song of Moses and Christ: That all nations shall 
come and worship in the presence of God; thus manifesting the 
righteousness of him: "Who so loved the world, that he gave his 
only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him shall not 
perish, but have everlasting life." Before they can believe they 
must hear. Rom. 10. The billions who have died in ignorance 
must be made alive before they can hear; hence God will have 
all men to be saved made alive, and to come to a knowledge of 
the truth: For there is one mediator between God and men, the 
man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be 
testified in due time. 1 Tim. 2:4,6. 

B. W. K. 



R77 : page 5 



What is Perfect Love. 



"Perfect love is gentle and teachable, kind, and easy to be 
entreated. It enters the school of Christ, as a pupil, not as a 
master, realizing how much is yet to be learned, rather than how 
much has been attained. Perfect love shows us our ignorance 
and begets the inextinguishable desire to dissipate that darkness, 
and to enter the realm of real and reliable knowledge. If you find 
yourself growing wise above all your teachers, inclined to 
become dogmatic, to criticize your fellow disciples and set 
yourself up as a standard for the whole church, you have no little 
reason to fear that you are not controlled by the Spirit of God. 
Self- wisdom may easily assume the place of divine wisdom; and 
Satan may appear as an angel of light even in one who concerns 
himself with the most holy things. In no way are his ends more 



effectually secured than by inducing people to promote the 
subject of holiness by exceptional methods, and in an 
unteachable and arrogant spirit. " 



R77 : page 5 

The Gospel in the Light of Human Nature. 

"But God commendeth his love toward us, in that while we 
were yet sinners, Christ died for us." Rom. 5:8. 

That "God is love" and unchangeable we believe to be prime 
facts of the gospel; and that man alone is alienated and needs 
reconciliation. The death of Christ was not for the purpose of 
purchasing God's love: it is above price; nor for the purpose of 
appeasing— quieting, pacifying, or cooling down— God's wrath, 
as though he were excited and hated man, but by meeting a 
necessity of man, in his relation to a broken law, to express 
God's love for man. It is a great mistake to think that God ever 
did, or ever will hate man. God devised the plan, provided the 
Ransom, and sent his Son to die for us, because he loved us. 
[John 3:16.] This is one great fact the world needs to know. 

Love appreciated will produce love in return. "We love him 
because he first loved us." Then God loved us when we knew 
him not and even though we hated him. Parents and teachers, 
beware! If you tell those under your care, that God will love 
them if they are good, you make the impression on their minds 
that he will hate them if they are bad, which is false. By such 
means you make the wall higher, or the gulf deeper between 
them and the Lord, and though, you may, through fear, succeed 
in driving them to outward obedience, or gather them into the 
nominal church, by a "profession of religion," they may be as far 
from God as before, for only the goodness of God leadeth to 
repentance. Had we the power of ten thousand voices, we would 
proclaim, that God loved us while we were yet sinners, and 
Christ died to commend that love. 

"But," it is sometimes said, "you must believe it, Christ died for 
you, if you will believe." Indeed! Believe what? Believe that 
Christ died for you, of course. But if it is not true, I have no 
right to believe it, and my believing would not make it true. On 
the other hand, its being a fact that Christ died for me, is the best 
possible reason for believing it, and all the unbelief possible 
could not make it untrue. Truth is entirely independent of man's 
faith or unbelief, Faith in or knowledge of, a fact cannot make, 
or change, the fact, but it changes the man. 

God loves us whether we believe it or not, and Christ died for us 
whether we believe it or not, but the knowledge of these truths 
must exist, before gratitude and love can spring up in our hearts, 
and loving obedience result. Whatever facts or changes were 



produced by the death of Christ, are real, and not dependent on 
our believing, any more than is the fact that Christ died. If it be 
true, [as some teach, but which we do not believe] that the death 
of Christ secures spiritual life for some, we think it would 
follow of necessity that it would secure it for all, because Christ 
died for all. 2 Cor. 5:14,15. Heb. 2:9 and 1 Tim. 2:6. 

What Christ's death does not secure for every one, it secures for 
none. 

While the death of Christ does not secure spiritual life for any, it 
makes it possible for all, and on account of man's relation to the 
law, as dead, without Christ's death spiritual life would not be 
attainable. 

Repentance is a necessity in order to gain spiritual life, and 
without the motive of love, as presented to us in the death of 
Christ, repentance toward God would be impossible. But neither 
God's love, nor Christ's death, produce repentance in man, until 
man believes in the love and death. Hence God's love would be 
fruitless, were men allowed to remain in ignorance of the truth. 
God's love does not exhaust itself in the death of Christ, though 
that death commends it, for God has constituted Christ not only 
the Redeemer but the Light of the world. He engaged not only to 
save man from death by a Ransom, but to bring man to the 
knowledge of that truth. 1 Tim. 2:4. Hence Christ is the "True 
light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world." John 
1 :9. Not all at once nor in one age, but, it is "to be testified in 
due time." 1 Tim. 2:6. 

Now it is evident, that man cannot repent, because of a truth, 
until he knows that truth, and yet when known, the truth is the 
"Foundation of repentance from dead works." The greatest 
possible sin is to "sin willfully, after we have received the 
knowledge of the truth;" and for this there remaineth no more 
sacrifice." Heb. 10:26, and it is impossible "to renew them again 
unto repentance; seeing, they crucify to themselves the Son of 
God afresh, and put him to an open shame." Heb. 6:4,6. 

We believe, then, that the death of Christ is an expression of 
God's love, and that in order to win man from sin to holiness one 
of the first things a man needs to learn, is that Christ died for 
him. 

But how does the death of Christ show, or commend, God's 
love? It will not do to say it shows it because it shows it. That 
would be about equal to saying, God hates sin because he hates 
it, which is no reason at all. God hates sin because he loves his 
creatures; sin being their destroyer. If the death of Christ shows 
God's love to us, there must be something accomplished by that 
death which is adapted to man's necessities. Paul is talking of 
Christ's death on the cross, which was in "due time," i.e. the 
appointed time —"After the 62 weeks." Dan. 9:26. 



Christ did not die twice. His becoming a man, was not by laying 
down, as in death, his preexistent life. He gave up the glory, and 
afterward prayed: "Glorify thou me, 

R77 : page 6 

with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." 
John 17:5. 

We assert freely that Christ's death must have been; in some 
way adapted to the necessity of human nature, or it would not 
have been, what Paul asserts, an expression, or proof of God's 
love. What man does not need, even if it were provided, would 
not be gospel. If a man is hungry, bread alone would satisfy the 
want. If he thirsts, a cup of water from the hand of a friend 
would be an expression of love. And so of any want; but to say 
that God would seek to show his love by anything which was of 
no use to man, would be to ignore every idea of the harmony 
between God's wisdom and goodness. 

There can be no doubt in any reasonable Christian mind, that the 
Gospel, in all its parts, takes man's need into account. Christ's 
life was necessary, as an example of loyalty, of patience in 
suffering, of devotion to his Father, of the principle of love even 
to enemies, and of overcoming evil with good. It was by his 
earth life and experience, that he learned to sympathize with 
man in temptations, in poverty and other afflictions, and so he 
was fitted to be a merciful and faithful Highpriest; having been 
tempted in all points as we are, and yet without sin. Heb. 4:15. 
And one feature of his work since his resurrection, clearly is, to 
give us the benefit of his former experience, by giving aid to the 
tempted. (Heb. 2:18.) He is not only a sympathizing friend, but 
also the giver and sustainer of spiritual life until it culminates in 
immortality. We wish it distinctly understood that we value the 
life of Christ, both before his death and after his resurrection as 
necessarily adapted to the wants of human nature. But why 
should any one ignore or belittle his death because of the value 
of his life? One link in the chain of provisions for man would 
thus be destroyed. 

But we are told by some, that Christ "gave his life (not his 
death) a ransom. " But this is equivalent to the statement, "Christ 
died for our sins." The Greek word, Psuchee, rendered "life" in 
the above passage, never, unless we are greatly mistaken, refers 
to a period of existence, but to the nature of man as represented 
and sustained by the blood. Many other statements of the word 
agree with these in showing that Christ's death meets a necessity 
of man. "Behold the Lamb of God, (lamb led to the slaughter. 
Isa. 53:7.) which taketh away the sin of the world. " John 1 :29. 

The sin of the world is the sin of Adam, for "in him all have 
sinned." Rom. 5:12 Margin. This left man "without strength." 
(Ver. 6.) "And in due time Christ died for the ungodly." The sin 
made mankind "enemies," and we were "reconciled to God by 



the death of his Son." Ver. 10. "God laid on him the iniquity of 
us all." Isa. 53:6. And he "bore our sins on his own body 

R78 : page 6 

on the tree." 1 Pet. 2:24. He did not "lead" our sins, but is our 
Leader, or "Forerunner," into the heavenlies, and "he put away 
sin by the sacrifice of himself." Heb. 9:26. "And I, if I be lifted 
up from the Earth, will draw all men unto me. " And, as if to 
anticipate, and answer criticisms, it is added: "This he said, 
signifying what death he should die." John 12:32,33. It seems 
clear, that the sacrifice of Christ, covers all sin, except what Paul 
calls the willful sin. Heb. 10:26. And doubtless this is why the 
Savior could say: "All manner of sin and blasphemy SHALL BE 
FORGIVEN unto men, but the blasphemy, against the Spirit, 
shall not be forgiven unto men." Matt. 12:31. It does not say 
may be forgiven, but shall be. What! Without repentance? No, 
but God, as has been shown, by his goodness leadeth men to 
repentance. The death of Christ commends his love, Christ as 
the Light brings men to the knowledge of the truth, and thus the 
goodness secures repentance. 

Evidently the recovery of all, is as complete in Christ, as was the 
loss through Adam. 

It is strange that any person, thus saved from the curse of sin and 
death, should sin willfully and be lost, but we believe that facts 
as well as scripture sustain the idea that men fall away after 
being enlightened. 

Dead men need a Redeemer; Christ gave his life a Ransom. (The 
reason that men die, though Christ's natural life was given as a 
Substitute, is because men in the plan were counted dead 
already, and Christ did not give his life to prevent men from 
dying but to prevent them from remaining dead, or to redeem 
them from death.) Man is a sinner; Christ saves from sin. Man is 
mortal, even when redeemed; (except the church, who are raised 
a spiritual body.) Christ is the Author and Giver of immortality. 
Man is ignorant-in darkness: Christ is the true light, both as 
Teacher and our great Example. Man is weak and readily 
discouraged: Christ is a sympathizing friend. All fullness we 
find in him, just what men need is provided and no more; more 
would not be gospel, though provided. An appreciation of his 
fullness, tends to humility and to dependence on him, but 
whoever ignores any feature of Christ's work, in that particular 
overestimates himself and is in danger. 

Oh, that God's love may speedily win many from sin unto 
holiness, and lead them to seek, by a patient continuance in well 
doing, for glory and honor and immortality. To such the reward 
of eternal life is promised. Rom. 2:7. 

J. H. P. 



R707 : page 6 

FAITH triumphs over reason by receiving the revelation of the 
God of reason. 



R78 : page 6 



The Great Salvation. 



"How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?"— HEB. 

2:3. 

This question is addressed to Christians, and not to the 
unconverted, as is often supposed. This the context proves. Paul, 
or whoever wrote this epistle, addressed it to the church. It 
seems peculiarly adapted to converted Jews, who were familiar 
with the writings of the Old Testament. We have in this epistle 
some of the most earnest exhortations to be faithful to the Lord, 
and the very best reasons and motives given for our 
encouragement. The text and context are of this character. If we 
are Christians we will find much applicable to us. It is important 
that we should, in order to get the benefit of the exhortation, 
remember that it means us. "How shall we escape, if we 
neglect?" On account of certain facts referred to in the first 
chapter, the second opens with: "Therefore, we ought to give the 
more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any 
time we should let them slip. " This certainly must refer to 
Christians; and there is danger of losing what we have received, 
unless we do give heed. 

The idea is suggested that neglect of the truths would cause 
them gradually to slip away from us. Backsliding is a gradual 
process, caused by neglect of truth and neglect of duty in 
obeying the truth. These are related to each other, and it seems 
that either may come as the cause of the other. The only 
safeguard against back-sliding and consequent falling away if 
persisted in, is to advance. Standing still seems to be impossible. 
In the sixth chapter the apostle seems to make falling away the 
alternative of going on to perfection. The Lord has arranged our 
life as a current against which we must row if we would go up, 
and he has placed the reward, the Great Salvation, at the head of 
the stream. If we would gain the prize, we must "run," "strive," 
"fight," or "overcome." If we fold our arms, we shall glide 
downward. It is easy to go with the multitude, but it is difficult 
to stem the flood, and we may be sure, "This vile world is not a 
friend to grace; to help us on to God. " What is worth having is 
worth striving for, and God has in both natural and spiritual 
things placed the valuable out of sight, or where it can be gained 
with difficulty. Our appreciation of the value of anything is 
shown by the earnestness with which we strive for it. We should 
be constantly seeking to know more of the truth of God for the 



purpose of obeying it. If we seek for truth merely as a theory to 
gratify our own curiosity, or for the purpose of showing our 
ability to cope with those who hold error, our intellect may be 
stuffed at the expense of our affections. Religion without love to 
both God and man, is as the body without the spirit— dead. 

Charity or love is the crowning excellency of Christianity, and is 
necessary to fit for the Great Salvation. "Add to your faith; 
virtue, and to virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, temperance; to 
temperance, patience; to patience, godliness; to godliness, 
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, CHARITY." 2 
Pet. 1:5-7. Love is last, and greatest. These additions secure the 
abundant entrance into the Kingdom of God. (Ver. 11.) Without 
the last all is vain. "Though I speak with the tongue of men and 
angels and have not love I am become as sounding brass, or a 
tinkling cymbal. And though I have (the gift of) prophecy, and 
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have 
all faith so that I could remove mountains and have not love, I 
AM NOTHING." 1 Cor. 13:1,2. There is a kind of knowledge 
that cannot be gained from books, but comes by experience as a 
fruit of the indwelling of the spirit of God. "He that loveth not 
knoweth not God, for God is love. " 

Love is an experience, and includes in it an earnest desire for the 
well-being of the object loved. Until we have sympathy and love 
for mankind, such as would prompt us to do all in our power for 
their salvation, we cannot know God. To know him thus is to be 
in unison or fellowship with him, and hence is eternal life. 

page 6 

The apostle gives a contrast between the former dispensations 
and the gospel. In order to appreciate the question, "How shall 
we escape if we neglect?" it is necessary to see this contrast. 

"God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in times 
past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days 
(gospel dispensation) spoken unto us by His Son." Heb. 1:1,2. 
God spoke then, and the same God speaks now, but there is a 
contrast in the agencies- Then by the prophets, now by His Son. 
Moses the prophet and law giver of the old dispensation, and 
who was "faithful in all his house as a servant" (3:5) "received 
the law by the disposition of angels." Acts 7:53. It was 
"ordained by angels in the hand of a Mediator." (Moses, type of 
Christ.) Gal. 3:19. But Christ, the Prophet and Law Giver of this 
dispensation, is higher than the angels, "as he hath by 
inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they. " Ver. 4. 
His official position is "Lord of all," dead and living, Heavens 
and Earth, angels and men. He has been "appointed" by his 
Father, "heir of all things"— Creator, Upholder and Savior. Ver. 
2,3. He has the brightness of his Father's glory and the express 
image of his person, and hence is in a peculiar and emphatic 
sense, God's power, 



page 7 

Wisdom, Love and Word, the embodiment of all the fullness of 
the Godhead. His superiority to the angels is well established 
and is the basis of the superiority of the gospel dispensation. 
While Moses was faithful as a servant over the house of 
servants, Christ was faithful as a Son over the house of sons. Ch. 
3:5,6. 

"For unto which of the angels said he at any time, thou art my 
Son;. ..And again I will be to him a Father and he shall be to me 
a Son; " And again he saith, "Let all the angels of God worship 
him." Ch. 1:5,6. 

Of the angels he saith; "Who maketh his angels spirits, and his 
ministers a flame of fire." "Are they not all ministering spirits 
sent forth to minister to the heirs of Salvation?" Ver. 7,14. But 
unto the Son he saith, "Thy throne, Oh God is forever and 
ever. "...And "Thou Lord, in the beginning hast laid the 
foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy 
hands; they shall perish, but thou remainest, &c." This certainly 
refers to the old creation, as it was "in the beginning" or first 
stage of its existence, and is to be changed also by his power and 
put on its beautiful garments of the perfect state. The work of 
Creation in all its parts is of God through Christ. "In the 
beginning was the Word" and by him God spake and it was done 
commanded and it stood fast. 

The same Word was made flesh John 1 but was still "God- 
manifest in the flesh" and in the body prepared became a 
sacrifice for sin. And the same mysterious Name "which no man 
knoweth but he himself"— "The Word of God," goeth forth 
conquering and to conquer, when his army of assistants are with 
him, "Kings and Priests" to reign on the Earth." Rev. 5:10 and 
19:11-15. 

The value of the Great Salvation which is offered in the gospel 
can be appreciated when we remember that all the Father gives 
his son, the Son will share with his Bride. And in view of the 
superiority of the Lord Jesus the question of the apostle can be 
appreciated; "If the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and 
every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense 
of reward, how shall we (under Christ) escape if we neglect so 
Great Salvation? 

J. H. P. 



page 7 



STRAIGHT PATHS. 



Make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be 
turned out of the way: but let it rather be healed."— HEB. 12:13. 



Such is the command of the apostle; but there is evidently a 
careless disregard of it among many of the professed Christians 
of to-day, as is shown by their lives and testimony. When we see 
those who profess to be followers of Jesus joining in the world's 
pleasures, and clad in the world's garments, we are led to believe 
that they have little care as to the paths they are making, and 
whether younger Christians coming after them will be turned out 
of the way, or established in the way, by their example. Tis true 
they are often heard to confess their sinfulness-their wanderings 
and short-comings; but seldom are they heard to warn others of 
the dangers that lurk by the way. They are never heard to tell the 
new-born soul to beware; that they should not love the world, 
but should come out, and be forever separate from it —from its 
sinful fashions and pleasures. No, we do not hear this; but we do 
hear these worldly-conformed professors ridiculing the very idea 
of plain dress for Christians; and with all their might do they 
uphold church fairs, festivals, parties, etc., laughing to scorn any 
who desire to lift their voices against them. Thus the crooked 
paths are being made, and scores of precious souls are being 
turned out of the way by those who should be "lights in the 
world." 

Take the evil of fashionable dress —that great and deadly evil, 
which is so fatal to spiritual life, and which is a ruling passion, 
and especially the besetting sin of the female heart. Oh, for a 
voice like a trumpet, to sound forth words of warning to my 
sisters in the churches. Are we adorned with the "modest apparel 
which becometh women professing godliness?" Let us look well 
to the paths we are making in this matter. It is so easy for some 
new-born soul to be turned out of the way by our examples. 
Some weak one who has just begun to look to us to see what we 
do, and how we dress.— Banner of Holiness. 



page 7 

The Example of Christ. 

It is only since his divine form has arisen before my soul, that I 
have learned to know the true condition of man. Formerly, by 
comparing myself with what was small, I appeared great in my 
own eyes; but since I have compared myself with him, how 
insignificant have I become. When we hear a man whom we feel 
to be truthful and humble speaking great things of himself, it has 
a humiliating effect upon us. And when the Savior utters such 
words as, "I do always those things that please him" and I do 
believe it to be in very truth that he utters this— I then become 
conscious of what man, who is created in the image of God, 
ought to be. 

When I see how, in all things, he sought not his own glory, but 
that of his heavenly Father, I am ashamed of my ambition; when 



I see how he came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, I 
am ashamed of my pride; when I see how he took the cup which 
his Father gave him and drank it, I am ashamed of my 
disobedience; when I see how he bore the contradiction of 
sinners against himself, and when he was reviled, reviled not 
again, I am ashamed of my impatience and my passion. Nothing 
has so subduing an influence as my Savior's example.— A. 
Tholuck. 



page 7 

In Memoriam. 

[On the death of Eld. Geo. Storrs.] 

The news of Bro. Storrs death (Dec. 28th, 1879,) reached us 
too late for insertion in last issue. As then stated our brother had 
just entered his 84th year and was quite ill. He was we believe a 
"faithful servant," and will soon "enter into the joys of our 
Lord. " We mourn the loss of a friend and brother in Christ yet, 
"not as those who have no hope." The great Deliverer, is at hand 
and assures us "I have the keys, of death and Hades." 



The well-worn armor is laid by! 
Thy faithful watchmen fall, O Lord, 
They gather up their feet and die, 
And wait their coming King's reward. 

Herald of truth, thy last farewell 
To earthly toils and scenes is given, 
No stain upon thy mantle fell, 
Thy record is laid up in Heaven. 

How little know the heedless crew 
In church or state, that by their side 
A witness, humble, faithful, true, 
Has lived long years for truth and died. 

In this dark world God's sons are veiled; 
It knew not Christ nor knows his, friends, 
They watch and wait to be revealed, 
When He, their Life, from Heaven descends. 

Rest veteran, in thy tomb awhile, 
'Twill not be long ere thou shalt rise 
To greet thy heavenly Leader's smile, 
And take from him the victor's prize. 

Surely the night is almost gone, 
And the millennial morn is near, 
Sentinels are falling, one by one, 
And leave the remnant weeping here. 



Come, Jesus, is thy remnant's call 
That first went up from Patmos' land; 
Come, heal the wounds of Adam's fall 
With the blest touches of thy hand. 



JOHN LYLE. 

Newark, N.J., Jan., 1880. 



page 7 



Bible Class Department. 



The Three Witnesses. 

"There are three that bear record in Heaven; the Father, the 
Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one."— 1 John 

5:7. 

In Lange's Critical Commentary, in reference to this passage 
we read: Said words are wanting in ALL THE GREEK 
CODICES; also in the CODEX SINAITICUS [the oldest 
existing MSS] AND IN ALL THE ANCIENT VERSIONS, 
INCLUDING THE LATIN, as late as the 8th century; and since 
that time they are found in three variations. Notwithstanding the 
Trinitarian controversies they are NOT REFERRED TO BY A 
SINGLE GREEK FATHER OR BY ANY OF THE OLD 
LATIN CHURCH FATHERS. 

The American Bible Union version [probably the best modern 
translation] leaves out the passage and adds the foot note, "The 
words omitted are wanting in all ancient copies." 

They are pronounced an interpolation by such authorities as Sir 
Isaac Newton, Benson, Clarke, Home, Griesbach, Tischendorf 
and Alford. 

In Hudson's Greek and English concordance we read: "The 
words are found in no Greek MSS. before the 15th or 16th 
century, and in no early version, unless, says Alford, pure 
caprice is to be followed in the criticism of the sacred text; there 
is not a shadow of reason for supposing them genuine. 
Tischendorf says, that this spurious addition should continue to 
be published as a part of the epistle, I regard as an impiety, etc.; 
and President T. B. Woolsey: "Do not truth and honesty require 
that such a passage should be struck out of our English Bibles; a 
passage which Luther would not express in his translation, and 
which did not creep into the German Bible until nearly fifty 
years after his death?" 

Dr. Adam Clarke, the learned Methodist commentator, in his 
notes on this passage, says: "It is likely this verse is not genuine. 
It is wanting in every MS. of this epistle written before the 



invention of printing, one excepted- condex motfortii, in Trinity 
College, Dublin; the others which omit this verse amount to one 
hundred and twelve. It is wanting in both the Syriac, all the 
Arabic, Ethiopic, the Coptic, Sahidic, Armenian, Slavonian, 
&c. ; in a word, in all the ancient versions but the Vulgate; and 
even of this version many of the most ancient and correct MSS. 
have it not. It is wanting, also, in all the ancient Greek Fathers; 
and in most even of the Latin.... To make the whole more clear, 
that every reader may see what has been added, I shall set down 
these verses, with the inserted words in brackets: 

"6. And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is 
truth. 7. For there are three that bore record [in heaven, the 
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. 
8. And there are three that bear witness on earth.] the Spirit, and 
the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one. 9. If we 
receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater," &c. 
Any man may see on examining the words that if those included 
in brackets, which are wanting in the MSS., and versions be 
omitted, there is no want of connection; and as to the sense, it is 
complete and perfect without them, and, indeed, much more so 
than with them. I shall conclude this part of the note with 
observing, with Dr. Dodd, "That there are some intervals and 
accidental remarks which may render the passage suspected, for 
the sentence is complete, and the sense more clear and better 
preserved without it. Besides, the Spirit is mentioned, both as a 
witness in heaven and on earth; so that the six witnesses are 
thereby reduced to five, and the equality in number or antithesis 
between the witnesses in heaven and on earth is quite taken 
away. Besides, what need of witnesses in heaven? No one there 
doubts that Jesus is the Messiah, and if it be said that Father, 
Son, and Spirit are witnesses on earth, then there are five 
witnesses on earth, and none in heaven; not to say that there is a 
little difficulty in interpreting how the Word or the Son can be a 
witness to him. 

W. I. M. 



page 8 



THE LAW OF GOD. 



Christians are in the habit of looking at "the law" as a great 
enemy. Why? Because it does not countenance the least sin. It 
says, "walk before me and be thou perfect." Is that not right- 
could a perfect God recognize or make a law in any way 
imperfect? Surely not. The reason men count the law their 
enemy is that all have sinned, and ever since the disobedience of 
Adam they have been in the condition known as "sinful flesh." 
Prior to sin's entrance, the law was Adam's friend, and justified 
him; but the condition of death obtained after "sin had entered," 



and man in this fallen condition of death finds it utterly 
impossible to so live and act in harmony with his maker, that 
God's perfect law would not condemn him. And since all are 
sinners, of course none but a defective law could recognize such 
persons as perfect. The law of God has condemned all, and 
every one who has reasoning faculties seems to recognize that 
he is not perfect. 

God has always had a law; even before the giving of it in full 
form to mankind at Mt. Sinai. (Exod. 20.) And since He always 
has been perfect, His laws always have been perfect and 
condemned and opposed even the slightest sin. Abel, Noah, 
Abraham and all the patriarchs recognized the fact that they 
were sinners when they made altars and sacrificed thereon, 
before attempting to hold communion. Thus they acknowledged 
themselves sinners and unable of themselves to approach God. 
How different from the way Adam and God walked and talked 
in the Garden! No sacrifices or offerings for sin were there 
needed, for Adam was justified by God's law. Thus we see that 
what the patriarchs knew of God's law condemned them. The 
giving of the full law from Sinai did not take away man's sin. 
No, it only showed it the more fully. Did the keeping of it ever 
justify any of them? No; "By the deeds of the law shall no flesh 
be justified in His (God's) sight. " Was the fault in the law, or in 
the people? "The law is holy," and God's commandments holy 
and just and good." (Rom. 7:12.) Since, then, the law did not 
justify them, it must have condemned them, even as it had 
condemned the patriarchs. Not any more really (for there is only 
one penalty— death) but more loudly. They were no more sinners 
than the patriarchs and others who had not had the full law given 
them, but they were shown their condition as sinners more 
clearly. Why? That they might see their own fallen and 
imperfect condition and learn the exceeding sinfulness of SIN. 
(Vs. 13.) 

We have seen that God always has had a perfect law which 
condemned every sin in every being, and how it was shown in 
different degrees to the patriarchs and Israel, yet that the effect 
was the same— condemnation— only more fully realized by those 
who saw the law most clearly. Now, how about the great 
heathen world? Surely a righteous law could not say: The 
heathen are RIGHTEOUS; unless they live in harmony with 
God. And if you thought they were living in harmony with God 
you would not send missionaries to them. No. Then they, too, 
are condemned by God's law. And as Paul says: "These that 
have not the law" (the full written law as given to Israel) "show 
the work of the law written in their hearts," a spark of that 
principle if justice and knowledge of right and wrong which 
must have been an important part of the natural organization of 
the first perfect man, Adam; a spark merely, not quite 
extinguished by the degrading effects of sin. And what did this 
spark of conscience do for them? It sometimes justified, and 



sometimes condemned. But if their spark of conscience 
condemned them only ONCE during their lifetime, it showed 
that they were imperfect. 

Now, "all unrighteousness is sin," and "sin is the transgression 
of the law," and "the wages of sin is death." So we see that the 
only voice of the law of God to any who hear it, is: You cannot 
live. "All have sinned and come short of the glory of God. " 
Therefore must "every mouth be stopped and all the world 
become guilty before God." (Rom. 3:9.) 

There lay the whole human family dead and dying through sin, 
the law hanging up before them, they admit, is grand, "just" and 
"holy. " They were told that "The man that doeth these things 
shall live." (Rom. 10:5. Gal. 3:12.) But O, they could not do 
them. Some tried hard, as Paul describes, Rom. 7:14-24. When 
with their minds they resolved to "do those things and live, " 
they found sin in their members hindering and preventing. When 
the striving ones found they could not deliver themselves from 
death, they exclaimed: "Wretched man that I am, who will 
deliver me from this body of death?" (Diaglott) or, from the sin 
and death which has gotten possession of my body. When he so 
cries out, he has reached the place God wanted to bring him to, 
i.e., to realize that he can NEVER deliver himself from death 
and sin. But some one asks: If he dies does not the act of dying 
fill all the requirements of the law, and could he not, after thus 
dying, be raised up by God? No, you err in supposing that the 
act of dying is the penalty. Man has been dying ever since sin 
entered the world, but the penalty will not be entirely inflicted 
until all are dead. But when will the law of God release the 
sinner from the bondage of death? Never; if he could not obey 
the law while partially dead he certainly cannot when 
completely so. Ever since the "fall" from perfect manhood 
through sin, man has been in a dying condition, sometimes 
spoken of as already dead (see Matt. 8:22.) And none but a 
perfect man could keep a perfect law. But, says one, did not God 
send his Son into the world to show us how we could work our 
way up to spiritual life— appearing among us on the lowest 
round of the ladder, did He not point out to us the way; he being 
thus "our forerunner?" 

This view in many respects is held by a great many, mostly 
"Unitarians" and "Universalists" and like many other views has 
a mixture of truth in it; but as a whole is far from being "the 
truth" on this subject. Jesus did indeed "lay aside the glory 
which he had with the Father, before the world;" He did appear 
to "set us an example that we should follow in his footsteps" and 
to be "our forerunner," but more, he is also our "Redeemer" 
from the curse of the Law— the curse of the law upon us as 
sinners is death. How did he redeem us from death? To redeem 
us to purchase back. He therefore is said to have "bought us with 
his own precious blood. " Blood represents life -"The life of the 



flesh is in the blood" (Lev. 17:11) therefore shed blood 
represents death or sacrificed life. "He gave his life, " "He shed 
his blood;" "He tasted death;" all have the same meaning. But 
how could his life purchase or redeem or buy ours? He as a man, 
was a perfect man, kept the perfect law perfectly; therefore the 
same law which was the sinners enemy condemning us to death, 
was his friend and guaranteed to him life. But was he not born 
into the world under condemnation of death, as much as any 
other son of Adam? No, he was not the son of Adam, but a 
direct creation of God- "made in the likeness of sinful flesh," 
but "in him was no sin. " If he had done sin or been born a 
sinner, his life would have been forfeited as was the first Adam's 
and ours. If a sinner he would be obliged to die for himself and 
consequently would have nothing to give as a ransom for ours. 
But he was perfect, kept the law, had a right to perfect natural 
life forever; "But for the joy set before him," by the promise of 
the Father to raise him from the dead a spiritual body, he 
renounced the natural life and gave it for our ransom. 

But when he arose from death, was not that a taking back of the 
price? It would, if he had taken back the same life (perfect- 
natural) which he laid down; but he did not take back the 
natural; he was quickened by the Spirit-"made a quickening 
spirit," raised a spiritual body." There is a natural body and there 
is a spiritual body. 

Thus "by his precious (valuable) blood" (life), we were 
"redeemed from the curse of the law" -death. To what kind of 
life were we redeemed? The same which man had before death 
(the curse) came; the same kind that he gave for us, i.e., perfect 
natural life. But we are promised spiritual life, and that we shall 
be made like unto Christ's glorious body? Yes; it is a part of 
God's offer to us (during the Gospel age), that if we die to 
earthly and fleshly— natural— life, we may be reckoned as 
"members of his body," and partake of the same kind of life as 
our Head. In this arrangement, we are reckoned as being (with 
all the rest of mankind) justified to the perfect natural life first, 
else we could not give our lives; but being justified to life, Jesus 
says to us, you can either have this natural life, or, if you will 
renounce this natural, as I did, and become dead to the world, 
you shall have instead, the spiritual life and body. "If we be dead 
with Christ, we shall live with him." Rom. 6:4-8. It is a faithful 
saying: "For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; 
if we suffer, we shall also reign with him." 2 Tim. 2:1 1. "Ye are 
partakers of Christ's sufferings." 1 Pet. 4:13. "Joint heirs with 
Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also 
glorified together. " Rom. 8:17. 

And it is because God thus waits until the elect number, the 
bride, the body, the Church, has "filled up the measure of the 
sufferings of Christ, which are behind," that the times of 
"restitution of all things," purchased for the world by the blood 



of Christ, are delayed and yet future. The Head suffered and 
died 1800 years ago; but all of the suffering and death of the 
body are not yet completed. Not noticing this, has caused 
wonder on the part of almost all, that the benefits and results of 
the ransom have not sooner come. (See type, "Scape Goat," &c, 
in next Number.) 

But would it be right for God to reckon the one righteous life 
given, as a full payment for the lives of the millions of sinners 
who have died? Does not the price-one, for a billion or more- 
seem like a short payment? This is a reasonable question, and 
we will allow Paul to give it a reasonable answer. He is a logical 
reasoner, as well as an inspired Apostle, and argues that, as God 
had seen proper to condemn all men to death on account of 
Adam's disobedience, so he had a right to reckon the second 
Adam a representative man, and justify to life all the race, in 
return for the sacrifice of this one perfect life. 

"For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so 
by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous." 
"Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all 
men to condemnation," (condemned to suffer the penalty of sin- 
death,) "even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came 
upon all men unto justification to life. " (Remember that we do 
not now enjoy life; our condition is a dying one.) "Dying thou 
shalt die" was the penalty pronounced on Adam (margin). The 
condition of perfect life as it was enjoyed before death came, is 
what all men are justified to, by the obedience of "Jesus Christ 
who, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man. " 

"For as in Adam (or by Adam's sin) all die, so "in Christ (or by 
Christ's obedience, &c.) shall all be made alive. As the first 
Adam's bride was a party to the sin, so we see the second 
Adam's bride is made a party with her Lord in the removing of 
the curse. Oh glorious plan, of our all wise and loving Father, 
and "the exceeding riches of his grace toward us, in Christ 
Jesus." 

But says one, I thought that Jesus had nullified, set aside and 
destroyed the law; and that therefore mankind could approach 
God. Oh no, that was a great mistake. Would it not be strange 
indeed if the Father made a law, which we have seen was "just" 
and "holy" and in fact the only one he could give because he 
could not make an imperfect law; would it seem proper even to 
think of Jesus as setting aside and destroying that "just" and 
"holy" law, or in any way making a league with sin or sinners? 
No, no. He came to do the Father's will and the law was the 
record of it. He kept it himself and taught the true meaning of it 
to be higher than the letter, and that to be "angry with a brother 
without a cause" was to violate the command "Thou shalt not 
kill. " No, says Paul: "Christ magnified the law (made it larger 
and more minute) and made it honorable," showed in fact that, 
that law could not be set aside nor broken. 



But we read, "Christ is the end of the law. " What can that mean? 
The trouble is you have not quoted the connections. The text 
reads: "For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to 
every one that believeth" (Rom. 10:5.) To whom is he this? To 
the believers— the members of his body. How? Righteously, not 
by breaking it, but by righteously fulfilling its requirements (and 
we in Him are just before the law.) Another similar text reads: 
"There is therefore" (because we in Him are reckoned dead to 
the world and alive toward God through Him-our new life) 
"now no condemnation to them which are IN Christ Jesus." Why 
are those in Christ not condemned? Because, since coming into 
Him by faith they have received of His spirit, and with Him can 
say "I delight to do thy will O, my God: yea, thy law is within 
my heart." (Ps. 11:8.) They are then alive spiritually though yet 
living in the dead body of sinful flesh which they are opposed 
to, and which by the holy spirit given they are enabled to 
"crucify, " &c. These walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, 
and to all so walking in Christ there is no condemnation from 
the law. And we may add none can so live and walk except they 
have recognized their ransom, come into Christ and received of 
His spirit. 

And in the glorious millennial age, when all shall know God 
from least to greatest, when "The knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth; "-"The times of restitution"-there will be 
the same "holy and just" law, and under the "Royal Priesthood" 
after the order of Melchisedec (the order of an endless life,) poor 
fallen humanity will be helped back again to that perfect 
condition from whence Adam fell; a condition in harmony with 
God's law, and therefore in harmony with God. 

But will they receive no punishment for misdeeds of the present 
life? They will receive punishment, "stripes, &c," in proportion 
as they had light and lived contrary to it. As our Master 
explained: "It shall be more tolerable for Sodom, &c," in the 
day of judgment (in the age of trial) than for the Jews, to whom 
He spoke, because the Sodomites had less light. (Matt. 2:24.) 
There will be many or few "stripes," in proportion to the amount 
of light they have had and the use made of it. 

There will be rewards given to some during that age also; "for 
whosoever shall give to one of these little ones (of 'little flock) a 
cup of cold water, only in the name of a disciple, shall in no 
wise lose his reward." (Matt. 10:42.) And when the King shall 
sit "on the throne of his glory," (during the millennial age), some 
will be rewarded for having ministered to the members of His 
body. "Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of these," (in 
the throne) "ye did it unto me." (Matt. 15:40.) 



page 8 



Bro. Paton's Trip West. 

Announced in our last, has been delayed for the present. He has 
been busily engaged during the past month writing a book which 
will be of general interest to you all. It will be a careful 
exposition of our views regarding fulfilled prophecy; our hopes 
of present and future; as well as the scriptural evidences of the 
presence of the Son of Man, and that we are now in "the day of 
the Lord," &c. 


