Announcements
● Literature offer for August: My Book of Bible Stories for $2.00. Or, alternative offer of three pocket-size books for $1.00 for those who do not prefer a book for children. September: A tract will be used along with two magazines and the revised brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century for 25c. October: Awake! subscription for $2.50 with a pocket-size book given free to new subscribers.
● Since the Society receives quite a number of inquiries relating to gifts and wills and the conditional donation arrangement, it may prove helpful to read to the congregation again the Society’s letter of last year. Especially is this suggested if, for some reason, it was not read to the congregation before. With this letter, enclosures were sent. These were to be placed in the congregation file by the secretary who is to make them available to any who request to read them.
● As of July 1, the Society is producing two Braille Watchtower magazines each month. Henceforth, the Braille edition will be available on a subscription basis only, the partnership arrangement for exchanging magazines being discontinued. The subscription rate is $6.00 per year. Other publications are available in Braille. Those who are interested should write the Society, Attention: Braille Desk.
● As soon as the August report is compiled, the form (S-10) for supplying the Society with the activity of the congregation should be completed and sent promptly to the Society. Keep the duplicate in the congregation file.
● Pioneer report cards and forms for use by the congregation during the coming year are being mailed in August.
● New Publications Available:
Good News—to Make You Happy—Bengali, Hungarian, Marathi, Serbian
Holy Spirit—The Force Behind the Coming New Order!—Hungarian
Study Questions for the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God?—Chinese, Japanese, Spanish
● Available Again in U.S.A.:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life—Hindi
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good—English
● “The Bible—A Book for This Generation” is the timely subject for the new slide talk that circuit overseers will show starting September 1979. In previous years it took four years to have a slide showing world wide, but this time enough sets of slides are being sent out so that all congregations earth wide will see the slide talk within the 1980 service year.
● Due to the steady increase in the cost of materials and services, the Society finds it necessary to increase the prices of the following publications, effective September 1, 1979:
Watchtower and Awake! Subscriptions
Semimonthly
 Magazines       Pioneer     Publisher     Public
 1 Year          $1.25       $2.40         $2.50
 6 Months          .65        1.15          1.25
Monthly
 Magazines
 1 Year            .65        1.15          1.25
  (No 6-month subscriptions on monthly magazines.)
                 Books
Pocket-size book  .10          .45          .50
There is no change in price for larger books, and individual copies of the magazines will still be placed with the public at 10c a copy.
● The Literature Inventory forms should be completed and forwarded to the Society no later than September 6. In view of September price changes, the value of 192-page books should be shown as 45c.

