Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 5
 5 min: Song 85. Announcements.
18 min: “Helping One Another (Part II): Through the Book Study.” Talk and demonstration. The book study arrangement lends itself well to providing personal assistance for those who desire some help in service. Helping one another is part of our service to God. (1 Pet. 4:10, 11) Stress that participation is prompted by loving interest in one another and is intended to aid those desiring assistance.
Present a brief demonstration showing how a conductor might approach a publisher to help get things started. Scene 1: He speaks to experienced sister, commending her for good consistency and effectiveness in the field service. Tells her about a newer sister in the group with a family and a busy schedule who appears to be in need of assistance. Asks her if she would be willing to work with her for a day or two, depending on the need, when they are able to do so. She is agreeable; willingly offers to help. Scene 2: Later, she approaches the other sister. Inquires how she is getting along and suggests the possibility of working together. Explains that she feels that preparing for service together with someone else and working with them would be mutually encouraging. Tells her that she would enjoy her company and likely each of them would do much to assist the other. Sister is pleased, readily agrees. They discuss tentative plans for the coming week. Both optimistic about the outcome. Scene 3: These two sisters are conversing with study conductor after the book study, relating experience they had in service. Both comment on how much they enjoyed working together and how they benefited. Conductor encourages them to let him know if he can assist in some way.
All of us can benefit from such a mutual interchange of encouragement and the congregation is strengthened by the building up of its members.—Rom. 1:11, 12; Eph. 4:12, 13, 16.
17 min: “Presenting the Good News—With My Book of Bible Stories.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Include brief demonstration of two teen-agers witnessing at two homes. At one door, use picture accompanying Story 115. At the next door, use Psalm 146:4, 5, with comments that lead to resurrection theme and picture (Story 92).
15 min: Invite audience to relate experiences using the Bible Stories book or something of special interest found in the service last weekend. Also, include some experiences from 7/15/79 Watchtower article “It Is Filling a Need!” Invite all to share in field service in coming week.
 5 min: Song 98 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 12
10 min: Song 5 and announcements. Read accounts report.
15 min: “Helping Those with Special Needs.” Audience discussion. How can we do this in our congregation? Invite experiences showing benefits gained by giving or receiving this kind of help.
15 min: How Can We Assist Those Who Are Weak? (Based on April 15, 1979, Watchtower, pp. 24-27) Discussion between two elders. Discuss material from the standpoint of how genuine love will help us to be understanding and patient toward those needing help.
15 min: “The Service Overseer—How He Can Help Us.” A talk by the service overseer. Explain new arrangement and advise congregation of what changes this has required locally. Point out benefits that can come from his good example and kind encouragement.
 5 min: Song 41 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 19
Theme: TRUSTING IN JEHOVAH DURING YOUTH.—Ps. 71:5, 17.
15 min: Song 78 and local announcements. Family group having discussion from Yearbook of day’s text (breakfast or evening meal). After comments on the text, father (or mother) relates interesting experience about zealous witness from page 83. Family appreciates this experience, expresses a desire to do likewise.
23 min: Helpful Guidelines for Young People. School starts shortly and there young people face many difficult situations. Parents or others approached may be able to help. Many youngsters show little initiative in school, often complaining that it is uninteresting and tiring. If not really involved in learning, interests may center on social activities, sports, and so forth, which can be spiritually harmful. Parents have good reason to be concerned.
Demonstration: Mother and father are talking to their children about coming school year. Children are commended for past good efforts in studies, but parents express concern about a few poor grades last year and involvement in certain activities that could be harmful. Children voice complaint that some subjects in school were boring. Parents reason with them kindly, helping them to appreciate the practical benefits to be gained. Father suggests that all open Youth book to chapter 11 and review discussion on “Why Study in School?” Emphasize practical reasons why youngsters should appreciate opportunity to receive training for developing skills in secular work, reading, increasing their learning abilities, and so forth. Family discusses situations where such training will be genuinely useful and appreciated. Children now view things differently and express determination to apply themselves more diligently as school begins. Parents commend them and suggest they get together as a family later to review progress and discuss any further problems.
18 min: Faithful Youths Like Samuel. (This part should be well rehearsed under supervision of qualified elder.) Group of young people on stage for discussion of the life of Samuel, especially as a youth. Group reads 1 Samuel chapter 3. Young brothers who are good readers take the parts of Samuel, Eli, the voice of Jehovah, and a narrator. What can youth today, faced with the problems and environment of the present wicked system of things, learn from Samuel’s example? Invite group to comment on following: (1) How can youth be eager to respond like Samuel? (2) How can young ones imitate his respect for an older person and his willingness to go to someone older for counsel? (3) How can youth today learn from his not being influenced by the bad examples around him? (4) His faithfulness from youth until old age should help youth in what ways as they plan for the future?—See ad pp. 1438, 1439.
 4 min: Song 75 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 26
 8 min: Song 94. Encourage all to share in field service on Sunday with tract distribution. Announce any local arrangements for service on holiday, September 3.
20 min: “What Has Happened to Love?” Use 10 minutes for consideration of the tract; show how material can be used in the field. Have a number of short demonstrations on how the tract along with the revised brochure and two latest magazines can be offered. Show what can be stated to (a) young (b) middle-aged and (c) older persons we meet at the door. We may start by saying: “Good day. We are leaving this free tract “What Has Happened to Love?” with all of our neighbors. This is your copy. [Hand person a copy of tract. Then, depending on the age of the householder, we can use one of the pictures.] It certainly saddens us when we see scenes like these, doesn’t it? Can you imagine how it would be if people would follow the principles that are mentioned in the Bible citations that are listed here, like . . . [Read one or two on page 3.] There are many persons living today who are finding true enjoyment in life because of upholding the Bible’s definition of love. Also, this brochure explains how such a way of life is possible. I would like to leave it with you, along with these two magazines, on a contribution of 25c.” Encourage all to share during the month of September in distributing the tracts that the congregation has been allotted.
12 min: Have several publishers relate experiences they had during August. Include some that highlight use of My Book of Bible Stories.
15 min: What Are We Doing with What We Are Learning? Prepare well in advance, requesting individuals or book study groups to present their experiences in actually using or applying what was learned at the service meetings during August. Comments should show how information is being used in a practical, beneficial way. Points to be stressed: (1) In what ways are you helping one another in the book study arrangement? (2) What kind of assistance have you been able to provide for those who are infirm or incapacitated? (3) Young people: How do you view school? In what ways are you trying to imitate the good qualities found in young Samuel?
 5 min: Song 97 and prayer.

