Part 2—Helping One Another—Through the Book Study
1 While all of us equally share the responsibility to preach, we are not all equal in experience or abilities. (1 Cor. 12:29, 30) There are those who are new or lack experience. Some are limited due to education or language barriers. Others are particularly experienced in one feature of field service, but not in another. Naturally, we all desire to be capable and effective preachers of the good news. By sharing the benefits of our experience and capabilities with others, much happiness can result.—Acts 20:35.
2 The book study group arrangement is a fine provision for providing mutual help. Many publishers have experience and abilities that they can use to assist others in their group. In many cases, it is simply a matter of making known the need and asking them to assist. We suggest that each book study conductor give thought to some who may need a helping hand in the service, and those who might be willing and in the best position to give effective help.
3 When he has this in mind, perhaps the conductor can first approach the experienced publisher about working with one less experienced. For example, he might say to a sister: “Would you mind working with Sister———— for a day or two in the house-to-house service? I am sure that she would benefit from your experience. I think both of you would enjoy working together as companions for awhile and it would prove to be mutually upbuilding.”
4 If the experienced sister is agreeable, the conductor can suggest that she talk to the other sister about it, working out arrangements that would be suitable for them. In some cases, they might want to discuss such with the study conductor, as he may have suggestions on how to proceed. They can plan what would be most convenient in the way of preparing together, sharing in the service and following up interest.
5 The conductor should take a real interest in the brothers by inquiring from time to time as to how they are getting along. His helpfulness and words of encouragement will demonstrate that he is more than just someone who conducts the study; he has tender affection for others and is sincerely interested in their spiritual progress. When the service overseer spends a week with that group, he, too, will be interested in what is being accomplished. Anything that he and the conductor can do with a view to developing the arrangement to help one another at the book study level will strengthen the congregation as a whole.—1 Thess. 2:7, 8.

