Presenting the Good News—With My Book of Bible Stories
1 “Simple, yet very instructive!” That is what many are saying about My Book of Bible Stories. Undoubtedly, this fine Bible study aid can help us reach many more sincere ones, both young and old, who have yet to understand the Bible’s message.
2 Since many have been affected by the death of a loved one, you may wish to speak of the condition of the dead and the hope of the resurrection, tying in Psalm 146:4, 5 and Story 92 of the Bible Stories book.
3 We might start our presentation like this: “Good day. As a neighbor of yours it is a pleasure to bring you some good news. All of us have experienced the loss of a close friend or relative in death. Perhaps you have wondered what has happened to such ones. [Allow time for comment.] God’s Word gives us hope in Psalm 146:4, 5. [Read.] How kind God is in giving hope both for those who have passed away in death and for those of us who are living. This picture [turn to Story 92] shows a resurrection that Christ Jesus performed not only for the young girl’s sake, but also for the joy of her parents. You can just imagine how happy those parents must have been. But this was not the only person Jesus resurrected. The last paragraph of this story shows that he resurrected the son of a widow and his good friend Lazarus. And note the good news mentioned in the last two sentences. [Read.] This publication is designed for young and old alike, to help us all better appreciate the love and concern that God has for us. We are offering it on a contribution of $2.00.” You may adapt this presentation to fit the circumstances.
4 Where people are busy, we might like to use a shorter presentation, including the illustration in Story 115. We might approach the householder by saying: “Good day. To provide good reading material for young people, I have found this publication to be of great assistance to parents and children alike. It helps them to learn about what God has promised for the future. [Turn to Story 115; read last sentence in paragraph one.] The publishers have made this Bible Stories book with over 125 Bible-based illustrations [quickly thumb through the book] available at a very reasonable cost of $2.00. Would you care to have a copy for your children (grandchildren)?”
5 Many have enjoyed fine experiences offering the Bible Stories book informally. One sister reported placing copies by offering it to pediatricians, mentioning that it would be good reading for youngsters in the waiting room. A sister who offered the book at a nursery school was able to start a study with the children. Additionally, she placed 70 books with the children, their parents and their neighbors. The lady in charge of the nursery took 24 books for herself, her relatives and friends. Be alert to your opportunities to offer this easy-to-place book.
6 With many young people home from school because of summer vacation, we should have many opportunities to talk to young ones and their parents. This month should prove to be a most enjoyable one as we render praise to Jehovah with the aid of My Book of Bible Stories.—Ps. 146:10.

