From Our Readers
Spiritism
I would like to comment on the Awake! article “Allan Kardec​—Pioneer of Spiritism.” (May 22, 1987) I believe that everyone has the right to choose the religion he wants, provided it moves the person to do good and does no harm to other persons or animals. I am a spiritist, and in the classes I attend, those present do not waste time criticizing other religions, much less waste paper and money to publicize such criticisms. Spiritists disagree with Jehovah’s Witnesses about the immortality of the soul, communication with the dead, and other things. However, we are not so ignorant or unloving as to say that you participate with the demons, as you do with us. Spiritism incites us to personal reform, transforming vices into virtues. It counsels us to practice charity and solidarity with our less fortunate brothers. It is impossible for the demons to counsel persons to act like that, for they would not get any advantage from doing so. A bit contradictory, don’t you think?
C. M. G., Brazil
We agree that each one should be free to choose his religion. Yet, we feel obligated to call attention to the Bible’s warnings of dangerous religious practices. Those who believe in communicating with the dead, the Bible shows, are vulnerable to subtle, deceptive influence by wicked spirits who falsely impersonate people who have lived and are now dead and hence powerless to do anything at all. (See Ecclesiastes 9:5, 6, 10 and Isaiah 8:19, 20.) For this reason, the Bible at Leviticus 19:31 and Deuteronomy 18:10-12 warns against spiritistic practices of any sort. As to spiritism’s apparently inciting one to transform vices into virtues, the Bible at 2 Corinthians 11:14, 15 says that “Satan himself keeps transforming himself into an angel of light. It is therefore nothing great if his ministers also keep transforming themselves into ministers of righteousness.” As stated at 2 Timothy 3:16, 17, the man of God should look to the Bible, not to spirits, as the true, dependable source of guidance concerning God’s will.​—ED.
Pollution
I read with interest your articles on “What Is Happening to Our Forests?” (June 22, 1987) I wonder why you did not suggest​—what appears to me to be the obvious solution as the alternative to pollutive, limited fossil fuels—​the use of an inexhaustible, unlimited source of energy, solar power. It is clean and will provide a source of power forever.
R. A. M., United States
We are very positive about the potential for solar power as a solution both to much of earth’s pollution and to the limited supply of fossil fuels. (See our issue of February 22, 1980.) However, the problem is more that of human selfishness and special interests, which hinder the development and universal application of solar energy. For these reasons, we believe only God’s Kingdom will be able to address itself successfully to all the problems involved and provide the lasting solution.​—ED.

