VOL. XIX. APRIL 1, 1898. No. 7. 



CONTENTS. 



Our New Prophetic Chart 98 

Views from the Watch Tower 99 

Poem: Oertake Us on Our Journey, 

Lord! 100 

The Memorial Supper 101 

Is There Hope for Judas? 101 

"By Grace are Ye Saved" 102 

Once in Grace, Always in Grace 107 

"If We Suffer with Him We Shall 

Also Reign with Him" 109 

"We Beheld His Glory in the Holy 

Mount Ill 

page 98 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2282 : page 98 

OUR NEW PROPHETIC CHART. 



WE STILL procure and supply ($1.50 including expressage) 
the handsome, 5 ft. long Chart of the Ages, similar to the one in 
the front of MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., for parlor and hall meetings. 
But now we have something entirely new which every 
WATCH TOWER reader will want for personal and family use. 

It is 34 inches long, on extra heavy coated paper, with metal 
mountings top and bottom and hangers. It gives the outlines 
of the ages and dispensations, and underneath the same, and to 



a scale, it shows the various lines of prophecy presented in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN volumes, also an illustration of the "days of 
creation" as set forth in the WATCH TOWER some years ago, and 
promised again in some future volume of the DAWN series. 

The chart is too complex to be described briefly. Suffice it 
to say, If you are deeply interested in present truth, as presented 
in the TOWER and DAWN, you will surely want one of these 
charts for your sitting room or study wall. We have made the 
price 25 cents each, including postage, which will bring it within 
the reach of almost all. But that the poorest may enjoy it 
and be helped by it, we will send it free to all such on our list 
who drop us a postal card stating the fact and requesting the 
chart free, during the month of April, 1898. 

For the suggestion of such a chart, no less than for the drawing 
of this one, we all are indebted to our dear Brother U. G. Lee, 
whose service was rendered free to the Lord and his people. 
Wherever possible, let several unite in one order, to one address, 
as thus the risk of damage will be decreased. 



R2281 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE chief concerns of the world are food, clothing, 
shelter, money and the preparation of munitions 
of war;— among the Christian (?) nations. Beat 
your plowshares into swords and your pruning hooks 
into spears: turn your factories from the manufacture 
of the implements of peace to the preparation of war 
materials is the order of the day. 

Great Britain vs. France and Russia, as well as 
Spain vs. the United States, are straining every nerve 
to be prepared for war, should it come;— the former 
over China and her trade, the latter over Cuba and her 
liberty. We have many reasons for hoping that a conflict 
will be averted in both cases. Should war come, 
however, in either case our sympathies would, we are 
glad to say, justly be with the English speaking nations. 
For altho England's policy in China has not 
been one of disinterested benevolence, there can be no 
question that it has been and is and will continue to be 
more liberal toward the Chinese than would be the 
yokes of other Christian (?) nations of Europe. 

An armed intervention by the United States to secure 
the liberty of Cuba from the despotism and cruelty 
of the most bitter and cruel nation in Christendom 
would be, as nearly as can be imagined, a war on lines 
of disinterested benevolence. We believe that it is 
neither the desire of the government nor of the people 
of the United States to annex Cuba, while its population 
in all respects is as dissimilar to our own as is that 
of Mexico: hence whatever may be done for Cuba must 



be accredited either to pride or to benevolence— as with 
the food supplies already sent and still being forwarded 
by government and people to relieve victims of 
barbarity. 

We incline to think that the President's policy 
will result in securing for Cuba, without war, a liberty 
similar to that enjoyed by Canada, and if so he will deserve 
the congratulations of all civilized peoples. However, 
should war come— either of the above suggested 
—it would have no special prophetic significance so far 
as we can see. It would mean loss of life, increase of 
debts: and by increased business prosperity for a few 
years it would really put off the great catastrophe which 
will overthrow all governments in anarchy. 

CORRECTIONS. 

Not long since we, in common with other journals, 
called attention to the inconsistency of the New York 
millionaire, Trustee of the First Presbyterian church, 
H.M. Taber, whose Will showed him to have long been 
an infidel. The son of the deceased has since corrected 
some misapprehensions which we gladly record. 
He declares that his father "cherished a peculiarly 
bitter abhorrence of religious hypocrisy," and points 
out that he never was a member of the church, and that 
he had severed his relationship of Trustee ten years 
before he died: his acceptance of that office originally 
was to gratify a dear member of his family who was a 
member of that Church. 



In Rules for Daily Life given in last issue (which, 
by the way, we learn have been helpful to the friends 
in various localities) we neglected a very important 
item. It is one which is generally recognized by 
earthly courts and judges, but, alas, too frequently forgotten 
in the family and in the Church. It is this: 
No one is to be esteemed guilty because guilt is charged; 
but only after it has been PROVEN. 

The charged person is not to be esteemed guilty 
until he or she has proved the charge untrue: he is to 
be esteemed and treated as absolutely guiltless until 
the accuser has taken the Scriptural steps outlined in 

R2281 :page 100 

Rule V., and has manifested or proved the guilt. If 
this course were followed strictly it would quickly put 
an end to slandering and back-biting. For if the Church 
slanderer found that his charges were not believed, he 
would abstain or else follow the Scriptural rule. 

Because the fact is not generally known, we remark 
that any injurious or derogatory report is a slander. 
Webster defines "Slanderer, One who injures 



another by maliciously reporting something to his prejudice; 
a defamer; a calumniator." No one under the 
control of the holy spirit will engage in such "devil's 
business;" and each should be careful not to encourage 
others in such "works of the flesh and of the devil." 

In referring to conscience as an unsafe guide (Rule 
XI), we merely meant that because of "the fall" all 
of our consciences need the constant guidance and control 
of the Lord's Word, or they will mislead us. We 
have no other guide than conscience or judgment; 
hence, the necessity of having it divinely directed. It 
is not enough to say, "My conscience does not reprove 
me." 

CHURCH REVENUES DECREASE. 

Commenting on the resignation of Dr. John Hall 
from the pastorate of one of the most prominent Presbyterian 
churches in the world— the resignation having 
been subsequently recalled— an Exchange says:— 

R2282 : page 100 

"Surprising as his resignation, since withdrawn, 
was to the public and the Presbyterian church, this 
reason will be even more surprising. From a surplus, 
large enough in successive years to build a $100,000 
manse, the church has run behind, and pews once rented 
at $3,000, are let with difficulty. Where 10 years 
ago the church was giving $44,000 yearly to home 
missions, it is now giving $12,000, and its contribution 
to foreign missions has sunk from $28,000 to $9,000. As 
is always the case, this reduction has affected all receipts. 
Any church which stops giving to missions 
before long will stop adequately supporting its own 
gospel services." 

The Editor proceeds to say that a similar falling 
off is noted in the receipts of all Presbyterian churches. 

We render acknowledgment to God that the voluntary 
contributions to the spread of present truth 
have been increasing yearly, during this same period, 
as shown by the reports of the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society;— and that notwithstanding the 
friends of "harvest truth" are nearly all poor— "not 
many rich," mighty or great among them. But where 
the heart has been touched and the flame of love to 
God and man has been enkindled, there is a burning 
desire to be, to do and to give to the glory of him who 
called us "out of darkness into his marvelous light." 

"THE MODERN STEPHEN." 

This is the title of a sketch in the Ram's Horn 
for January 29th. It represents a faithful minister of 
the gospel under persecution. He is shown fallen in 
the street, a Bible on his arm: around him lie stones 



labeled Hate. Around him are pictured his assailants 
throwing more stones: a saloon keeper hurls a stone 
labeled Revenge; a society man with kid gloves hurls a 
stone labeled Persecution; a finely dressed man resembling 
a banker hurls a stone labeled Malice; an elegantly 
dressed woman (possibly his wife?) hurls a stone 
marked Scandal; while a College Professor with a large 
head (resembling that of a certain Xenia, Ohio, Professor) 
is throwing stones marked Ridicule. 

The cartoon is a good one, and very forcibly illustrates 
the changed methods of Satan and his employees 
for the accomplishment of the same ends as formerly. 
Thus are the prophets prohibited, "killed" and "beheaded" 
who do not shun to declare the truth, the 
whole counsel of God, today.— Compare Rev. 13:15,17; 
20:4; 6:11; Luke 21:17; 2 Tim. 3:12. 

R2282 : page 100 

O'ERTAKE US ON OUR JOURNEY, LORD! 

-(Luke 24:13-32.)- 

When to Emmaus the disciples walked, 
Downcast, their hopes to sorrow turned, 

A courtly stranger came and with them talked 
Whose hearts for consolation yearned. 

"Why walk ye thus, with sad, dejected mien, 
When brightly shines the King of Day? 

The woods are decked; for, as a radiant queen, 
Spring comes triumphant on her way." 

"O stranger, not by us the fields are seen; 

We study sorrow's pages o'er. 
The day is night, and crushed our hearts have been, 

Since Calv'ry's cross our Master bore. 

"Jesus of Nazareth his humble name, 

But rightful heir of David's throne. 
We trusted for redemption; but in shame 

We must our cause defeated own." 

"Defeated? Say not so who hope in God. 

Weep not! Jehovah's oath and seal 
Attest Messiah's righteous scepter-rod 

Shall Israel bless, all nations heal. 

"But ought he not have suffered all these things, 

And enter into glory, first 
To make conciliation? King of kings 

Indeed, but for our sakes accursed." 

Unlocking then the mysteries of the Word, 

The light the prophecies concealed, 
His eloquence their languished faith bestirred, 



And lo ! the Master was revealed. 



O kindly stranger! On our toilsome way 
O'ertake us, thou who went'st before! 

On thy deep footprints focus ev'ry ray 
Of light that "shineth more and more." 

Forsake us not, when faith and hope are weak, 
But walk with us the journey through; 

Full fill us with thy spirit, holy, meek, 
All bonds of earth and sin undo. 

Reveal thyself! With tender touch anoint 
Our dimmed eyes. Revive our faith 

With visions of the crown thou dost appoint 
To those who bear the cross till death— 

That, though at first we may discern thee not, 
We shall behold thee when we rest 

At twilight— all our griefs and cares forgot, 
Rejoiced in thee, and by thee blest. 

-R. B. HENNINGES. 



R2282:page 101 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



SOME friends of the truth in Georgia write that 

they have not celebrated the Memorial Supper 

since coming out of Babylon, and give as their 

reason: "We feel that our minds are consecrated, but 

our flesh is not, nor can be under surrounding circumstances. 

We are poor and have large families dependent 

and cannot deny them. Therefore we have abstained 

from this much desired blessing." 

If we understand the brethren aright, they are 
laboring under some misapprehension. If we should 
wait until our flesh is perfect, none of us could partake 
of the Memorial Supper, for the Church of this age is 
not to expect perfection of the flesh; our perfection, if 
we are faithful, will be as spirit beings in the First 
Resurrection. Now we have the treasure of the new 
nature, the new mind or will, in earthen vessels,— all 
of them more or less marred, blemished by sin. But 

R2283 :page 101 

here we have benefit under the New Covenant, by the 

terms of which God has agreed to accept our perfect 

wills (backed by our best endeavors) AS OUR ABSOLUTE 



PERFECTION. All such can say with the Apostle, 
"The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us"— we 
"walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit," and as 
close to it as possible. 

Consecration does not imply the neglect nor the forsaking 
of our families;— unless in God's providence his 
adversaries and ours should be permitted to kill us, or 
captivate and imprison us, and thus forcibly hinder our 
care, or separate us;— as was frequently the case during 
the dark ages. Otherwise God instructs us that 
reasonable care for our families is his will, and properly 
our duty. 

Full consecration to the Lord means a full surrender 
of our wills to God's will and of our bodies to our 
new wills. It means, consequently, the putting away 
of sin, to the best of our ability under the direction of 
the Lord's Word, and a cultivation daily and hourly of 
the holy spirit with its fruits and flowers of meekness, 
gentleness, purity, kindness,— Love. 

So then, dear Brethren, by faith realize that the 
Lamb of God was slain for our sins, and that the merit 
of his sacrifice covers and reckonedly cleanses us from 
sin in God's esteem: and so believing, and with hearts, 
wills, fully given up to the Lord, come to his table and 
partake of his emblems with mingled meekness and 
courage. 



We have various questions respecting the fourteenth 
of Nisan, all of which arise from a failure to recognize 
that the "Passover," as understood by the Jews, 
refers to the Feast of Passover, and has no reference to 
the killing of the lamb on the 14th,— which is the thing 
we celebrate. With the Jew, the 14th was merely a 
day of preparation for Passover, and the eating of the 
lamb, and especially its killing, was only a part of that 
preparation. The Law provided that the lamb should 
be killed on the 14th of Nisan at even— or literally, 
between evenings. It was therefore within the scope 
of that requirement, if the lamb were killed and eaten 
on the 14th at any time after 6 P.M. of the 13th. 

Let none of us forget to "put away all leaven"— 
sin— in preparation for the eating of the Passover. Let 
us cleanse ourselves from all filth of the flesh and of 
the spirit, perfecting holiness in the reverence of the 
Lord." (2 Cor. 7:1; 1 John 1:7.) Thus the remainder 
of life will be a feast of unleavened bread. 

Do not make the serious mistake that leaven symbolizes 
merely false doctrine (Matt. 16:6-12); remember 
that it is also defined by the Apostle to signify a 
wicked disposition. Not merely a wickedness which 
would steal and lie and murder (the grosser forms of 
wickedness), but a form of wickedness much more likely 
to assail those who have even nominally accepted 
Christ; viz., "malice," producing hatreds, envyings, 



strifes, back-bitings, evil surmisings, and other works 
of the flesh and the devil. Let the spirit of love come 
into our hearts and purge us of the old leaven of malice. 
-See 1 Cor. 5:6-8; Eph. 4:31; Col. 3:8; Tit. 3:3. 

Let a man examine himself and so let him eat of 
that bread and drink of that cup. Each should seek 
to make the most of the occasion in the interest of his 
own spiritual welfare. Let each apply afresh the 
cleansing blood, and renew his consecration to be faithful 
to the Master until death. Remember, too, the 
Master's words, "Watch and pray, lest ye enter into 
temptation." "Brethren, pray for us!" 



R2283 :page 101 

IS THERE HOPE FOR JUDAS? 



Wisconsin. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In reading the article 
on Venial and Mortal Sins in the TOWER for 
June 1, '96, 1 found a statement on page 122 which, 
if it is true, would seem to show that Judas' case is 
not a hopeless one. The statement is as follows: "On 
the contrary, those who have sinned wilfully and with 
full intent, and whose sin is mortal, do not feel penitent; 
but afterwards approve their sin and boast of it 
generally as greater light and liberty." This does not 
seem to be true in Judas' case. He repented of his 
sins, and that his repentance was sincere is shown by 
the fact that he restored to the Priests the money for 
which he had betrayed Jesus, and confessed to them 
that he had sinned, and in his despair went and hanged 
himself. -Matt. 27:3,4,5. 

In the article on Judas' case in the TOWER for 
April 15, 1896, one of the reasons given for believing 

R2283 : page 102 

that Judas' case is a hopeless one is our Lord's statement 
in Matt. 26:24. It seems to me that Jesus could 
not have meant that it would have been better for Judas 
never to have lived, as this could not be true. For 
even the short span of life he did enjoy was better than 
no existence at all. May the meaning not be that it 
would have been better for Judas if he were not born 
yet? This seems to be the meaning in the Diaglott 
translation of Matt. 26:24. It certainly appears that 
Judas did not expect that the Jews would be able to 
capture Jesus and condemn him to death. For if that 
was what he expected and desired, then he would not 
have repented of his sin. In John 17:12 Jesus calls 
Judas "the son of destruction." This would tend to 



prove that Judas' case is a hopeless one. But we find 

that Jesus applies just as strong names to the Scribes 

and Pharisees. He tells them they are of their father, 

the devil, calls them serpents and generation of vipers, 

and asks how they can escape the damnation of Gehenna. 

So it would seem that if Judas has died the 

second death, at least some of the Scribes and Pharisees 

must also have suffered it. Judas' case resembles 

somewhat that of the lady, described on page 41 in the 

booklet on Spiritism, who had permitted the evil spirits 

to get control of her will and lead her to wrong a 

dear friend, and then make her believe she had committed 

the unpardonable sin. She, too, would have 

killed herself as Judas did, if she had not been prevented. 

From what is stated in John 13:2,27, it 

would seem that Satan was the evil spirit who led 

Judas to betray his Savior. 

Hoping you will kindly help me to get a correct 
understanding of this question, I remain, 

Yours in the Redeemer, R. A. LINDBLAD. 

We give the brother's argument space because it 
is as good as we have ever seen on that side the Judas 
question. 

Some twenty years ago we were inclined to think 
that all must come to a full knowledge of all truth ere 
they could be liable to the Second Death; but we have 
come to the conclusion from the general tenor of 
Scripture that this is not the Lord's view and plan. 
On the contrary, deliberate and intelligent rejection of 
the first principles of the gospel seems to imply an unfitness 
for further favors on the ground that he that 
is unfaithful in that which is least, would be unfaithful 
also with more. Adam's knowledge of the divine 
plan was very slight, yet his disobedience brought full 
death penalty. The real grounds for sympathy with 
and hope for the masses is the Apostle's statement that 
Satan has blinded their minds,— misinterpreted the 
facts. All such will by and by "see out of obscurity" 
when Satan shall be bound— during the Millennium. 

We confess little hope for the Scribes and Pharisees 
who, when they could find no other fault, ascribed 
our Lord's good works to the devil. As for Judas' 
tears,— were they better than those of Esau (Heb. 12:17)? 
Did his repentance lead him to a renewed and 
reformed life, or to self destruction?— Heb. 6:6. 



R2283 : page 102 

"BY GRACE ARE YE SAVED. 



"For the grace of God that bringeth [leads to] salvation hath 
been manifested for all men— teaching us that renouncing ungodly 



desires we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this 
present age, waiting for the blessed hope, even the glorious 
manifestation of our great God and Savior Jesus 
Christ; who gave himself for us that he might redeem 
us from all iniquity and purify unto himself 
a peculiar people, devoted to good works." 

-Titus 2: 11-14. - 

"GRACE, 'tis a charming sound," sang the 
poet, nor did he exaggerate; for to all who 
have learned the true meaning of divine grace, that 
word, like the word "gospel," is a synonym for all the 
divine mercies which God's people may now or ever 
enjoy. But this word grace is little used to-day in 
common conversation on the every day affairs of 
life, and consequently remarkably few appreciate its 
richness, its wealth of significance, and consequently 
many of the statements of Scripture in which this word 
occurs are, to the majority of readers, deprived of their 
real beauty and force. 

The word grace signifies favor— particularly unmerited 
favor. Acts of grace are thus to be clearly 
distinguished from acts of justice and from obligations. 
If this proper signification were in the minds of people 
when reading the Scriptures where the word grace so 

R2284 : page 102 

frequently occurs, it would be to all true believers a 
great protection against numerous of Satan's wiles and 
false doctrines— the general aim of which is to misrepresent 
the divine dealings and to pervert and subvert 
the divine testimonies. Every testimony to the effect 
that God is extending his "grace" to humanity or to 
the Church is a testimony to their unworthiness to justly 
demand those favors or blessings. 

The spirit of the world in general is that of self-sufficiency 
and independence; following their own wisdom 
and lacking the instruction and wisdom from above, 
the worldly-wise regard themselves with complacency; 
they believe themselves to be quite sufficiently righteous 
to merit a good deal of divine blessing and reward: 
true, they admit also that they have imperfections, but 
these they expect to pay for to the full according to 
some law of divine retribution. Hence they are undisposed 
to look for or to accept pardon, forgiveness, 
justification through the great sacrifice for sins which 
God has provided. They see a law in nature according 
to which fire burns him who believes that it will 
burn and burns equally him who believes not that it 
will burn. And so they regard all of the laws governing 

R2284 : page 103 

humanity as merciless, graceless— strictly just. 



The Scripture presentation of the matter does not 
overlook the law of retribution— that sin of any kind, 
the transgression of any law, will surely bring its penalty, 
whoever may be the sinner and whatever may be 
the conditions. And the propositions respecting divine 
grace, rightly understood, are not in conflict with this 
universal law of retribution: the proposition of grace 
is not to prevent fire from burning, but to provide a 
healing balm; not to prevent the wages of sin from 
following transgression, but to succor the repentant 
who desire to reform, and to help him back to divine 
favor and full recovery, along the lines of strictest justice; 
—by a willing ransom-price. And since this succor 
is wholly unmerited on man's part and without 
just obligation on God's part, it is purely of divine 
favor— "grace." Indeed, if it were not for sin and its 
retributive punishments, there would be no room for 
grace: it is man's necessity for grace that constitutes 
the divine opportunity for its exercise. Grace, however, 
operates in harmony with the divine laws, and 
not in violation of them. 

Remembering that divine grace signifies God's unmerited 
mercy and favor, let us examine its operation 
in the light of Scripture:— 

(1) The first movement of divine grace toward 
mankind was the exercise of benevolence, love and 
compassion toward mankind in his fallen and sinful 
condition. There was nothing in man to merit this 
compassion and sympathy; quite to the contrary: we 
were aliens from God and enemies of his righteous rule 
through wicked works,— the depravity wrought in us 
through sin voluntarily committed by father Adam. 

(2) It was in harmony with this thought of grace 
on God's part, or, as we might term it, God's gracious 
plan, that he revealed something respecting his purpose 
of ransom and restitution to father Abraham;— 

thus preaching first, beforehand, to him the good tidings 
of a coming blessing or grace, saying, "In thy seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blest." Abraham, 
and others who believed God, rejoiced in mind under 
the influence of this gracious promise— altho even the 
beginning of its fulfilment was still nearly two thousand 
years off. 

(3) The third step of grace was in the great gift 

of divine love, our Lord Jesus Christ. It included the 
gracious arrangement made with the only begotten 
Son of God, on account of which he joyfully laid aside 
his heavenly glories and conditions and humbled himself 
in death as the ransom or substitute for the first 
Adam and thus incidentally a "ransom for all" the 
race of Adam. 

(4) It was a fourth step of grace when God, having 
determined to select a Church, a "little flock," to 

be heirs of God and joint-heirs of Jesus Christ their 
Lord, in the dispensing of the divine favors or grace, 
promised through Abraham, began the work of selecting 



this Church— receiving at Pentecost the first installment, 
from the house of servants into the house of 
sons and joint-heirs. (John 1:12,13.) Altho tests 
were applied to those received into the family of sons, 
and altho character qualifications were imposed upon 
them and will be imposed upon all who will be called 
and accepted to this high calling, nevertheless this also 
was a step of grace, because there were no obligations 
resting upon God to confer upon us such a "high 
calling," such "riches of his grace in Jesus Christ our 
Lord." 

(5) Throughout this Gospel age the same grace 

has been in operation doing a twofold work; (a) justifying 
repentant believers from the guilt of their moral 
obliquity, and giving them thus a standing before God 
in Christ's imputed righteousness;— thus making them 
eligible to the "high calling to divine sonship and to 
joint-heirship in God's Kingdom to come, and (b) then 
extending to them that "high calling," inviting them 
through the divine Word to become the "very elect." 
True, there are conditions imposed, and not all the 
many "called" will be among the few "chosen;" 
but nevertheless it is an inestimable privilege to be 
"called" and to have put within our grasp the opportunity 
and all the needful helps, whereby we may make 
our calling and election sure. 

(6) The grace of God will still further be manifested 
when the "elect" Church shall all have been sought, 
found, tried, disciplined, and "made meet to be partakers 
of the inheritance of the saints in light;" for the blessings 
which will be conferred upon this glorified Church 

will not only be such as were not merited, such therefore 
as were not of obligation upon God's part, but 
according to the divine testimony they will be additionally 
great, super-abounding in grace, "exceedingly 
abundantly more than we know how to ask or expect;" 
for "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath 
entered into the heart of man, the things which God 
hath in reservation for those that love him."— 
1 Cor. 2:9. 

(7) Even then, God's grace will not have exhausted 
itself;— even after having thus honored and 

blessed and exalted the Church, the body of Christ, whose 
only merit consisted first in an honest confession of 
sin and an acceptance of the divine favor, and second, 
in their "reasonable service" in rendering their lives 
in obedience to him who bought them and in and 
through whom the divine graces were extended. 

Then divine grace will begin to be fully manifested 
—then all shall see it, all shall know it, and all who 
will may share it; for then will begin the glorious 

R2284 : page 104 

"times of restitution of all things, which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the 



world began"— the Millennial age of a thousand years; 
the time when the knowledge of the Lord shall graciously 
be caused to fill the whole earth; the time when 
all the sin-blinded eyes shall be opened; the time when 
all the prisoners of the pit (death) shall come forth, 
that they may be instructed in righteousness. Then, 
according to the grace of the divine promise, he who 
redeemed the world shall judge the world in righteousness, 
a trial, an opportunity, that whosoever will, with a 
knowledge of sin and its penalty, and with a knowledge 
of righteousness and its rewards, with a knowledge 
of the goodness and grace of God shining in the face 
of Jesus Christ our Lord, may then stand trial and be 
judged as to whether they will receive God's grace and 
its provisions of eternal life, or whether they will reject 
these and die the second death. 

Here we behold the wonderful steps of grace. No 
one can intelligently believe in divine grace who holds 
the theory of evolution or any other theory of salvation 
than the Scriptural one, which recognizes man's 
original creation in the divine likeness, his fall into sin 
and death, his redemption therefrom by the death of 
our Redeemer, and his hope for recovery through divine 
grace extended now to the Church and to be extended 
by and by through the Church (under Christ its 
Head) to all the families of the earth. 

Coming now to consider present manifestations of 
divine grace toward the Church, we note that many 
professed followers of the Lord fail in a very large degree 
to appreciate this grace which it is their privilege 
to enjoy. This is attributable largely to false teaching 
and preaching. In very much that is preached in 
the name of the gospel of the grace of God, the element 
of grace is entirely omitted, and such preaching 
is proportionately vain— sometimes worse than vain— in 
that it is delusive and subversive. For instance, how 
common it is for people to hear and to believe that if 
they "do right" they will have divine rewards at the end 
of life's race; but if they "do wrong" they shall have divine 
punishment at the end of the race. Such views ignore 
grace entirely, for if we are to be punished in proportion 
to our shortcomings and rewarded for our obedient 
deeds, where would be the "grace?" where would be 
the mercy? where would be the necessity of a Savior, 
a sin-offering, an atonement and a reconciliation with 
God? and where would be the peace through our Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ? None of these mercies 
and blessings can be rightly recognized except as the 
grace of God (his unmerited favor) is seen in them. 

The fact is that the divine standard of righteousness 
is much higher than men generally understand: 
with God righteousness is synonymous with perfection; 
and hence "all unrighteousness [all imperfection, however 
or whenever or wherever]— is [a proof of] sin." 
Thus all men are proved to be sinners,— because all are 
imperfect, un-right. And the divine law is that the 



sinner, the wrongdoer, the un-right, the imperfect, 
shall not live. "The wages of sin is death." Whoever 

R2285 : page 104 

understands this can see at once that man's only 
hope of eternal life lies not in his own perfection, but 
in divine mercy, grace. To plead that we are not 
wholly bad, corrupt, or even that we are not so bad as 
some others, is to admit our imperfection, and hence 
to prove the hopelessness of our case except as divine 
grace intervenes to help us. 

But, says some one, That is not a fair statement 
of the case. God made me as I am, imperfect; and 
justice requires that he shall not demand of me an impossible 
perfection, nor punish me for weaknesses and 
imperfections beyond my control. 

Such reasoning implies a misunderstanding of the 
case. It is a mistake to assume that God made us imperfect. 
All "his work is perfect." (Deut. 32:4; 
Psa. 18:30; Matt. 5:48.) He neither created idiots 
nor other physical and mental malformations of humanity, 
but, as the Scriptures declare, we were "born in 
sin and shapen in iniquity— in sin did my mother conceive 
me." Our blemishes come to us from our parents, 
not from God. The Scriptures not only point out to 
us father Adam's sinless perfection, saying that he was 
created in the image of God, but they plainly declare 
that it was by his disobedience that the divine sentence 
of death passed upon him and passed as an inheritance, 
a legacy of evil, to his offspring, saying, "By one man's 
disobedience sin entered into the world and death as a 
result of sin, and so death passed upon all men, for all 
are sinners [imperfect]." Truly also, "The fathers 
have eaten a sour grape [disobedience] and the children's 
teeth are set on edge.— Rom. 5:12,17-19; Jer. 31:29; 
Ezek. 18:2. 

The very basis of all our hopes, then, is this grace 
of God, operating toward us through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. God's grace does not subvert or set aside God's 
law, however, and he who would rightly appreciate 
and use the divine grace should recognize this fact. 
God's grace was not intended to frustrate the spirit of 
his own law: it was not intended to clear the guilty, 
the wilful transgressor. It acknowledges the divine 
law, attests its justice, and has fully met its requirements 
in the person and sacrifice of our Lord Jesus on 
behalf of Adam and all his race involved in his transgression 
and his penalty— death. Hence it was that 
"Christ died, the just for the unjust" in order "that 
God might be just and yet be the justifier of him that 
believeth in Jesus." And the only condition upon 
which God's grace is offered is our acknowledgment 

R2285 : page 105 



of our sin, weakness and imperfection, a sorrow for 
these and a repentance and reformation to the extent 
of our ability and an acceptance of Christ Jesus as the 
personification of divine grace. Upon no other condition 
can we step into this grace of God or walk in 
its way and inherit its rewards. 

And even after we have received Christ and God's 
grace in him, and are no longer recognized as strangers, 
aliens to God, but sons, as servants of righteousness 
and no longer servants of sin, being imperfect, we are 
not free from blemishes of word, thought and deed; 
yet, God's grace under the New Covenant continues 
with us to cover our blemishes until perfected in the 
resurrection. Under its provisions whatever is contrary 
to our wills, and purely the result of hereditary weakness, 
may be forgiven; and our obliquity and blameworthiness 
be gauged only by the measure of wilfulness 
or assent connected with the wrongdoing. Nevertheless, 
to some extent, chastisements or natural 
penalties for violations of law may be expected: but 
to those under grace these will come as helps by the 
way, causing them more and more to detest sin, as 
corrections in righteousness, as chastisements and 
disciplines for their blessing. And even these sure 
penalties may be to some extent ameliorated in accordance 
with the wisdom of our great High priest, who, 
having borne all our sins in his own body on the tree, 
is freely empowered to abate for us so much of the 
penalty of our misdeeds as grace may be able to cover 
as un-wilful transgressions. 

There is a disposition in our day, as there was a disposition 
in the days of the apostles, for those who have 
once accepted of divine forgiveness, the grace of God 
through Christ, to turn aside therefrom and to attempt 
to justify themselves by works. Even while first experiences 
were those of humble dependence upon divine 
mercy, subsequent experiences sometimes lead to the 
rejection of the grace that at first was so thankfully 
received. The Apostle wrote to some thus affected, 
saying, "Christ has become of none effect unto you, 
whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen 
from grace." (Gal. 5:4.) Judged from this same 
standard, how many Christians to-day have backslidden 
—fallen from grace— lost the trust in the merit 
of the precious blood and in divine favor extended to 
us through the great atonement sacrifice. Now, as 
then, the disposition is to trust to works of our own 
righteousness, which the inspired writers tell us and 
which our own consciences should prove to us are imperfect, 
"filthy rags" unfit and unable to cover us. 
Yes, we need a covering before we could in any manner 
or degree hope to be acceptable to God, and this covering 
of our imperfections with the imputed righteousness 
of Christ, is another statement of the grace of 
God extended to us. This tendency to depart from a 
recognition of God's grace in Christ as our only hope 



for eternal life, and to take instead a hope of being 
able to walk righteously and to do justly, and thus to 
merit eternal life, is what the Apostle very properly 
calls "another gospel"— a false gospel.— Gal. 1:6. 

This thought of the divine grace as the basis of 
all our mercies is interwoven with all the promises of 
God's Word. Thus the Apostle speaks of the gracious 
plan of God, and Christ as the exponent of that plan 
as "the grace of God and the gift by grace."— 
Rom. 5:15. 

Our approach to God in prayer is spoken of as an 
approach, not to the throne of justice and equity, but 
as an approach to "the throne of grace," where "we 
may obtain mercy and find grace to help in every time 
of need."~Heb. 4:16. 

Again we are exhorted that our hearts be established 
in grace; and again told that unto every one of 
us is given grace according to the measure of our faith; 
and again the Apostle declares of himself, "By the 
grace of God I am what I am." 

According to the testimony of our text this grace 
is general, "for all men," and must therefore ultimately 
in some manner or other be extended to all men,— the 
dead as well as the living. The translation of our 
Common Version is manifestly faulty here; all men, 
even in this most enlightened day of the world's history, 
have not yet beheld God's grace in any degree, 
nor has it as yet brought them salvation. But since it 
has been provided freely for all, so ultimately it shall be 
extended to all, that all may avail themselves of it. 

The teaching of this grace is not that we may continue 
in sin that grace may abound; for divine grace is 
intended to benefit only those who renounce sin and 
become servants of righteousness: and thus, as our 
text declares, God's grace teaches us that we should 
repudiate sin and live separate from every ungodly desire, 
in righteousness, soberness and godlikeness. 
Furthermore, as our text declares, this grace of God 
does not claim to have reached its completeness, and 
to have accomplished in us and for us the grand designs 
of the God of all grace. On the contrary, it teaches 
us to wait for the consummation of this grace until the 
glorious manifestation of the Son of God in the majesty 
and power of his Kingdom, to unite his Church with 
himself as his Bride and joint heir, the channel of mercies 
and blessings through which God's grace shall flow 
to all the groaning creation.— Rom. 8:18-22; 11:31. 

"RECEIVE NOT THE GRACE OF GOD IN VAIN." 



"We then as workers together with him, beseech you also 
that ye receive not the grace of God in vain."— 2 Cor. 6:1. 

This exhortation is addressed to such as have already 



recognized God's gracious character and the gift 

R2285 : page 106 

of his grace toward mankind,— the redemption which 
is in Christ Jesus. The Apostle has just been explaining 
this matter of how God's grace had provided a 
reconciliation; "that God was in Christ reconciling 
the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses 
unto them [but unto him who died for them]." He 
declares himself an ambassador on behalf of God to 
declare this grace and exhorts his readers not only to 
accept of God's grace in the forgiveness of sins through 
Christ, but additionally that they also should become 
fully reconciled or completely in harmony with the 
Lord, as would be represented by full consecration to 
him and his service, after the example of the Apostle 
himself. 

We take it that this exhortation of our text is the 
equivalent of the same apostle's exhortation elsewhere, 
namely, "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of 
God [already brethren because already believers in 
Christ and partakers through him of divine grace], 
that ye present your bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable 
unto God, which is your reasonable service." 
-Rom. 12:1. 

The Apostle was here urging progress on the part 
of the believers, advancement from "justification by 
faith" to the next higher step in divine grace and 
privilege,— full consecration even unto death, in response 
to the "call" to joint-heirship with Christ in 
his Kingdom,— to suffer with him in the present time, 
and to reign with him by and by in glory. These two 
steps are contrasted by the same Apostle, who says of 
himself and others who had taken both steps, (1) "Being 
justified by faith we have peace with God through 
our Lord Jesus Christ." (2) "By whom also [additionally] 
we have access by faith into this [further] 
grace wherein we stand and rejoice in hope of [sharing] 
the glory of God."— Rom. 5:1,2. 

R2286 : page 106 

In our text the Apostle distinctly implies the possibility 
that some may receive the grace of God in vain 
—to no purpose. We see from the connection as we 
have examined it, that he refers to the grace of God 
in justification, the forgiveness of our sins, and not to 
the second step of grace, our acceptance to the new 
nature through the begetting of the spirit. This implies, 
therefore, that the only object of justification by 
faith in this present age, is to give us a footing, a standing 
of acceptableness with God, from which we may 
be able to advance and take the second step of self-sacrifice, 
and become joint-heirs with Christ in his 
Kingdom. Nevertheless, this first step and all the 



privileges and blessings connected with it would be 
"in vain," profitless to us, if we fail to take the second 
step, the particular feature of the divine plan which 
belongs to this Gospel age. 

We are not to add to the Word of God, and to say 
that to receive justification in vain (by not making use 
of it to progress to a complete consecration and newness 
of nature) would mean eternal torment, or even 
the second death: we are simply to understand it as it 
reads, that the intention of the grace of justification, 
the first step, being to qualify us for the second step, 
those who fail to take the second step will have no particular 
benefit accrue to them from the first step, which 
would thus have been taken in vain, profitlessly, without 
permanent results and advantages. 

We hold that the Scriptures in general teach that 
only those who take the "narrow way" will gain any 
prize offered during this Gospel age, which is specifically 
the age set apart for the development of the "royal 
priesthood," devoted to good works— to self-sacrifices 
in the service of the Lord and his cause. Indeed, there 
is only one prize and one hope of our calling during 
this age— the other prize and other hope and other call 
will be in the age to come. We cannot therefore expect 
that any who take the first step of faith in Christ, 
and who are therefore temporarily justified because of 
their faith, will have a reward for a faith which did 
not work by love. The faith that works by love speedily 
goes on to full consecration and self-sacrifice, and is a 
sure indication of the kind the Lord is seeking for his 
"little flock," the "royal priesthood," the "joint-heirs." 
The faith, therefore, which refuses to work 
by love, cannot be considered an acceptable faith in 
God's sight. Nor can we expect that this class will 
be counted worthy to share in the earthly phase of the 
Kingdom with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the 
prophets. 

Why should they be rewarded? It was by God's 
grace that the knowledge of his grace reached them, 
while it passed by others. Will they be rewarded 
further because they have already been blessed with a 
knowledge of God's grace which they have rejected- 
received in vain? We think not. Instead of being 
more worthy to receive blessings of the Lord than the 
ignorant world who never tasted of his grace, they are, 
if anything, more blameworthy, because that after having 
tasted of the truth they did not love it sufficiently 
to serve it when they found that that service implied 
self-sacrifice. Quite different from this was the conduct 
of the ancient worthies. While not favored with 
the "high calling" to the divine nature and jointheirship 
with Christ, because this "call" was not yet due 
to be proclaimed, nevertheless, these ancient worthies 
manifested a faith and a trust in the Lord and his 
promises which worked, and by their works manifested a 
love for the Lord and a loyalty to him which did not 



hesitate to sacrifice reputation, wealth and life itself, 
in obedience to the principles of righteousness revealed 
to them. 

R2286 : page 107 

Those who receive the grace of God (justification, 
forgiveness) in vain, permit their justification to lapse, 
and to our understanding have thereafter no advantage 
above the remainder of the world, nor has the Lord 
more interest in them than he has in "all the families 
of the earth," for whom he has prepared the gracious 
blessings of the Millennium. When God's time shall 
come for extending to the world in general his mercies 
and blessings, we fail to see that previous knowledge 
and opportunity, misused, received in vain, will be of 
any benefit or advantage: whether or not it will be of 
disadvantage and bring greater "stripes" of punishment, 
will depend largely, we believe, upon the measure 
of light enjoyed with its corresponding responsibilities, 
and the measure of conscientiousness with 
which that light was lived up to. 

A much misunderstood text respecting grace is 
the one used as a caption for this article, namely, "By 
grace are ye saved, and that not of yourselves, it is the 
gift of God." (Eph. 2:8.) The erroneous thought given 
by many is that our faith is not our own faith, not of 
our own volition, but an impartation, a gift from God. 
Of course, in one sense every gift and blessing which 
we enjoy is indirectly if not directly from God; "Every 
good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and 
cometh down from the Father of lights." (Jas. 1:17.) 
But the proper understanding of the Apostle's words, 
we believe, is this: It is of God's grace and not of 
personal merit on our part that salvation is offered to 
us; and altho that salvation is offered to us as a reward 
of faith (including true faith's obedience), yet we 
cannot even boast respecting our faith as tho it merited 
the Lord's favor,— for our faith is something which 
is the indirect result of divine providence also; there are 
millions of others in the world who might exercise just 
as much faith as we if they had been favored of God 
with as much light, intelligence, knowledge, as a basis 
of faith: hence our faith is not to be credited as a meritorious 
condition but we are to be thankful to God for 
it, for the circumstances and conditions which have 
made it possible for us to exercise faith are of his grace. 



R2286 : page 107 

ONCE IN GRACE ALWAYS IN GRACE. 



QUITE a large number of people rest themselves 

very securely upon the fallacy that 

if they have once been made the objects of divine 

grace, it means perpetual grace to all eternity, and insures 

their salvation despite anything they may afterward 

do or leave undone. This view is an outgrowth 

of false views of election and predestination,* and is 

hurtful to many. Like most of errors, this view is 

supported by misapplications of Scripture. For instance, 

the following:— 

"Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you." 
-John 15:16. 

"My Father, which gave them me, is greater than 
all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's 
hand."-John 10:29. 

"If God be for us, who can be against us?"— 
Rom. 8:31. 

"Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's 
elect? It is God that justifieth."— Rom. 8:33. 

"What shall separate us from the love of Christ? 
Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, 
or nakedness, or sword? Nay, in all these things we 
are more than conquerors through him that loved us." 
-Rom. 8:35,37. 

"I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, 
nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things 
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor 
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from 
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord." 
-Rom. 8:38,39. 

Those who become thoroughly infatuated with the 
theory that God's grace, having once reached them, 
must abide with them through all eternity, entirely 
lose sight of the numerous texts which declare that all 
who would be permanent and everlasting objects of divine 
grace and love must abide in Christ, and as the 
Apostle says, "Keep yourselves in the love of God." 
They must so run as to obtain the prize of the high 
calling. We must lay aside every weight and the sin 
which doth so easily beset us and run with patience 
the race set before us in the gospel, if we would win 
the grand consummation which will mean everlasting 
grace. It was grace that first contrived the way. It 
was grace which opened the door to this race-course 
and invited us to run for the prize. It is grace that 
holds before our eyes the inspiration of the prize. It 
is grace that provides strength and succor along the 
journey in every time of need. But the necessity still 
remains that we shall "abide," that we shall "run," 
that we shall not "faint," that we shall not be "overcharged" 
with the cares of this life and the deceitfulness 
of riches. 

Mark how the Apostle Peter declares the matter: 
after telling respecting the cultivation of the fruits of 
the spirit, he says, "If ye do these things, ye shall 
never fall, but so an entrance shall be ministered abundantly 



into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ."— 2 Pet. 1:11. 

Mark how the Apostle Paul speaks of some and 
says that if they shall fall away after having tasted of 
divine grace it will be impossible to renew them again 
unto repentance.— Heb. 6:5,6. 



♦MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., p.96. 
R2286 : page 108 

Mark how the Apostle John declares, "There is a 
sin unto death: I do not say that ye shall pray for it." 
(1 John 5:16.) The sin unto death in the present time 
could be committed only by those who have tasted of 
divine grace, which ultimately shall reach every man 
and test every man; because "the grace of God hath 
been manifested for all men"— "to be testified in due 
time." 

Mark our Lord's words on this subject. Speaking 
of those who had already received the grace of God 
and had already become members of his body, branches 
in the true Vine, he says, "I am the true vine and my 
Father is the husbandman; every branch in me that 
beareth not fruit he taketh away." (John 15:1,2.) 

R2287 : page 108 

"He that abideth in me and I in him, the same bringeth 

forth much fruit." (John 15:5.) "If any man 

abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and withered." 

(John 15:6.) "Ye are my friends if ye do 

whatsoever I command you."— John 15:14. 

Here, then, we have two separate lines of texts, 
and the question before us properly is, not which set of 
texts will we adopt, for we are not at liberty to choose 
portions of Scripture which we may prefer, or to reject 
portions because out of harmony with our theories: 
rather our theories must be modified, altered, amended, 
so as to be in fullest harmony with every testimony of 
the inspired Word. How, then, can these two sets of 
texts be harmonized? We answer, they can be very 
simply and very beautifully harmonized by giving to 
each its proper place and weight: they balance 
themselves. 

The statement that none could pluck us out of the 
heavenly Father's hand is equally precious and equally 
important with the one which declares that if we do 
not bear fruit, the heavenly husbandman will cut us 
off from membership in the Vine, not permit us to 
abide in the Vine; but as rejected ones we shall be deprived 
of all his grace, and hence wither. The point 
to be noticed is, that so long as our hearts are loyal to 
the Lord and his Word and his work, neither angels 



nor devils nor men nor any other creature or thing 
would be permitted to alienate us or separate us from 
him who loved us and bought us; but if, on the contrary, 
we do not earnestly desire to abide in the Vine, 
and to bear the fruit of the Vine, and to work the works 
of God, we are thus proving that our hearts are alienated 
from our Lord, and under such circumstances he 
would not only permit us to leave him, and his work, 
and his word, but, indeed, would force us to do so,— as 
expressed in the statement, "Every branch in me that 
beareth not fruit, he taketh away." 

From this standpoint all is clear and harmonious: 
it was by the action of our own wills, after we had been 
favored with a knowledge of the truth, that we consecrated 
and were "accepted in the Beloved;" and similarly 
by the actions of our own wills we can at any 
time withdraw from the Lord. He would not compel 
our loyalty; he seeketh not the worship of slaves, or 
any compulsory work or service. "He seeketh such 
to worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth." 
(John 4:23.) As by our own will or volition we placed 
our hands in the hand of the Lord for guidance, and 
submitted our wills to his will, to be dead to ourselves 
and alive to our God, so by the same will and volition 
we may withdraw ourselves and break our covenant 
and do despite to the spirit of grace, and bring upon ourselves 
all the loss which this would entail. But once having 
been accepted in the Beloved, nothing but our own 
wills could change this relationship: the ill will of others 
could not do it; and as for our heavenly Bridegroom, 
like the Father, he changes not— he is faithful. Nothing 
shall be able to separate us from the love of God 
in Christ Jesus so long as our wills are actively enlisted 
with the Lord and his cause. 

It is well, however, for us to note from another 
standpoint the operations of grace on behalf of those 
who have received it. For instance, suppose that our 
hearts are loyal to the Lord in the sense that we do 
not willingly and intentionally repudiate him, or his 
people, or his Word, or his work, but that nevertheless 
from some cause our hearts become overcharged 
with the cares of this life, or the ambitions of this life, 
or the strife for the riches of this life, and so our zeal 
and energy for the Lord and his cause, and our fruit-bearing, 
are largely hindered (not stopped, but lessened): 
will the Lord's grace let go of us in such an 
hour of temptation and trial and abandon us to the Evil 
One? Will he say to us lightly, You are now choosing 
the world; I now drop you entirely; go to your 
choice. Or will he have compassion upon us, and remembering 
our frame, that we are dust, go after us as 
lost or wandering sheep? 

The latter, we answer. Once in grace under divine 
protection and oversight, means always in grace 
until we shall have done despite to the spirit of favor, by 
sinning deliberately, repudiating either the Lord or his 



Word or its spirit. The Lord goes after his sheep frequently 
with the rod of chastisement, reproof, trial, 
difficulty, persecution, adversities, that he may correct 
them and bring them again to the narrow way; or as 
expressed in another place, the branch is pruned, 
many of the tendrils which were catching hold of all 
the various attractions of earthly life are pruned off, 
yet the branch remains a branch in the Vine: the very 
object of the pruning is to cause that branch to bear 
fruit more abundantly. "If ye be without chastisement," 
says the Apostle, "ye are not sons." Every 
son needs discipline to fit him and prepare him for the 

R2287 : page 109 

Father's service, that he may be pleasing, acceptable 
as a co-worker with God, not only in the present period 
but also in the world to come. 

These chastisements will be kept up for a reasonable 
time, often are kept up for years. With some 
they result in a complete correction in righteousness, 
bringing the wandering sheep back, so instructed by 
its experiences that it will never wander more. In 
other cases this discipline and chastisement are repeated 
over and over and become a life-long lesson, and the 
recipients will fail to get the great prize of the high-calling, 
which is offered only to the overcomers. 

A pen-picture of these, who having become the 
Lord's people by his grace, and who, still clinging to 
the Lord do not repudiate him, his Word and his people, 
yet are not overcomers of the world nor proper 
fruit-bearers, nor "fit for the Kingdom," is given us 
in Rev. 7:14,15: "These are they which came out of 
great tribulation and have washed their robes and made 
them white in the blood of the Lamb." Because the 
grace of God in Christ keeps hold of us so long as we 
do not repudiate him and his principles of righteousness, 
therefore that grace will bring us through if we 
thus abide in him and in his Word, even if it should 
not bring us through as conquerors and more than conquerors, 
but must bring us through "great tribulation;" 
—palm bearers, tho not crown wearers. 

In still other cases, however, the chastisements of 
the Lord merely sour and embitter the hearts which 
in such cases usually become the more proud, boastful, 
arrogant and resentful of the rod of correction. They 
become deaf to the Shepherd's voice, and run to the 
goats for sympathy and fellowship and counsel, and 
speedily lose the sheep nature. For such there seems 
to be no hope held out in the Lord's Word. We should 
do all that we can to help these,— "pulling them out 
of the fire"— but if we find it impossible to renew them 
again unto repentance we may surmise the reason to be 
that they have ceased to be "sheep," ceased to abide 
as branches in the Vine. 

The proper attitude of heart for all who have received 



divine grace, is to be anxious to bring forth 
much fruit and thus to be more and more like our dear 
Redeemer, daily growing in likeness to him, as well as 
in knowledge of him. "Herein is my Father glorified 
that ye bear much fruit," and such fruit as will remain. 



R2287 : page 109 

"IF WE SUFFER WITH HIM WE SHALL ALSO REIGN WITH HIM. 

APRIL 10. -MATT. 16:21-28. 

"He was bruised for our iniquities."— Isa. 53:5. 

THIS lesson brings us down to near the time of 
the crucifixion. The former part of our Lord's 
ministry was devoted apparently to the establishment 
of his disciples' faith, through cures and miracles and 
instructions. He had taught them that he was the 
King long promised, the Messiah; and had promised 
them that if faithful to him they should participate in 
the glories of the Kingdom; but up to this time he 
had not explained to them how sufferings and death 
must precede the glories. "From that time forth began 
Jesus to show to his disciples how he must... 
suffer,. ..be killed, and be raised again the third 
day." It was necessary that they should know of the 
sufferings, that were to be expected as well as the glories 
to follow; but it was not expedient that they should 
learn of the sufferings at first, nor until their faith and 
confidence should become established. Here is a valuable 
lesson to all who are seeking to walk in the Master's 
footsteps— especially to such as endeavor to teach 
others: namely, that the truth should be told as the 
hearers are able to hear it; "milk for babes," "meat 
for men." 

Noble, impulsive Peter had previously been commended 
for his good confession, that Jesus of Nazareth 
was the Christ, the long promised Messiah: perhaps 
the Master's approval on that occasion had something 
to do with Peter's forwardness on this occasion. With 
our poor, weak, fallen natures, it is a difficult matter 
always to keep well balanced and to say the right thing 
at the right time. On this occasion Peter made a serious 
mistake, for he attempted to turn teacher and got 
out of his place as pupil or disciple, when he attempted 
to reprove the Master and to instruct him, saying, 
"This shall not be unto thee." 

In his commendation of Peter's confession of him 
as the Christ, our Lord had intimated that it was not 
merely by his own wisdom that he had thus recognized 
and confessed, but that he had been under the guidance 
of the Father,— "Flesh and blood hath not revealed 



R2288 : page 109 

it unto thee, but my Father." So in this case, 
our Lord intimates that Peter evidently had come under 
the control of a different spirit or influence— the influence 
of Satan: and since Peter had become the mouthpiece 
of error, of Satan, our Lord addresses him as tho 
he himself were Satan, "Get thee behind me, Satan." 
Our Lord recognized that the temptation put to him at 
the beginning of his ministry, and which he had resisted 
in the wilderness, was now again being thrust at him 
by the same great enemy of God who was seeking to 
use Peter as a channel of temptation, to hinder him 
from progressing in the way to sacrifice which the 
Father's plan had marked out for him. 

R2288 :page 110 

What a lesson is here for every one of us to the effect 
that we may be either mouthpieces of God and righteousness 
or error and Satan;— helps or hindrances to 
the fellow-members of the body of Christ. How careful 
we should be that our words and conduct are in full 
accord with the divine plan as presented to us lesson 
by lesson through the great Teacher and his appointed, 
and since Pentecost, inspired, apostles. We remember 
in this connection the words of our Lord, "His 
servants ye are to whom ye render service." Many 
are professing to render service to the Lord and his 
cause, who in reality are serving the great Adversary 
of God and the truth. 

And how many there are to-day, who like Peter 
attempt to turn aside those who have consecrated 
themselves as living sacrifices: not that they wish to 
do evil, but that they have not the spirit of the truth 
themselves, but the spirit of the world, and hence 
speak from the worldly standpoint, which is in direct 
conflict with the divine plan as respects God's consecrated 
Church. Let each of us take heed first, that we 
be not thus tools of the Adversary in stumbling others, 
and second, that we be not stumbled by any of the 
Adversary's tools who may take such positions, no matter 
how kind and sympathetic their manner and intentions. 
If they seek to turn us aside from the narrow 
path which our Lord marked out, they are not our true 
friends but most seductive enemies. 

Our Lord lost no opportunity of enforcing the lesson 
which he had started and which Peter attempted to 
interrupt. He proceeded to show the disciples that 
not only he, their Master, must suffer, but that all 
who desired to be his disciples, and to sit with him in 
his throne and share the honors of his Kingdom, must 
likewise expect to suffer. Each must "deny himself, 
and take up his cross" and follow the Captain of their 
salvation. He enforces this by laying it down as a 
general principle, that the disposition to preserve the 



present life and its comforts at any cost is the disposition 
which will be deprived of eternal life; while the 
reverse disposition, that is willing to lay down the 
present life in the service of the Lord, his truth and 
his people, is the one to which God will be pleased to 
grant life eternal. The word that is here rendered 
"life," is the same that in the next verse is rendered 
"soul:" it is the Greek word psuche, and signifies being 
or existence. 

Our Lord put the proposition squarely before his 
disciples and inquired whether they thought it would be 
profitable to a man if he should gain the whole world 
in this present life, and then lose his being,— utterly 
perish. The implication is that it would be much 
more desirable for him to lose all things pertaining to 
this present life, yea, and the present life itself also, if 
thereby the eternal life of the future might be obtained. 
What could be considered a valuable exchange for the 
everlasting life of the future which God hath promised 
to them that love him? 

It should be noticed that our Lord says nothing 
here in favor of the common fallacies on this subject 
usually drawn from his words by mistaken inference: 
his words by the plainest inference contradict the very 
unreasonable and so-called "orthodox" views of this subject. 
Our Lord did not say, What shall it profit a man 
if he gain the whole world and be cast into an eternal torture 
—be roasted and boiled in liquid flame? Not a word 
of the kind. Such a statement, altho in harmony with 
the views often advocated by Christian people, would 
be wholly contrary to the divine plan and Word. Such 
"orthodox" teachings are, like Peter's expression, instigated 
by the great Adversary, Satan, as a libel and 
slander upon the divine character and plan. Our Lord's 
statement was most explicit; that is a question of life 
or no life; of being or no being; of existence or non-existence; 
of eternal life or destruction in the second 
death. Let those who will not hear the Lord's 
words believe Satan's falsehood if they prefer it: we 
may be sure that all who have the Lord's spirit and 
who are seeking to walk in his footsteps will hear his 
voice and be guided into the truth which now, as 
meat in due season, is provided for the household of 
faith. 

In the 27th verse our Lord handles very rudely 
another of Satan's deceptions. Satan, through many 
mouth-pieces in many church pulpits and at many funerals 
is declaring that every man is rewarded either 
with heaven or hell for all eternity at the instant of 
death. But here our Lord expressly declares that he 
will reward every man when he shall come in the 
glory of the Father— at the establishment of his Kingdom. 
This, taken in connection with the preceding verse, 
gave to the disciples and gives to us the correct 
thought; viz., that if we now are willing to lay down 
our lives for the truth, in the service of God and Christ 



(including the members of his body), and thus shall 
suffer the loss of earthly things which otherwise we 
might have gained or attempted to gain, we shall be 
rewarded by the Master with eternal life and a share 
in his glory— at his second coming. 

The 28th verse is separated from its connection by 
the starting of a new chapter and thus many are confused,* 
and fail to see that the record of the fulfilment 
of this promise immediately follows it. But this is a 
part of our next lesson. 



*For the division of the Scriptures into chapters and verses 
is a modern invention, and while intended for convenience 
is sometimes misleading, as in this case. In the Revised Version 
this difficulty has been corrected. 



R2288 :page 111 

"WE BEHELD HIS GLORY IN THE HOLY MOUNT." 

-APRIL 17.-MATT. 17:1-9.— 

"We beheld his glory, the glory as of the 
only begotten of the Father."— John 1:14. 

LITTLE did the disciples imagine that our Lord's 
statement that some of them should not taste 
of death until they had seen the Son of Man coming in 
his Kingdom, would be fulfilled within six days to 
Peter, James and John in the Mount of Transfiguration. 
Yet so it was, and evidently it produced a great 
and designed effect upon the witnesses, one of whom, 
writing respecting it, says (2 Pet. 1:16-18), "We have 
not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made 
known unto you the power and coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty. 
For he received from God, the Father, honor and glory, 
when there came such a voice to him from the excellent 
glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we 
heard, when we were with him in the holy mount." 

The transfiguration scene was not all that it appeared;— 
it was a "vision," as our Lord explained to 
the disciples when they were coming down from the 
mount. In this vision, as in all visions, the unreal 
appears real. Just so it was in the vision of John, on 
the Isle of Patmos, described in the book of Revelation. 
He saw, he heard, he talked, yet the things thus shown 
him in the vision were not realities— not beasts with 
many heads and many horns, and angels and vials and 
thrones, nor real dragons, etc., merely a vision. And 
a vision was in every sense of the word just as good, 



and really better suited to the purpose, than realities 
would have been. 

Moses and Elias were not present on the mountain, 
personally, but were merely represented to the disciples 
in the vision. We know this not only from our 
Lord's statement, that it was a "vision," but also from 
his statement that no man had ascended up to heaven. 
(John 3:13; Acts 2:34.) We know also that Moses 
and Elijah could not have been there, since they were 
not resurrected from the dead; because our Lord Jesus 
himself was the "First-fruits of them that slept"— 
"the first-born from the dead, that in all things he 
might have the preeminence." (1 Cor. 15:20; Col. 1:18.) 
Furthermore the Apostle to the Hebrews distinctly 
mentions Moses and the prophets (which would 
include Elijah) and their faithfulness in the past and 
their acceptance with God; but he points out that they 
had not yet received their reward, and that they would 
not receive it until after we (the Gospel Church) shall 
have received our reward as joint-heirs with Christ in 
his Kingdom. "These all, having obtained a good report 
through faith, received not the [blessings of the] 
promise; God having provided some better thing for 
us, that they without us should not be made perfect." 
-Heb. 11:39,40. 

Since, then, the appearance of Moses and Elias 
with our Lord was an appearance merely, we properly 
inquire, What was the significance or meaning of this 
vision? We reply, It was a tableau, illustrative of the 
glorious Kingdom of Christ, as our Lord had predicted, 
and as Peter understood it and expressed it. In this 
tableau, the three disciples formed no part. They were 
merely witnesses. Christ was the central figure; his 
features and garments, shining with miraculous lustre, 
represented in figure the glories which belong to the 

R2289 : page 1 1 1 

spirit nature, which our Lord received at his resurrection, 

"the express image of the Father's person." It 

is this same spirit glory that is represented in the visions 

of Revelation, where our Lord is represented 

with eyes as a flame of fire, and his feet bright as burning 

brass, etc. (Rev. 1:14,15; 2:18.) At his second 

advent our Lord will no longer be flesh because, as he 

testified, "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 

of God." He is now, and every will be, a glorious spirit 

being of the highest order— the divine nature: and the 

transfiguration was intended to convey to the minds of 

his disciples a faint conception of the glory which 

excelleth. 

Moses represented the faithful overcomers who 
preceded our Lord, described by the Apostle (Heb. 11:39,40), 
who cannot be made perfect until the Kingdom 
shall have been established. Elijah represented the 
overcomers of the Gospel age.* The topic discussed 



in the vision was our Lord's crucifixion. (Luke 9:31.) 

The cross of Christ is thus pointed out as being the 

necessary thing in order that he might enter into his 

glory, as he himself expressed the matter after his resurrection, 

saying, "Ought not Christ to have suffered 

these things, and to enter into his glory?" (Luke 24:26.) 

There could have been no Kingdom glory without 

the redemptive work. But this vision portrays the 

Kingdom glories which will ultimately result from our 

Lord's death. 

Possibly, too, the vision was intended to represent 
the two classes who will be associated with the Lord 
in his Kingdom, first the Church— the body of Christ, 
his bride and joint-heir, who shall be like him and see 
and share his glory, as spirit beings. These in the 
present time are represented by Elijah. Second, the 
overcomers of the past, who shall be the earthly representatives 
of the Kingdom, as per our Lord's statement; 
—The world "shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and 
all the prophets in the Kingdom;" because they will be 
restored, perfected human beings: but the world will 
not see the Lord and the Church, his glorified spouse, 
because they will all have been changed from flesh and 
blood (human nature) and will be spirit beings and of 
the divine nature, and hence as invisible to men as are 
God and the angels.-l Tim. 1:17; 6:16; Heb. 11:27. 

Of course, the disciples did not clearly comprehend 
the matter at the time, yet they realized a blessing and 
felt that it was "good to be there." Their meeting 
had started as a prayer-meeting: the three favorite disciples 
of the Lord accompanying him on this occasion, 
as on several other occasions— for instance, when he 
went in to awaken the daughter of Jairus from the 
sleep of death, and a little later than this in the Garden 
of Gethsemane, they were again his chosen and 
closest companions. We cannot suppose that the choice 
of these was an arbitrary one, but must suppose that 
there was something about these three men that made 
them specially companionable to the Lord. One thing 
about them that impresses every reader of the New 
Testament record is their faith in the Lord and their 
zeal for his cause. It was James and John who, in 
their zeal (but not according to knowledge), were 
about to call down fire from heaven upon the Samaritans, 
because they did not promptly recognize and 
cordially receive the Master. It was Peter who first 
promptly confessed Jesus as the Christ, the same Peter 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 8. 

R2289 :page 112 

who drew his sword in the Master's defense, and declared 
that he would die with him. The Master himself 



was of a warm temperament, and naturally and 

properly was most drawn toward those who were similarly 

fervent. 

There is a lesson here for us, to the effect that, if 
we would be closest to the Master and most frequently 
privileged to have fellowship with him, we should 
similarly have and cultivate this earnest, zealous spirit. 
Cold, calculating people may have other good qualities, 
but there is no room for coldness or even luke-warmness 
on the part of those who have once tasted that the 
Lord is gracious. With such, the love enkindled 
should lead to a consuming zeal. It was thus with 
our Lord Jesus, and this was one of the reasons why 
he was beloved of the Father. Speaking for him, the 
prophet said, "The zeal of thine house hath consumed 
me." Let all who desire to be pleasing in the Lord's 
sight become so filled with the same spirit of zeal for 
righteousness and truth that it will consume them as 
sacrifices upon the Lord's altar. Thus they will be 
most pleasing and acceptable to him through Jesus our 
Lord. As a rule, only the warm and zealous ever get 
free from Babylon. The others coolly calculate and 
weigh matters so long that the spirit of the world, the 
flesh and the devil puts fresh blinds on them, even after 
they have gotten into the light and see considerable. 

Peter proposed making some booths on the mountaintop 
for the Lord and his guests. Luke adds, "Not 
knowing what he said." He was bewildered, confused, 
but in harmony with his natural temperament wished 
to say something. The voice from heaven, however, 
seemed to say, Be still! hearken rather to the words of 
my beloved Son. Not a few need to learn the lesson 
of quietness— to hear and learn, be taught of God, before 
they have much to say. Peter evidently learned, 
as we may judge from his after conduct, to be slower 
to speak and swifter to hear. (James 1:19.) This is an 
important lesson to all who would be servants of the 
Lord: we must learn that of ourselves we know nothing, 
and can do nothing aright. The proper learning 
of this lesson means a lesson in humility and in patience, 
a lesson respecting our own nothingness, and 
that "our sufficiency is of God." Those who reach 
this condition become apt students in the school of 
Christ— not forgetful hearers, but doers of the Word: 
and such only are prepared to teach the truth to others. 
Those who are too forward and ready to teach, before 
they have received instruction from the Lord, are very 
apt not to know what they say, as was Peter's case; 
and if such be true-hearted and worthy of being used 
of the Lord as his servants, they are very apt to receive 
numerous reproofs from time to time. 

The first lesson for such to learn is that "The 
fear [reverence] of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." 
Thus, Peter's rash expression, "not knowing 
what he said," found a reproof in the voice from heaven 
which said, "Hear ye Him." And fear fell upon the 



disciples. 

Not only is the fear of the Lord valuable as a beginning 
of true wisdom, but it is valuable all our journey 
through. One tendency amongst those who have 
received the light of present truth, and who lose thereby 
the terrible and slavish fear inspired by misrepresentations 
of the divine character and plan, is to lose 
all fear. And according to the Scriptures this is a very 
dangerous condition, an ultra freedom that is apt to 
lead to license, under our present imperfect conditions. 

It is true that "perfect love casteth out fear," but 
it is also true that perfect love is a very scarce commodity 
on earth even amongst the saints. Hence the Apostle 
urges, "Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of 
entering into his rest, any of us should seem to come 
short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) The fear which we are to 
lose entirely is "the fear of man which bringeth a 
snare." He who loses the fear of God, and the fear 
of losing the great prize which God has held out before 
us, is in a very dangerous position: he is likely to 
become self-conscious and self-satisfied, and readily 
drops into the condition where he does not believe even 
in the just sentence against sinners, the second death, 
and where he is proportionately careless respecting the 
keeping of his own words and thoughts and deeds in 
strictest alignment with the principles laid down in the 
Word of the Lord. Having lost his fear of the Lord, 
he rapidly loses carefulness respecting the Word of the 
Lord, and inclines more and more to "lean to his own 
understanding," and becomes blinded to his own faults. 

Let us note carefully additional encouragements to 
fear held out in the Scriptures. Some of these are as 
follows:— "O fear the Lord, ye his saints." "Ye that 
fear the Lord, praise him." "Let them now that fear 
the Lord say, that his mercy endureth forever." "Like 
as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth 
them that fear him." "The mercy of the Lord is from 
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him." 
"He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him." 
"The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him." 
(Psa. 34:9; 22:23; 118:4; 103:13,17; 145:19; 147:11.) 
Our Lord says, "I will forewarn you whom ye shall 
fear." (Luke 12:5.) The Apostle Paul says, "Be not 
high-minded, but fear." "Let us also fear." (Rom. 11:20; 
Heb. 4:1.) The Apostle Peter says, "Honor 
men; fear God;" and "He that feareth him and worketh 
righteousness is accepted with him." (1 Pet. 2:17; 
Acts 10:35.) God says through the prophet that 
they who fear his name, are the ones who speak often 
together, and of whom a book of remembrance is made. 
And again he promises, "To you that fear my name 
shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in 
his beams." (Mai. 3:16; 4:2.) Of our dear Redeemer 
himself it is recorded that Christ "was heard in that he 
feared."— Heb. 5:7. 

The lesson of these various scriptures is that, to 



lose fear of God, in the sense of losing fear of his displeasure 

or fearing to come short of the grand possibilities 

which he has so graciously put within our 

reach, would be a most serious loss, as it would probably 

cost us our eternal life; for those who have lost 

this fear are like steam-engines which have lost their 

governors, and are apt to run with too much liberty to 

self-destruction and unfitness for service. Hence, as 

the Apostle again says to the pilgrims who seek the 

heavenly country,— "If ye call on him as Father,... 

pass the time of your sojourning here in fear" (1 Pet. 1:17); 

not in levity, nor in worldly frivolities, nor in 

sensualities, nor in land and money grabbing, nor even 

carelessly and slothfully, but in earnest watchfulness 

of every word and act, to please the Lord and to copy 

his character and thus to make your calling and election 

sure to a place in his Kingdom, when it shall be established 

in power and great glory. 



page 113 