Parents​—Choose Your Child’s Toys Wisely
CHILDREN are “an inheritance from Jehovah,” says the Bible. (Psalm 127:3) God-​fearing parents therefore recognize their responsibility to train their children “in the discipline and mental-​regulating of Jehovah.” (Ephesians 6:4) They do not leave it to toy manufacturers to shape the personalities of their children.
Toys can play an important role in stimulating the emotional and mental growth of children. This does not mean, however, that parents must spend a lot of money on high-​tech gadgets. Some of the most wholesome and stimulating playthings will cost you next to nothing.
A simple cardboard box can be turned into a playhouse, an airplane, or anything a child’s fertile imagination can envision. A pail and a shovel allow a child to build sand castles. Simple blocks, puzzles, clay, and crayons can likewise provide hours of wholesome recreation. For older children, art materials and hobby kits can teach useful skills and provide a healthy outlet for creativity​—infinitely more satisfying than zapping computerized blips.
Some play activities require no special equipment at all. A walk through the woods can be an exciting adventure for a child, especially when accompanied by a loving, involved parent. Why, even basic household skills can be taught as fun activities. Writes Penelope Leach in her book Your Growing Child: “Cooking a cake or a meal, digging the garden, cleaning the car or painting the ceiling, doing the shopping or bathing the baby may all be work to you, but to your child they may be among the most desirable kinds of play.”
Seven Helpful Guidelines
Of course, there is a place for manufactured toys. And if the family budget has room for them, you may want to ask yourself the following questions before making a purchase:
1. Does the toy really stimulate my child’s curiosity and imagination? If not, he will quickly become bored with it. A toy may look good in a TV commercial, but remember: The child actors and actresses have been paid to look excited about the toy. Your child may not react the same way. Try observing him at play or in a toy store. Toward what types of playthings does he gravitate?
Parents sometimes feel that a toy has no value unless it is “educational.” Professor Janice T. Gibson, however, reminds us: “Children learn from all toys they play with. What is important is that they have fun so that they keep on playing in ways that are good for them.”
2. Is the toy appropriate for my child’s physical and mental abilities? Sometimes a child simply isn’t strong enough, patient enough, or agile enough to use a particular toy. A parent, though, may be inclined to buy it because it has a certain nostalgic appeal. But can a three-​year-​old boy really operate an electric train set​—or swing a baseball bat? Why not wait until your child is better equipped to appreciate such playthings?
3. Is the toy safe? Small toddlers tend to put everything into their mouths and can easily choke on tiny wooden blocks or plastic objects. Sharp or pointed edges can be dangerous to children of any age. You may also want to ask yourself if the toy is likely to be thrown or used as a weapon against a sibling.
In the United States, some toys are labeled to indicate the specific age groups they are designed for. Adhering to such recommendations can protect your child from injury. If in doubt regarding a toy, try asking the store clerk if a demonstration model is available for your examination.
4. Is the toy well constructed and durable? “Toddlers who like to drop, throw, and taste everything can wreak havoc on toys that are not durable,” Parents magazine reminds us.
5. Is the toy worth the money? TV commercials rarely discuss price, but toys do cost. Much of the money pays for the brand name rather than the actual materials involved. Furthermore, commercials often cultivate unrealistic expectations in children, which can result in great disappointment.
Teach your children to be shrewd shoppers. Proverbs 14:15 says: “Anyone inexperienced puts faith in every word, but the shrewd one considers his steps.” An article in The New York Times said: “Sometimes you can point out ahead of time why a particular toy is poorly made or merchandised in a misleading way.” The Times added: “Children become much savvier consumers when the money comes out of their pockets instead of yours.”
Of course, the real value of a toy goes beyond its materials or workmanship. Important factors are how much your child will use it, and how much pleasure it will bring him. A backyard swing set may be relatively expensive, but it may provide many hours of fun over a period of years. A cheap toy that is quickly discarded may turn out to be a poorer investment in the long run.
6. What values and standards does the toy teach? Professor of child study David Elkind cautions that “toys should stimulate children’s imaginations in positive, not negative, ways.” Avoid toys that are gruesome, that clearly promote violence, or that mimic adult vices, such as gambling.
What about toys based on popular fairy-​tale or science-​fiction characters? Such stories generally deal with the triumph of good over evil. Some parents thus view the ‘magical elements’ in these tales as simple flights of a childish imagination and see no harm in letting their children enjoy them. Others may fear that the stories could stimulate an interest in the occult. (Deuteronomy 18:10-13) Without judging others, parents must make their own decisions in this regard, considering the effects such stories​—and any toys based on them—​have on their children.
Remember too the principle at 1 Corinthians 10:23: “All things are lawful; but not all things are advantageous.” While a popular toy may not be objectionable to you, is it truly advantageous to purchase it? Could it offend or stumble others?
Toys that claim to be educational should also come under parental scrutiny, especially when they purport to teach children about sexual matters and pregnancy. Is the child ready for such information? Would the information be better conveyed through discussions between you and your child?a Certain toys might convey the physical aspects of such matters, but do they convey proper moral attitudes?
7. Do I really want my child to have this toy? You may feel that your child already has too many toys, that the toy is simply not practical for your circumstances, or that the toy makes more noise than you can live with. If such problems cannot be resolved, you may have little choice but to say no. This is not easy. But giving in to every childish whim and demand will not help your child grow into a balanced adult. Note the principle at Proverbs 29:21: “If one is pampering one’s servant [or child] from youth on, in his later life he will even become a thankless one.”
This does not mean that as a parent, you have to be dogmatic and unreasonable. That would only cause your child to feel angry and resentful. “The wisdom from above is . . . reasonable.” (James 3:17) One child-​care expert put it this way: “You need to sit down with your child and explain very carefully why you don’t want to give him certain toys.”
Some Things More Important Than Toys
While toys can be valuable tools for educating and entertaining, they are only things. A child may love a toy, but a toy cannot love a child. Children need loving attention that only parents can give. “Essentially a parent is the best toy yet devised,” says Dr. Magdalena Grey. When parents play with their children, they help forge a close emotional bond and contribute to the growth of healthy attitudes and emotions.
Yes, children need healthy play. But more important, they need moral and spiritual direction. “This means everlasting life,” says the Bible, “their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) Parents can play a major role in helping their children gain this lifesaving knowledge. Families among Jehovah’s Witnesses try to make a study of the Bible a part of their regular routine. Often they do so with the assistance of publications such as My Book of Bible Stories, Listening to the Great Teacher, and Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work, which have been written especially for young ones.b These books do not merely entertain​—they have helped thousands of children develop a solid faith in God. Children also appreciate audiocassette recordings of Bible dramas and of publications such as The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived.*
True Christians therefore do more than play with their children​—they also pray with them, study with them, and talk with them. Giving such loving attention takes time and much effort. But in the long run, it brings a child more lasting joy than any game or shiny toy can!
[Footnotes]
See the articles on sex education in the February 22, 1992, issue of Awake!
Published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Pictures on page 8, 9]
Children enjoy homemade toys​—laundry baskets become cars; shoe boxes become trains

