Take a Closer Look at the Nopal
By Awake! writer in Mexico
The nopal plant is an unattractive cactus that for centuries has been a part of the life of the Mexican people. It can be found in other countries in the Americas—as well as in arid areas around the world—but its usefulness may not be readily apparent because of its thorny appearance. The plant can reach up to 15 feet [5 m] in height. It has flattened oval stalks that are full of thorns, and it produces prickly pears that taste sweet.
Milpa Alta, near Mexico City, is an ideal location for raising nopal plants, and local farmers have for a long time exported them to other parts of the world. Milpa Alta even hosts an annual fair, which gives people the opportunity to taste a great variety of products prepared with nopal.
In Mexico a shopper can usually find nopal stems in small marketplaces as well as in modern supermarkets. There they are sold cleaned and ready for use.
Generally, these must be fresh and tender to be used as food. Mexicans prepare them in many ways and serve them with a variety of meats. The most common dish is grilled nopal stems served with steak, while scrambled eggs with chopped nopal is a delicious breakfast dish.
In addition, a tasty salad can be prepared by chopping up small squares of boiled nopal stems, adding finely chopped raw tomatoes, onions, and coriander, and combining this mixture with olive oil, vinegar, and salt. Although nopal stems may at first seem flavorless—and unappealing because of their slimy texture—when seasoned with spicy Mexican sauces, their taste is quite delightful.
Experienced farmers can cut and clean nopal stems very quickly and skillfully. If you decide to do this yourself, you need to be careful of their many thorns. It is recommended that you wear plastic gloves.
The nopal plant has been found to have medicinal properties. Mexico’s National Institute of Nutrition has described its health benefits, saying, among other things, that it can lower one’s total cholesterol and LDL lipoproteins. Some have recommended its use in helping to control diabetes. As scientists continue to study the humble nopal plant, additional health benefits may be found.
In the meantime, why not try a traditional Mexican meal made with the nopal plant? You may find that there is far more to it than its appearance would suggest.

