Announcements
● Literature offer, December: New World Translation (bi12) and Good News—to Make You Happy, for $1.25. January: Watchtower subscription, with three booklets, for $1.50, or subscriptions for both Watchtower and Awake!, with 6 booklets, for $3.00. If the subscription is not accepted, we can offer a pocket-size book (25c) along with two magazines for 35c. February: Holy Spirit book for 25c. March: Any one of the large (50c) books with two free booklets; when all large books have been placed, offer any pocket-size (25c) book.
● The Memorial for 1977 will be held on Sunday, April 3, after sundown. Where more than one congregation uses the Kingdom Hall, it will be permissible, if necessary, to start the first talk before sundown, but the serving of the emblems should always be after sundown. The following may help in determining this time:
The local sunset time will be about a minute different from what it was for April 3, 1976. That time may have been given with the weather report in the local newspaper, which may be on file in the local public library or newspaper office. Or a nearby weather bureau may have a record of it.
If this time cannot be ascertained locally, perhaps it can be obtained from a nearby city. If you get the April 3, 1976, sunset time for a location (in the same time zone) within 75 miles of where you are, sunset in your locality will be within about 10 minutes of that time. Determining this information now will permit you to order your Memorial invitations well in advance. These may be ordered in lots of 250 for 50c, 500 for $1, or 1,000 for $2. Please use the special order blank provided for ordering Memorial invitations and remit with the order.
For future reference, you may wish to keep a record of local sunset times for the period of March 22 through April 19, 1977, since Memorial always falls within this period.
● A special talk will be given the week of March 27, before Memorial in all congregations. The subject will be “The Faith That Means Survival.” A manuscript for this talk will be sent in due time. No special handbills for this talk will be printed. The regular handbills, showing the times of meetings, should be used, and publishers can personally make special mention of this lecture.
● After January 1, 1977, congregations may submit orders for the 1976 bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! These will be available in English, Dutch, French, German, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish. Volumes are $2.50 each. There are no pioneer rates. These are cash items and so payment along with a Remittance and Credit Request form must accompany all orders.
● New Publications Available:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life—Persian
Bible Price: $5.70—Hindi
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
Crampon Bible—French
Segond Bible—French

