Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
We are now in position to review with you what has been accomplished during the 1976 service year. A vast amount of work was done in preaching the good news of the Kingdom for a witness and in aiding persons to know the way that leads to life. And more have been sharing in the preaching work, as there was a 2-percent increase in the U.S.A. on the average.
The analysis shows that there have been decreases in most averages—hours, magazines, return visits and Bible studies. While this is of much concern to us, and we all look for ways to do better in Jehovah’s service, there is reason to be encouraged regarding our future activity.
The congregations in the United States have now increased to 7,375, and there are 334 circuits and 35 districts. The publisher-to-population ratio is now a favorable 1 to 370. Many congregations are covering their assigned territory frequently, and during 1976, as was the case every year since 1970, all the unassigned territory was covered. So Jehovah is blessing the efforts of his people to widen out the proclamation of the good news even deep into this time of the end.
The monthly average of 17,251 regular pioneers was down from 20,385 last year. But we feel sure that many are now planning to take up pioneer privileges in the present service year or to enter the auxiliary pioneer service.
Since our hours have decreased on the average from 9.6 in 1975 to 9.1 (or close to 8 million fewer hours), this is a good time to think about ways we can personally reverse this trend. Our each spending just one additional hour in Jehovah’s service each month would put the average over 10 again, and think of what praise to Jehovah could be accomplished by all of us together putting in this additional 8 million hours. And our return visits, our Bible studies and our placements would show corresponding improvements.
During the year, 43,900 persons were baptized in the U.S.A. We rejoice with these new servants of Jehovah in their stand for true worship and look forward to aiding them to press on to Christian maturity. Since Jehovah continues to show patience, let us imitate him and keep busy extending knowledge of the way of salvation to all who will hear.
It is a pleasure to be working with you in holding high Jehovah’s great name in these momentous last days.
Your fellow servants,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

