Help to Improve Your Teaching
1 Do you find that you need a helping hand to improve in presenting the good news? Assistance is available right in your congregation. Do not be hesitant to seek this assistance from more experienced publishers. There are many things that can be learned from preparing together and then working together, even if you merely observe for a few calls.
2 Perhaps your experience in the field service has been limited up to this point to distributing tracts or sharing in the magazine distribution. Commendably you are arranging to have some share in telling others of Jehovah’s means of salvation. Would you like to take another important step now in making your preaching and teaching work more effective and productive? Remember, the commission that Jesus gave to his disciples included the ‘making of disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them.’ (Matt. 28:19, 20) The command given later at Revelation 22:17 was that “anyone hearing” the good news should say: ‘Come and take of life’s water free.’ The making of disciples requires that we be teachers, and to this end we invite you to take this next step toward disciple-making by engaging in the return visit and home Bible study work.
WHERE TO GET HELP
3 Speak to your book study conductor or any one of the elders and tell him that you would like this help to improve your teaching. Very likely he will be able to arrange for one of the experienced publishers in your congregation who has a service schedule similar to yours to work with you for a few weeks. You may wish first to gain some experience in house-to-house work, using the Bible with a brief presentation of the offer. This will lay the foundation for some return visits with the objective of starting a Bible study. Or, the one working with you may already have some calls and would be happy to take you along when making them.
4 Of course, before going into the field service it is advisable to prepare something to say that is pointed and interest-catching. This will also help you in gaining confidence, if you are a little unsure of yourself. There is no reason to be afraid or to hold back because you feel that you need more knowledge or experience. Going right ahead while putting your confidence and trust in Jehovah will bring you many blessings. Soon it may be your privilege to conduct a Bible study regularly.
5 Parents, have you recently analyzed what the next step might be for your children in progressively working toward the goal of being disciple-makers? If they are now sharing in tract work or magazine service, would their age and ability make it possible for you to assist them to progress further and use the Bible in their presentations? With your help, could they share in developing the interest they locate in their preaching work? Could a Bible study be started? Many young servants of Jehovah effectively share in conducting studies, especially among young folks of their age.
6 At their quarterly meeting to be held in December, elders are invited to review how they can make loving assistance available to those who need it. This would be a good time also to review what has been done to implement the suggestions on page 7 of the March 1976 Our Kingdom Service to improve arrangements for giving assistance at the book studies under the supervision of the book study conductor. In giving assistance, build in the hearts of the brothers and sisters a desire to share in Jehovah’s service so that they get joy from it and want to do it regularly.

