Presenting the Good News—With the Bible and Good News Book
1 December will be the first time that the Good News book will be specially featured for the benefit of the public. It is a fitting companion to offer with the Bible, because it deals with the Bible’s inspiration, what the Bible contains, how it was preserved, and its value. Remember that the full title of the book is “Good News—to Make You Happy.” Happiness can be stressed, for people find it hard to be happy today.
2 In the presentation, try to get into a discussion of the Bible first, if possible. You may wish then to feature the New World Translation, or in certain cases circumstances may indicate that it would be preferable to offer the book first.
3 During the holiday season, Luke 2:8-11 or just Luke 2:13 and 14 will often awaken a hearing ear. Then the note from “The Publishers” on page 2 of the Good News book may be read, leading into chapter 1, page 5.
4 If, after the Bible discussion, you lead into the book, there are many good points to use. We will here suggest some transitions from the Bible discussion to the book, and some features that you may find to be appealing to many people.
5 You might say, ‘Have you wondered how a book written by men could really be a pure message from God?’ Then point to the illustrations on pages 16 and 17, showing the different ways that God used to see that what he wanted in his Word was written down, and how he did oversee its accuracy. You might add that it is certainly heartwarming and meaningful for us to read the writings and follow the lives of men who served God, persons who had the same feelings and often the same problems that we have. To see how men of faith stood firm for God and to see how God dealt justly and mercifully with people means much to us; examples are often better than mere words. We can place ourselves in their position. How much better than a book of cold facts and commands, and just as authentic!
6 Other features that we could well use are one or more of the historical charts on pages 12, 21 and 26, because many people are confused as to the age of the Bible, and as to when certain Bible personalities lived—before or after the Flood, before or after Christ, and so forth. It helps much in Bible reading to know these things. We also have the chart of prophecies fulfilled in Christ (page 145), a study of which strengthens faith in the Bible’s authenticity and in Jesus’ Messiahship.
7 In our opening Bible discussion we may have spoken about God’s kindness, his mercy, his justice. In certain localities where people may be turned away from faith in God because of the hypocrisy they have observed in the false religious systems, we may be able to use the pictures on pages 104 and 105 to show that the clergy of Christendom misrepresent God and the Bible.
8 Of course, the theme of happiness is usually a welcome one. If there are children in the home, leafing through chapter 19 will be appealing. If you start a conversation by the use of Revelation 21:3, 4, chapter 17 of the book, particularly pages 158 and 159, should bring good cheer to the householder. The security mentioned on pages 5 and 6 will also, no doubt, appeal to some persons.
9 If you cannot succeed at first in getting into the Bible, you may accomplish your purpose by using the scriptures from the “Sermon on the Mount,” page 32.
10 The Good News book, when placed in the hands of people, is a good instrument for a Bible study. It should be helpful in bringing many persons to a knowledge of the truth, and may reach some who were not reached with the Truth book. Those who already have the Truth book will appreciate reading the Good News book also.

