The Bible’s Message in Reach of Everyone
1 As we would reasonably expect in the case of an inspired guide provided by the Creator for people of all races, the Bible has been widely distributed. It is available, the whole or in part, in languages spoken by 97 percent of the world’s population. Modern printing has made it possible for millions and millions of copies to be distributed each year.
2 One of the reasons for the Bible’s popularity is that it touches the heart of the reader today just as it has done all through the centuries, because it deals with human problems. It makes no difference what kind of society—farming, seafaring, or industrial—all persons can grasp its message. Human nature has not changed, and the Bible deals with real problems that affect humans wherever and whenever they live.
3 Have you sat down and just read the Bible itself for an hour or two—for example, the Gospel accounts, the book of Acts or the books of Samuel or of Kings? When you do, note how you begin to feel that you are living at that time. Your heart is touched. Such reading is a spiritually uplifting experience.
LET THE BIBLE SPEAK
4 When we go to the people, it is our aim to get them to read the Bible. Most people never read it. That is why there is so much lack of faith, with increased trouble and sorrow.
5 In December we will be presenting the New World Translation. But our first objective is to talk about the Bible, to get people to see its value and their need for its wisdom. How can we better help them, or encourage them to read the Bible, and show them something it contains?
6 To get the conversation started, you might first ask them if they have a Bible. You may find that many already do have one. In this case, ask them if they find time in this busy world to read it. Do they have any problem in understanding it? Often this will give you the opportunity to go farther and help them to get right into the Bible. You might even ask that they get their own copy so that they can read from it.
7 For example, reference might be made to Psalm 37:37, 38, in showing what is ahead for those who are upright in God’s sight in comparison with the outcome for the wicked. The Bible shows that God will soon clear away wickedness and wicked people, and then those who love God and their neighbors will be able to live in peace and happiness.
8 Then you might tell them of the special Bible study arrangement Jehovah’s Witnesses are introducing to their neighbors, also showing them the New World Translation and the Good News book. Since the New World Translation is in modern speech and has other fine features, they may wish to obtain a copy along with the Good News book. But if they decline, perhaps being content with the translation they already have, then we can enthusiastically encourage them to read their copy of the Bible. And in doing so, we can direct attention now to the Good News book.
9 Again, let it be apparent that you are there to help the person appreciate God’s Word. The Good News book is an aid to help in understanding the Bible. In it we learn of God’s new system where war, hunger, sickness and even death will be eliminated. You might refer to the happy scene on page 4 and ask the one with whom you are speaking if he or she would like to pick up a newspaper and read one of the headlines mentioned in paragraph 3 of page 5. Who would not like to read, “No Housing Shortage—Secure Jobs for Everyone” or “Disease and Old Age Eliminated—Hospitals and Funeral Parlors Closed Down”? Does that sound like a dream? No, it will be a reality, you can point out, because God has promised it. And this purpose of God and other vital subjects are discussed fully in the Good News book.
10 If the person is listening well, you might briefly point out how the book is arranged to help people understand the Bible, and then demonstrate this with several paragraphs. Show them how the Bible is referred to repeatedly as proof of the things written. (Note, too, that often scriptures are cited at the end of a question at the bottom of the page. It is recommended that these be read in addition to those in the paragraphs above.) Cover a few paragraphs, such as those on page 5, and suggest returning at a convenient time.
11 If the one with whom you are speaking does not have a Bible, this is added reason for him to obtain a copy of the New World Translation. Discussing a few of its features may be helpful.
12 How grateful we are that Jehovah is seeing to it that the Bible’s vital message is in reach of all who are searching for the truth and the way of life! His patience has permitted our learning of the way of salvation. Let us do our part as message bearers in spreading the good news of his Word to still others while there is still time.

