Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 28
17 min: Song 100. Discuss with audience by questions and answers the article “The Bible’s Message in Reach of Everyone.” (Exclude paragraph 10, which will be handled in next part.) Demonstrate presentation in paragraphs 6-9.
12 min: Demonstrate how a study might be started on the first call by using the Good News book, as discussed in paragraph 10 of article “The Bible’s Message in Reach of Everyone.” Stress the objective, in any approach, of starting a Bible study, if possible. Include field service announcements.
13 min: Encourage all, particularly young folks and others who will have some time off during December, to consider possibility of being auxiliary pioneers. Several of those planning to be auxiliary pioneers might tell how they are arranging their affairs to do so and invite others to share with them. Call attention to new schedule for book studies. Any other announcements.
18 min: Talk on article “Self-Control—A Safeguard Against Disaster,” in September 1 Watchtower. Develop so these main points stand out: Why one cannot be lax in cultivating self-control; why recognize our limitations due to sin and imperfection; what it means to pray, “Do not bring us into temptation”; what results, according to James 1:14, 15, if we neglect to continue cultivating self-control; how young people particularly are put to test in exercising self-control; and how self-control is developed and maintained. Song 75.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 5
15 min: Song 74. Field overseer discusses Branch Letter and includes some significant trends in the congregation so far during service year. Include Theocratic News and local announcements.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—With the Bible and Good News Book.” Discussion with audience. Conclude with demonstration, using suggested texts at Luke 2:8-11 or Luke 2:13, 14.
25 min: Talk, with some audience discussion, on article “Approaching God in Prayer.” (September 15, 1976, Watchtower) Main points to stress: Confidence in approaching Jehovah; proper manner and spirit in approaching Jehovah in prayer; why offered in Jesus’ name (whether name is used at beginning, at end, or both, is optional); meaning of “Amen” and all joining in saying; Bible examples of various forms of and occasions for prayer; why should be specific and fit the occasion; meaning of Romans 8:26; order of importance in Jesus’ model prayer; repetitious prayers and use of Jehovah’s name; Bible examples of posture; no special posture in prayer required (yet not wrong to invite our brothers to assume a certain posture or to stand if circumstances make it appropriate); appropriate at mealtimes; power of prayer (Jas. 5:16-18); and why we can confidently expect Jehovah to hear our individual prayers. Song 42.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 12
15 min: Song 110. Welcome all in spirit of Hebrews 10:24, 25. Read and discuss article “You Had a Visitor.” Announcements, including local announcements. Briefly consider accounts report.
15 min: Question-and-answer discussion of article “Help to Improve Your Teaching.” Presiding overseer might handle and outline to congregation various ways assistance will be made available to those needing help.
15 min: Talk, with some audience participation, on article “Counsel—Will You Profit from It?”, appearing in September 15 Watchtower. The following questions may be helpful in stressing main points: What human tendency often manifests itself when counsel is given, as illustrated in the case of Adam and Eve? How did David show the proper attitude after Nathan confronted him with his sins? How should we react if counsel is given but we have broken no law? How might this be illustrated? What factors involving the counselor might cause resentment when counsel is given? Why is pride the root cause? Why is an attitude of being “always right” a dangerous one? What harm is done when counsel is rejected? What fine benefits come to one who accepts counsel? (Remind all to study the article “Why a God of Love Gives Reproof” in the December 1, 1976, issue of The Watchtower, and to bring this issue to the service meeting next week.)
15 min: Holiday Witnessing: Field overseer might handle this part. Tell audience what arrangements have been made for special witnessing activities on December 25 (and possibly December 24, if this is a legal holiday in your community). Group witnessing might be planned from the book study locations for several hours of service. A good opportunity for entire family to go in service together. With everything planned in advance, such as territory to be worked and brothers to take the lead, should be fine day in Jehovah’s service. Discuss with audience what might be said appropriately in introducing the offer on this holiday. What might be said if person wishes publisher “Merry Christmas”? Without making an issue of this, publisher might say in return: “Thank you”; “And I wish you a good day”; or something similar. Sample presentation might be featured. (It is suggested that these points be reviewed at the meetings for service this week.) Song 107.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 19
15 min: Song 108. Using Luke 6:45 and Romans 10:10, show why Jehovah’s people rejoice to speak of their heavenly Father out of the abundance of their hearts. They delight to share the good news with others. Local announcements.
30 min: “Why a God of Love Gives Reproof.” Audience discussion of article appearing in December 1, 1976, Watchtower, using the following questions: Paragraphs 1-3: What does the Bible tell us regarding God’s concern for mankind, and the need for reproof and discipline? Paragraphs 4, 5: Why should we be grateful for divine correction? Paragraphs 6-8: In what ways should love and patience be reflected in the disciplining of children by parents? Paragraphs 9, 10: What shows that these desirable parental qualifications find their origin in Jehovah himself? What is the objective of God’s discipline? Paragraph 11: Why does Jehovah hate sin and what motivates his anger as regards sinning? Paragraphs 12, 13: How is Jehovah’s approach to the matter of discipline illustrated at Isaiah 28:23-29? What lesson do we learn from this? Paragraphs 14, 15: What appealing example did Jesus set for Christian shepherds? What attitude did he show toward repentant sinners? Paragraphs 16, 17: What should motivate a Christian elder in giving reproof, and what is the Scriptural way to deal with an erring one? Paragraph 18: How can reluctance to talk be dealt with, and what is it important to keep in mind even though strong measures must be taken? Referring to closing paragraph, briefly mention what questions will be taken up in future Watchtower studies as the subsequent articles are discussed.
15 min: What Impressed You that This Is the Truth? Interview of a few brothers and sisters, telling specific points that convinced them that Jehovah’s Witnesses have the truth and are God’s true servants. Should prepare for this part in advance. Chairman invites all to be particularly alert to what first got the interest of those relating the experiences and what barriers or problems had to be overcome. Song 109.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 26
15 min: Song 10. Show how 1976 yeartext has been of great encouragement to Jehovah’s people during the past year. Include discussion of Question Box; also any local announcements.
15 min: Presenting the offer for January. The January 1 and 15 issues of The Watchtower will feature in the opening articles an appropriate Scripture text that can be used in Bible discussions preliminary to offering the subscription. Using the January 1 issue, demonstrate presentation that might be used in your community. Encourage all to work toward obtaining at least one subscription during the first month of the campaign. The campaign this year will be during three months: January, April and July.
30 min: Prepare locally, taking up some specific need of the congregation. Song 13.

