
UNIT 13 (B)
Conduct Progressive Bible Studies—Part 1



OPENING DISCUSSION

Pioneers can take a lesson from the Master Teacher, Jesus Christ. (Luke 6:40) Whether Jesus was speaking to a crowd on a mountainside or to just a few people as they walked on the road, what he said and the way he said it made a lasting impression. Jesus stimulated the minds and hearts of his listeners, and he made practical application that they could understand. Can you accomplish similar things?—Luke 24:32.
In order to fulfill our commission to make disciples, we should have a strong desire to improve in our teaching ability. (Matt. 28:20) The apostle Paul emphasized the importance of this skill when he said: “Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching.”—1 Tim. 4:16.
The work of teaching others has brought joy to thousands of Jehovah’s people who have had the privilege of conducting progressive Bible studies. As an effective teacher, you are able to reach the hearts of your listeners and to help them progressively to understand, appreciate, and act on what they learn. 1 Timothy 4:16 assures us that our teaching results in the saving of lives—all to Jehovah’s praise. What greater motivation could we have?



QUESTION OUTLINE

Our Grand Instructor
What is involved in teaching? (it-2 p. 1070)
Why is Jehovah called the Grand Instructor? By what means do we “see” and “hear” our Grand Instructor? How are we taught by Jehovah? (Job 36:22; Isa. 30:20, 21)
From the following examples, what do we learn from Jehovah about effective teaching?
Genesis 18:20-32
Job 38:4, 8, 31
Isaiah 40:26
Isaiah 44:14-17
Jonah 4:9-11
How does God’s spirit function as a teacher for us today? (John 14:26)
Jesus, the Master Teacher (John 13:13)
On what did Jesus base his teaching? (Matt. 4:7, 10; John 7:16)
What does John 7:18 reveal about Jesus’ motive in teaching, and what example does he set for you?
What are some of the ways that we might inadvertently draw too much attention to ourselves when we are teaching? How might this become a snare to us and our student? (be p. 57 pars. 1-2)
Why did the officers who were sent to lay hold of Jesus return empty-handed? (John 7:45, 46) According to Matthew 7:28, 29, why were the crowds astounded at his teaching?
◆ Why was Jesus such an outstanding teacher? He loved the truths he conveyed and the people he taught. Jesus had a masterful grasp of teaching methods.

Preparing to Conduct Progressive Bible Studies
What four things made Ezra an effective teacher? (Ezra 7:10)
As described at 2 Samuel 12:1-7, what shows that the prophet Nathan had David in mind when he prepared his approach?
As you prepare a lesson with the needs of a student in mind, what might this include? (km 8/04 p. 1 pars. 2-4)
Ask yourself: What does the student need to work on to make spiritual progress? What points might he have difficulty in understanding or accepting? How can I reach his heart?
Begin your preparation by praying to Jehovah about your student and his needs. Ask Jehovah to help you reach the student’s heart. (Acts 16:14; Col. 1:9, 10)
◆ Teaching effectively involves more than just discussing the material and looking up the cited scriptures. We need to present the information in a way that touches the student’s heart. This requires thorough preparation with each student in mind.—Prov. 15:28.

While preparing to conduct a study in the Bible Teach book, why should you give attention to the . . .
• chapter title?
• introductory questions?
• subheadings and visual aids?
• review box at the end of the chapter?
How will this overview of the information help you to focus on the main points as you prepare to conduct the study?
As you prepare, mark key words and phrases that answer the printed question in a paragraph. How will this be beneficial to you? How will this help your student?
Why do you find it helpful to analyze how the cited scriptures relate to the main point of the paragraph? How do you decide which scriptures to read during the study?
How will making brief notes in the margins of the publication be helpful to you?
Help Your Student Prepare for the Study
How can showing a student your studied copy of the publication under consideration be helpful? (Luke 6:40)
How can you encourage your student to follow your example in marking what is needed in the paragraph to help him recall the answer? Why will encouraging him to answer in his own words be of benefit?
Encourage your student to look up the scriptures as he prepares for the study. What help may your student need when using the Bible? How could you assist him?
◆ Once a regular study has been established, prepare a lesson together to show the student how this is done. With most students, it will be helpful to prepare an entire chapter together.

A student who reads the lesson beforehand, marks the answers, and thinks of how to express them in his own words is on the road to spiritual progress.
How can your own preparedness and regularity at a study session help your student to see the value in this routine?




