
UNIT 14 (A)
Conduct Progressive Bible Studies—Part 2



OPENING DISCUSSION

Why was Jesus so effective when teaching others? Jesus instructed by example, stimulated thinking ability through skillful use of questions, and used appropriate illustrations. (Matt. 17:24-26; Mark 1:22) He also taught his disciples to develop faith and build a close relationship with Jehovah.
Today, pioneers continue the work of disciple-making by directing people to the Christian congregation and helping them to develop a strong love for Jehovah. Let us explore Jesus’ methods of teaching so that we can improve. (Luke 6:40) We will focus on Jesus’ use of questions and illustrations.



QUESTION OUTLINE

Jesus Employed Questions in His Teaching
Jesus made remarkable use of questions in his teaching. He patiently took the time to do so, and it was effective. Jesus asked questions to convey truths, to determine what was on the minds and hearts of his listeners, and to stimulate and train the thinking of his disciples.
How did Jesus effectively use questions in the following situations?
Matthew 16:13, 15
Matthew 17:24-27
John 11:26
How might we use auxiliary questions when conducting a Bible study? How could the use of such questions draw out the thoughts and feelings of our student? (Prov. 20:5)
◆ A student’s answers may indicate that he understands what the Bible teaches, but does he agree with what he is learning?

What questions might be used to determine what is in the student’s heart? For example:
• Does God’s view of such matters seem reasonable to you?
• What benefit do you see in applying such counsel?
• How can you apply this information in your life?
◆ Questions require your student to think. Be patient and avoid rushing the student after asking a question.—be p. 259 pars. 1-2.

What should you do if your student answers incorrectly? How could you lead him to the appropriate conclusion?
How does Proverbs 12:18 help us in using auxiliary questions with tact?
◆ CAUTION: Use auxiliary questions as needed, but be careful that such questions do not needlessly sidetrack the student.

Why Jesus’ Illustrations Helped People
How can using illustrations as Jesus did simplify and clarify your teaching and add support to it? (Matt. 7:24-27; 16:1-4; be p. 242 par. 4)
Why was it said about Jesus that “without an illustration he would not speak to them”? (Matt. 13:10-15, 34, 35; it-1 p. 1175)
When properly used, how can illustrations and examples be powerful teaching tools to accomplish the following?
• Arresting attention
• Stimulating thinking
• Stirring emotions, affecting the conscience and the heart
• Serving as memory aids
• Overcoming prejudice (be p. 240 par. 1)
EXAMPLE: A person who is studying is hesitant about sharing with others the things he is learning. You could illustrate the need to try by asking: ‘If you were to see a person drowning, what would compassion move you to do? How do you think Jehovah will feel toward us if we do something to assist those who face death at Armageddon?’
Why is it more effective to use questions that appeal to a person’s loving qualities than to use questions that foster guilt? (be p. 260 par. 1–p. 261 par. 1)
What kind of illustrations are most effective? (be pp. 240-246) What simple illustrations have you used?
Conduct Effective Bible Studies
◆ The Sermon on the Mount contains profound truths, and yet Jesus taught with simplicity, brevity, and clarity.

How can the format of the Watchtower Study be used as a pattern for our Bible studies?
• Read the paragraph
• Ask the printed question
• Allow the student to answer
• Read and consider appropriate scriptures
• Ask auxiliary questions and use illustrations
Why should we focus on the main points when conducting a Bible study? Why could it be counterproductive to bring unnecessary material into the discussion? (be p. 162 par. 4)
What should we do when our student raises a question? (km 2/05 p. 6 pars. 1-4)
Why should we allow the student sufficient time to read, grasp, and accept truths presented in the lesson?
How do we decide how much material we will cover? How can we keep the Bible study moving at a progressive pace? (Col. 2:6, 7; km 1/05 p. 1 pars. 1-6)
How can we take the limitations of our students into consideration? (John 16:12)
Directing Students to the Christian Congregation
Which of the following methods have you found helpful in encouraging a student to begin attending meetings?
• Inviting him from the initial study
• Describing the meetings
• Building anticipation for special events (such as the Memorial, the circuit overseer’s visit, and assemblies)
• When praying at the study, mentioning the congregation meetings and the benefits of attending
How can you use jw.org to direct your students to the organization?
◆ Who Are Doing Jehovah’s Will Today? This brochure contains one-page lessons that can easily be covered in just five to ten minutes at the end of each study.—km 3/13 p. 3.

Its purpose is to (1) familiarize Bible students with us as a people, (2) help them learn about our activities, and (3) show them our organization in action.
As your student progresses, how can you help him to establish goals such as: praying to Jehovah each day, reading the Bible daily, preparing for his lesson each week, regularly reading The Watchtower and Awake!, attending meetings and assemblies, as well as sharing what he is learning informally? (w01 8/1 pp. 19-22)




