
UNIT 1 (A)
Explanation of Pioneer Service School Course



OPENING DISCUSSION

Jehovah is the “Grand Instructor.” (Isa. 30:20) He began teaching after he created his firstborn Son. (John 8:28) Following Adam’s rebellion, Jehovah did not stop teaching, but He lovingly provided instruction for imperfect humans. He wanted people to be educated. (Isa. 48:17, 18; 2 Tim. 3:14, 15) He commanded family heads to instruct their households in his Law. Arrangements were made for joyous conventions that included a public reading of God’s Law. (Deut. 4:10; 6:4-9) During the first century C.E., Christians likewise met together and made good use of God’s inspired Word. (1 Cor. 14:23-31) In modern times, “the faithful and discreet slave” has made available an abundance of spiritual food to educate God’s people. (Matt. 24:45-47) This has included congregation meetings, assemblies, conventions, and various schools, such as the Pioneer Service School.
During this course, you will be helped to . . .
• strengthen your relationship with our Grand Instructor, Jehovah God, and with the Head of the Christian congregation, Christ Jesus. (John 17:3)
• abound in love for the whole association of brothers. (1 Pet. 2:17)
• become more effective in all aspects of your ministry. (2 Tim. 3:17)
• be more aware of Bible principles and better equipped to apply them. (Col. 1:9, 10)
This course includes 40 hours of classroom discussions, demonstrations, and workshops designed to help you sharpen your skills as a pioneer. The workshops will present practical application of what is discussed in class. You may receive an assignment for a demonstration, an interview, or a soliloquy for one of the designated units. The instructor will assign these in advance, so that they can be well prepared and rehearsed. You will receive additional information if you are asked to participate.
You have received your personal copy of the Pioneer Service School textbook in advance of your scheduled week of instruction. Use this time to become familiar with the textbook. Space is provided in the margins for your personal notes.
Study and meditate on the lessons, the questions, and the Scriptures before they are considered in class. The questions will help you cultivate thinking ability. Analyze the scriptures carefully. Endeavor to understand the Bible principles involved. Get sufficient rest during the week of school. This will help you to be alert for class discussions each day.
◆ Read Luke 6:38b.
To a large degree, what you get out of this Pioneer Service School will depend on what you put into it.—w80 6/15 p. 12 pars. 5-6.
We encourage your participation in classroom sessions. The other pioneers will benefit from your expressions and experiences, just as you will benefit from theirs. In this way, the course will prove to be a genuine “interchange of encouragement.” (Rom. 1:11, 12) There is no reason for you to be fearful of or apprehensive about attending the school. There are no written tests. You will benefit from the school by doing your best and not comparing yourself with others.—Gal. 6:4.
Throughout the entire course of the school, you should have in mind making personal application of the information being considered. You would do well to ask yourself such questions as: ‘How does this information apply to me personally? What Bible principles are involved, and how can I apply them? How can I use what I am learning to make my service more effective? How can this help me in my dealings with my brothers and sisters in the congregation? How will it enrich my relationship with Jehovah?’—Prov. 9:9.
We are certain that you will highly esteem the privilege you have of attending the Pioneer Service School. With Jehovah’s blessing, the school will provide lasting encouragement and much practical assistance. As a result, may you be equipped to do the work of a skilled “evangelizer” and “fully accomplish your ministry.”—2 Tim. 4:5.




