
UNIT 11 (B)
Make Effective Return Visits



OPENING DISCUSSION

Many of us are in the truth today because someone patiently made effective return visits on us. We appreciate the personal attention we received. Jesus showed that this is an important part of our work, for he instructed his followers not only to preach but also to “make disciples . . . teaching them.”—Matt. 28:19, 20.
Teaching differs from preaching in that the teacher does more than proclaim; he instructs, explains, and offers proofs. Therefore, while salvation is still available to interested ones, we must return again and again to cultivate the interest shown.—w03 11/15 pp. 13-18.
Return visits can be one of the most enjoyable parts of your ministry. Why? Because having had contact with the householder, you know some of the subjects that interest him. You have also had time to choose scriptures that you would like to feature, and the householder knows that you are there to discuss the Bible.
What do you think makes for an effective return visit? Have you wondered what other pioneers do? Many have found that three things are needed: (1) showing sincere personal interest, (2) preparing an appealing Bible subject to discuss, and (3) laying the basis for each successive conversation. This unit, along with the accompanying workshop, will bolster your enthusiasm and improve your skills in furthering the interest of those you call back on.—km 7/08 p. 4; km 4/98 pp. 3-4 pars. 6-8; km 3/97 p. 3 pars. 1-9.



QUESTION OUTLINE

Have a Positive Attitude
What is your attitude toward making return visits?
Why are some hesitant about making return visits?
What effect may our attitude have on others? (1 Thess. 1:6, 7)
Why is it important to return when we have promised to do so? (Luke 16:10; w12 10/15 p. 31 par. 15)
Read and discuss Acts 9:10-17.
Initially, what was Ananias’ attitude about calling on Saul (Paul)? (Acts 9:13, 14)
What was Jesus’ direction? (Acts 9:15)
What was Ananias’ approach on the call? (Acts 9:17) How did he show personal interest?
Why would his visit have been appealing to Saul?
From this account, what can we learn about the proper attitude when making return visits?
Laying the Groundwork
Why is it good to teach the householder a Bible truth that will benefit him personally? (be p. 159 par. 1)
What groundwork for a return visit should we lay in the initial conversation? How can we do so?
EXAMPLE: We can easily bring up a subject or raise a question to be considered on the next visit. Perhaps after describing the Paradise, you could say: “How can we be sure it will really come in our lifetime? Maybe I could stop by in a few days when the rest of the family is at home and show you the answer the Bible gives to that question.”
What other questions could you raise for consideration in the next conversation?
What is the advantage of building anticipation by leaving some questions unanswered until the next discussion?
What do you say to prepare the householder for the next visit?
After the Initial Conversation
How would you determine which scriptures and publications to use in the next conversation?
✍ In your house-to-house record, include the content of the conversation and the subject to be discussed when you return. Note the relevant pages of the publication(s) you will use. This specific information will help you to stay enthusiastic about the call and to prepare for future conversations.—km 4/00 p. 8 pars. 2-4.
How does our researching a subject show sincere personal interest? How will sharing this research affect the householder? (be pp. 33-38)
How will thinking positively about the person motivate you to return?
Why might we call back even when no literature has been placed? (Matt. 10:13; Luke 10:5, 6; km 12/06 p. 1 par. 2)
Have you had good results making a return visit on someone even though you did not place literature?
How do you determine the best time to make a return visit?
Why is it often wise to make the return visit within a day or two?
Relate experiences you have had when making return visits a day or two after locating the interest.
EXPERIENCE: One sister makes arrangements to call back on interested persons as soon as possible. But a day or two prior to the appointment, she stops at the home to give the householder a magazine on the subject they discussed. Then the sister explains: “I saw this article and thought you would like to read it. I can’t talk now, but I’ll be back on . . . as we planned. Is that time still all right with you?”
Why might this be a good approach?
What can you do when a person cannot be found at home after repeated calls? (km 11/11 p. 1 par. 4)
Determine Your Objective
Our primary objective is to help people become baptized disciples of Christ Jesus. In modern times, the Bible study arrangement has been the most effective way of reaching this objective. In working toward that goal, be sure to discuss a Scriptural subject on each return visit. This will increase the householder’s interest in accepting a Bible study and it will make the purpose of our conversations clear.
How might we accomplish our primary objective by setting the following incremental, or short-term, goals?
• Answering a question with the Bible
• Offering literature relevant to specific interests
• Developing a magazine route
• Considering a paragraph from one of our study aids
• Offering a Bible study
The Return Visit
How do you introduce yourself on the return visit? (km 12/13 p. 1; km 1/92 p. 8 pars. 1-5)
Why is it important to avoid asking questions that bring a negative response or that put the householder in an awkward position? (km 1/92 p. 8 par. 6)
Why do some hesitate to talk with us when we return?
How will warm personal interest in others help to lessen their apprehension?
What do you say to put a person at ease and build his confidence in the Bible’s message?
Why should we do the following? (km 9/96 p. 1)
• Remember that we are guests
• Show appreciation for hospitality
• Be properly dressed and groomed
• Be punctual (jr p. 38 pars. 13-14)
• Respect the person and his property (Phil. 1:27)
What role does our enthusiasm play when we are making return visits?
Why might a short review of the last discussion be helpful?
Why are the following essential in making return visits?
• Showing a sincere personal interest in people
• Selecting an appealing Bible subject to discuss
• Laying the groundwork for each successive visit
• Continuing to think about the person after you leave
• Returning in a day or two to follow up the interest
• Keeping in mind that your objective is to start a Bible study
Be Bible-Study Conscious
Some pioneers find it better to make a formal offer of a Bible study rather than having an informal discussion. Others consider scriptures on a subject without mentioning the matter of a study. Which method do you prefer, and why?
Relate experiences you have had conducting a doorstep Bible study.
What is the advantage of inviting the householder to use his own Bible? (bt p. 90 par. 13)
Why is it important to discuss subjects and questions that interest the householder?
Why keep these discussions simple and Scriptural?
Why is it essential to listen attentively when the householder expresses himself?
Why should you be careful not to condemn wrong views or bad habits before the householder has cultivated appreciation for spiritual matters? (w03 11/15 p. 14 par. 9)
How long should you stay on the first few visits? Why?
Challenges in the Return Visit Work
What can you do if the householder is too busy to talk with you?
What advantage is there in sharing a brief Scriptural point even with busy people?
SUGGESTION: Some pioneers write down scriptures for the person to read later.
Although the householder may be busy, what do you say to prepare him for your next visit?
What do you say if you find that the householder shows his lack of interest by being rude or abrupt? Why do you handle it that way? (be p. 222 par. 2)
How might you still leave a favorable impression? (Matt. 10:12, 13; Rom. 12:17, 18)
What should you do if someone comes into the home when you are talking with the householder? Why would you do so?
If making return visits is difficult for you, why might you accompany someone who does well in this work?
How will a prayerful attitude regarding return visits help you fully accomplish your ministry? (1 Cor. 3:6)




