
UNIT 8 (B)
Participate in Various Forms of Our Ministry



OPENING DISCUSSION

Jesus foretold a grand preaching work that would take place during the time of the end. (Mark 13:10) This worldwide preaching activity would constitute part of the sign of Jesus’ presence in Kingdom power. (Matt. 24:3, 14) Today we see the Kingdom-preaching work speeding up, with pioneers at the very forefront. This message of truth that we declare opens the way for lovers of righteousness to come into a proper relationship with Jehovah. (Isa. 60:22) The Kingdom message also serves to warn the wicked concerning Jehovah God’s judgments soon to come upon the face of all the earth.
In recent years, it has become increasingly difficult in some lands to find people at home. Challenging economic conditions have forced many to work, resulting in few being at home during the day. Given these circumstances, how can we continue to reach people with the good news? Examining the effective preaching methods of the apostles and other Christian ministers in the first century will help. They zealously took advantage of every opportunity to speak about the Kingdom—publicly, informally, and from house to house. (Matt. 10:7; Acts 20:20, 21) These first-century evangelizers focused on people, not houses. May we do the same and ‘fully accomplish our ministry.’—2 Tim. 4:5.



QUESTION OUTLINE

Share the Good News at Every Opportunity—Informal Witnessing
Informal witnessing does not require that we begin the conversation with a formal introduction or a scripture. We may find it helpful to have the goal of simply starting conversations without feeling that we must give a witness at the outset. This may give us confidence to introduce the good news later in the conversation.—km 8/10 pp. 3-4.
How did Jesus share the good news informally with a Samaritan woman?
Read and discuss John 4:7-26.
Note to Instructor: Isolate key lessons to be learned from Jesus’ informal witnessing. Explore his opening words, his attitude, the way he maintained common ground, as well as the way he developed the conversation.

What is the natural result when the truth fills our heart? (Luke 6:45)
How will we be motivated to speak up if we meditate on the following?
• Jehovah’s goodness (Ps. 40:5)
• The spiritual treasures Jehovah has given his servants (Matt. 13:52)
• The dire condition of people in the world (Jonah 4:11)
What circumstances have provided opportunities for you to share the good news with others informally?
EXAMPLES: While visiting relatives, traveling or on vacation, or having daily contact with neighbors, workmates, business associates, and others
How did you take advantage of the situation?
How can wearing our badge cards for conventions, keeping our literature visible when traveling, and dressing neatly lead to a witness?
What do the following scriptures teach us regarding appropriate occasions for witnessing to others?
Luke 19:1-10
Acts 13:14-16
What principles stated in the following scriptures will enhance our Kingdom preaching?
Galatians 6:10
Titus 2:1-10
How will having empathy help you make your sacrifice of praise more appealing? (1 Cor. 9:19-23)
What does Colossians 4:6 teach us about the way we should converse?
How can we be tactful when we converse with people? (km 1/06 p. 1; km 2/01 p. 1; km 6/96 p. 7)
EXPERIENCE: A sister who learned the truth through informal witnessing considers her special territory to be the people she meets through her three children. Her territory includes neighbors and parents she meets at school and at meetings for parents. Whenever she introduces herself, she makes a simple but heartfelt statement that the Bible is a valuable aid to her in rearing her children, and then she moves on to some other topic. But having broken the ice, she finds it much easier to bring the Bible into subsequent discussions. By using this method, she has helped 12 persons to baptism.
How do you determine if an opportunity to witness is appropriate or not?
What have you found to be an effective way to start informal Bible discussions? (km 8/10 pp. 3-6; km 12/95 pp. 3-4)
How did you introduce the good news?
What have you learned from printed experiences of informal witnessing?
SUGGESTIONS: Read the Bible or Bible literature while using public transportation or during rest or lunch periods at work. Mention a recent news item.
How can we perceive that a person does not wish to continue speaking about a Scriptural theme?
What do you do in such circumstances?
Why should we try to leave a person with a favorable impression? (km 6/96 p. 7 par. 6)
◆ One must learn not only how to start but also when to stop speaking on a Scriptural subject.

What have you done to obtain contact details from interested ones?
What could you do if a person feels hesitant about giving you his phone number or e-mail address?
How have you arranged to meet again if you do not have the person’s address?
Why do we not call this avenue of service “incidental”? (km 6/03 pp. 3-4)
What publications do you carry with you in order to be prepared for opportunities to witness?
How have you used handbills and tracts in informal witnessing? (km 10/12 p. 3 par. 7)
Share the Good News on Appropriate Occasions—Public Witnessing
Why do we not label this type of preaching “alternative”? (km 12/11 p. 1 par. 3)
What do Acts 16:13 and Acts 17:17 teach us regarding appropriate occasions for witnessing to others?
How do the principles in the following scriptures apply to our preaching work?
Matthew 7:12
Hebrews 13:16
Note to Instructor: Develop the following material in a way that addresses local needs. Be prepared to communicate branch guidelines regarding public preaching in your area. Help the pioneers to consider new ways to preach publicly.

Why are the preaching methods listed below particularly effective?
What suggestions would you offer to make these activities productive?
• Special Metropolitan Public Witnessing (km 7/13 pp. 4-6)
• Using public transportation (km 7/97 p. 1; km 9/96 p. 4 pars. 14-15)
• Witnessing in parks or parking lots (km 7/13 pp. 4-6; km 9/96 pp. 4-5 pars. 16-17)
• Street witnessing (km 6/11 p. 2; km 2/91 p. 8)
• Preaching in marketplaces or shopping malls (w08 9/15 pp. 25-26; km 9/96 p. 5 pars. 18-20)
• Working business territory (km 3/12 p. 2; km 7/04 p. 4; km 9/96 p. 5 pars. 21-26)
• Telephone witnessing, if appropriate in your area (km 1/10 pp. 4-6; km 8/93 pp. 3-4; yb06 p. 52 par. 1–p. 53 par. 4)
What experiences have you had witnessing in hospitals, nursing homes, prisons, ports, to street vendors, in open-air markets, or to taxi drivers? In what other settings have you preached publicly?
Maintain Boldness in Various Forms of Our Ministry
What role should prayer play in preparing for all types of witnessing? Why? (Eph. 6:19)
What can you do to work in harmony with your prayers?
EXPERIENCE: A shy seven-year-old girl heard at a meeting how important it is for all to preach. So when going shopping with her mother, she put two brochures in her bag. While her mother was busy at the counter, the girl offered a brochure to a lady, who graciously accepted it. When asked how she got the courage to approach the lady, this shy girl replied: “I just said, Ready, Set, Go! And I went!”
Students may share encouraging experiences they have had in various forms of witnessing. Highlight such qualities as reliance on Jehovah, preparation, and personal interest.




