
UNIT 4 (B)
Show Personal Interest in Others



OPENING DISCUSSION

Showing interest in others is not just a technique to be mastered, it is a quality of the heart. (be p. 189 par. 3) It involves how we listen and what we say. It is manifested by the kindness and consideration that we extend to others as well as our demeanor, our attitude, and even our facial expressions. If we truly care about others, this heartfelt concern will show.
Could you be more alert to show personal interest in others? Successful pioneers genuinely care about others and are observant of their needs. People in every part of the earth respond to a warm smile, a listening ear, sincere concern, and acts of kindness, both small and large.
So be vigilant to display personal interest in others and attract them to the good news. Members of our family and congregation also need our love and attention. You can be sure that Jehovah will richly reward your efforts.—Gal. 6:10; Heb. 6:10.
◆ How to show genuine interest: Encourage expression. Really listen. Ask appropriate questions. Commend generously. Think about the individual’s needs and prepare accordingly.




QUESTION OUTLINE

Getting to Know People and Their Background
What shows that the apostle Paul took the background and thinking of his listeners into consideration when he preached? (Acts 26:2, 3; 1 Cor. 9:20-23)
As you approach individuals, what clues might reveal their culture, interests, or family situation? What surroundings might you observe? What evidence might you see that indicates their religious beliefs?
What current events are on the minds of people in your territory? Give examples. How can events that are publicized in the media serve as a basis for conversation? (km 9/00 p. 4)
◆ Politely acknowledge the activity a householder is engaged in when you make contact and be respectful of his time. When householders see that you are aware of their circumstances, they may be more willing to engage in a friendly conversation.—John 4:7, 10, 28, 29.

How can giving advance thought to how you will approach people in your territory make your presentation more appealing? (km 5/13 p. 2)
If some have moved to your area from a foreign land, what have you found to be an effective way to witness to them?
Why use the booklet Good News for People of All Nations? What do you appreciate about the format of this booklet? What experiences have you had using it?
How could you use jw.org when meeting someone who speaks another language? What experiences have you had using it?
How do we follow up on any interest shown?
Note to Instructor: Explain the function of the Please Follow Up (S-43) form and explain how foreign language groups and congregations in your locality can be supported. (km 5/11 p. 3)

How should our observations and what we learn about others affect our presentations? (Rom. 12:14-16)
Listen Attentively to the Observations and Concerns of Others (Jas. 1:19)
How can we use questions effectively? (be pp. 236-239) How does the use of questions show personal interest?
Without being intrusive, how might we encourage someone to express his opinion on a matter? (Col. 4:6) Why must we avoid the appearance of conducting an interrogation? (w05 6/1 p. 32)
EXPERIENCE: In an open letter published in the newspaper Le Progrès, of Saint-Étienne, France, a woman described the visit of two people who knocked on her door shortly after she suffered the tragic loss of her three-month-old daughter in death. “I immediately recognized them as Jehovah’s Witnesses,” she wrote. “I was ready to dismiss them politely, but then I noticed a brochure they were offering. It was about why God permits suffering. So I decided to invite them in with the intention of demolishing their arguments. . . . The Witnesses stayed a little over an hour. They listened to me with great compassion, and when they were leaving, I felt so much better that I agreed to another visit.” In time, this woman accepted a Bible study. It is revealing that what she remembered about that first visit was, not what the Witnesses said, but how they listened.
How does listening to others honor them? (Rom. 12:10) Why does listening attentively give evidence that we value their thoughts and feelings? (be p. 187)
When speaking to others, what advantages are there to making appropriate eye contact? (be pp. 124-125)
Why is it good to commend a householder if you can do so sincerely?
◆ Acknowledge the expressions of others graciously, even if you do not agree with their point of view. Avoid controversy.

Be Adaptable When Presenting Bible Truths (1 Cor. 9:19-22)
When in the ministry, what might you say to show your consideration for the following people?
• Elderly person
• Child, teenager, college student
• Father, mother
• Someone ill; someone you awakened from sleep
• Grieving person
• Person with a fine home or a beautiful yard
◆ When we focus on the needs of others, we will be less nervous and more inclined to speak from the heart.

To what extent should you adapt or change your presentation to appeal to the person who comes to the door? How? (km 6/13 p. 1 par. 3)
If the householder mentions a matter of personal concern, why should you center your discussion on what matters to him?
Under what circumstances might it be most appropriate to end a discussion? (km 9/09 p. 1 par. 4)
What notes will help you to remember the interest found? How is this an indication of the depth of your concern for others?
✍ Keep written records: Your records should be accurate and complete. Write down the name and address of the householder as soon as you leave the call. Do not guess at the house number or the street name—check the information to be sure that it is accurate. Write a brief description of the individual. Make note of the topic you discussed, the scriptures you read, any literature you left, and the question you will answer when you return. Include the day and time of the initial call and when you said you would call back. Now that your record is complete, don’t lose it! Keep thinking about the individual and how you will handle the call the next time.—km 2/14 p. 1.
The most important reason for showing sincere interest in others is that by doing so, we imitate the love and mercy of our heavenly Father. This helps to draw our listeners to Jehovah and to the message he has given us to spread. As you share the good news, strive to “look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.”—Phil. 2:4.




