Prayers in the Bible Are Worth a Closer Look
AN ANXIOUS woman, a king, and God’s own Son said the prayers we will take a close look at now. Each prayer was prompted by a different set of circumstances. Yet, such situations could affect us today. What can we learn from these examples?
“Look Upon the Affliction of Your Slave Girl”
Are you struggling with a persistent problem? Or have you become weighed down with anxiety? Then you have much in common with Hannah before she gave birth to her first child, Samuel. She was childless and was being taunted by another woman. In fact, Hannah’s situation so vexed and concerned her that she would not eat. (1 Samuel 1:2-8, 15, 16) She appealed to Jehovah and offered the following supplication:
“O Jehovah of armies, if you will without fail look upon the affliction of your slave girl and actually remember me, and you will not forget your slave girl and actually give to your slave girl a male offspring, I will give him to Jehovah all the days of his life, and no razor will come upon his head.”​—1 Samuel 1:11.
Notice that Hannah did not speak in generalities. She addressed Jehovah with a specific request (for a male offspring) and coupled this with a definite resolve (to put him at God’s disposal). What does this tell us?
When in adversity, be specific in prayer. Regardless of what your problem is​—whether it is your domestic situation, loneliness, or ill health—​pray to Jehovah about it. Describe to him the exact nature of your difficulty and how you feel. “Every evening I entrust all my troubles to Jehovah,” says a widow named Louise. “Sometimes there are quite a few, but I clearly mention each one.”
Speaking to Jehovah in exact terms brings benefits. Doing so helps us to define our problem, which might then appear less formidable. Saying specific prayers relieves us of anxiety. Even before her prayer was answered, Hannah felt reassured, and “her face became self-concerned no more.” (1 Samuel 1:18) Moreover, being exact makes us alert to identify the answer to our prayer. “The more exactly I phrase my prayers,” says Bernhard, a Christian in Germany, “the clearer are the answers.”
“I Am But a Little Boy”
However, a person might feel a different type of concern if he receives an assignment of which he feels unworthy. Are you at times overwhelmed by the responsibility granted you by Jehovah? Or do some people regard you as unsuitable for your assignment? Young Solomon was in that situation when he was anointed as king of Israel. Certain prominent men preferred that someone else be on the throne. (1 Kings 1:5-7, 41-46; 2:13-22) Early in his reign, Solomon made a request in prayer:
“Jehovah my God, you yourself have made your servant king . . . I am but a little boy. I do not know how to go out and how to come in. . . . Give to your servant an obedient heart to judge your people, to discern between good and bad.”​—1 Kings 3:7-9.
Solomon focused his prayer on his relationship with Jehovah, on the privilege he had been given, and on his ability to carry out the assignment. In a similar way, whenever we are given responsibility that we feel is beyond our ability, we should petition God to equip us to do the job. Consider the following experiences:
“When asked to care for greater responsibility at the branch office of the Watch Tower Society,” explains Eugene, “I felt completely inadequate. There were others who were better qualified and had much more experience. I slept very little for the next two nights, spending most of the time in prayer, which gave me strength and the necessary assurance.”
Roy was asked to deliver a funeral discourse following the sudden and tragic death of a young friend who had been very popular. Hundreds were sure to attend. What did Roy do? “I have seldom prayed so much for strength and for the ability to find correct words to express upbuilding thoughts and to offer comfort.”
As the Creator ‘speeds things up’ and as his organization expands, a natural consequence is that more of his servants are being entrusted with responsibility. (Isaiah 60:22) If you are asked to have an increased share, rest assured that Jehovah can make up for any lack in experience, training, or ability on your part. Approach God in the same manner as Solomon did, and He will equip you to handle the assignment.
“That They May All Be One”
A third situation that arises today is that of being required to represent a group in prayer. When called upon to say a prayer on behalf of others, what should we pray for? Consider Jesus’ prayer recorded in John chapter 17. He said this prayer in the presence of his disciples on his last evening as a man. What sort of petitions did he direct to his heavenly Father?
Jesus stressed the common goals and the shared hope of those present. He mentioned the glorification of Jehovah God’s name and the making known of the Kingdom. Jesus emphasized the value of a personal relationship with the Father and the Son, based on knowledge of the Scriptures. He spoke of separateness from the world, which would brace his followers for opposition. Christ also asked his Father to protect the disciples and to unite them in true worship.
Yes, Jesus emphasized unity. (John 17:20, 21) Earlier that evening, the disciples had engaged in some immature bickering. (Luke 22:24-27) In prayer, however, Christ sought not to censure but to unite. In the same way, family and congregation prayers should promote love and seek to overcome friction between individuals. Those being represented should be drawn together in unity.​—Psalm 133:1-3.
This unity is manifested when those listening say, “Amen,” or “So be it,” in conclusion. For this to be possible, they have to understand and be in agreement with everything said. It would be unfitting, therefore, to mention in prayer a subject that is unknown to some present. For instance, an elder who is representing a congregation in prayer might seek Jehovah’s blessing on a spiritual brother or sister who is seriously ill. But it normally would be best if he did so only if the overwhelming majority of those he is representing know the person and have heard about the illness.
Notice, too, that Jesus did not itemize the personal needs of each member of the group. Doing so would have involved mentioning intimate matters known only to certain individuals. Personal concerns are a fitting subject for private prayer, which can be as extended and as intimate as desired.
How should a person prepare himself to represent a large gathering of worshipers in prayer? One experienced Christian explains: “I consider in advance what to give thanks for, what requests the brothers might have, and what petitions I could mention on their behalf. I put my ideas, including expressions of praise, in the right order in my mind. Before saying the public prayer, I say a silent prayer, asking for help to represent the brothers in a dignified manner.”
Whatever your circumstances, likely you will find a prayer in the Bible that was said by someone in a situation like yours. The broad spectrum of prayers in the Scriptures is evidence of God’s loving-kindness. Reading these prayers and meditating on them will help you to enrich your prayers.
[Box on page 5]
NOTABLE PRAYERS IN THE BIBLE
Jehovah’s servants offered prayers under a multitude of circumstances. Can you relate to one or more of the following situations?
Do you need guidance from God, as did Eliezer?​—Genesis 24:12-14.
Are you in imminent danger, as was Jacob?​—Genesis 32:9-12.
Do you want to know God better, as did Moses?​—Exodus 33:12-17.
Are you confronted with opponents, as was Elijah?​—1 Kings 18:36, 37.
Is preaching difficult for you, as it was for Jeremiah?​—Jeremiah 20:7-12.
Do you need to confess sins and seek forgiveness, as did Daniel?​—Daniel 9:3-19.
Do you face persecution, as did Jesus’ disciples?​—Acts 4:24-31.
See also Matthew 6:9-13; John 17:1-26; Philippians 4:6, 7; James 5:16.
[Box on page 6]
WHAT TO PRAY FOR WHEN FIGHTING AN INGRAINED HABIT
  Are you struggling against a recurring weakness? How can prayers recorded in the Bible be of benefit? Learn from David, who prayed at various times with regard to his own weaknesses.
  David sang: “Search through me, O God, and know my heart. Examine me, and know my disquieting thoughts.” (Psalm 139:23) It was David’s desire that Jehovah God search out improper desires, emotions, or motives. In other words, David enlisted Jehovah’s help in avoiding sin.
  But David’s weaknesses overcame him, and he sinned greatly. Here again, prayer helped him​—this time to restore his relationship with God. According to Psalm 51:2, David pleaded: “Thoroughly wash me from my error, and cleanse me even from my sin.”
  We too can humbly pray for Jehovah’s assistance in order to curb wrong inclinations. This will strengthen us to overcome an ingrained weakness and can help us avoid sin. If a relapse occurs, we should approach Jehovah again with petitions that he help us to carry on the fight.
[Pictures on page 7]
Prayers spoken on behalf of a group should emphasize Scriptural hopes and common spiritual goals

