Will You Praise Jehovah?
“LIKE your name, O God, so your praise is to the borders of the earth.” These are words from a prophetic song of the sons of Korah. (Psalm 48:10) Today, a mighty chorus of millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses is praising God and making known his name by preaching the good news of his Kingdom. By doing this in 232 lands and islands of the sea and in more than 300 languages, they are literally reaching “the borders of the earth.”
What is it that compels people of different cultural, social, and linguistic backgrounds to praise Jehovah? Their gratitude for an accurate knowledge of God’s Word, the Bible, is a major reason. Spiritual truth has liberated them from superstitions and from such enslaving religious beliefs as eternal torment. (John 8:32) The truth also helps them to appreciate God’s marvelous qualities, such as his love, power, wisdom, and justice that is tempered with mercy. Coming to an understanding of God’s offering his only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ, as a ransom sacrifice for mankind motivates upright people to praise and serve Jehovah.
According to the Bible book of Revelation, a celestial chorus exclaims: “You are worthy, Jehovah, even our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they existed and were created.” (Revelation 4:11) Such praise does not result from a mere sense of obligation. Rather, it stems from reverence for Jehovah.
Praise God by Declaring the Good News
In praising Jehovah, a person is imitating the superb example of Jesus Christ, the principal praiser of God. Following in Jesus’ footsteps includes participating in the work of preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 4:17, 23; 24:14) This preaching activity has become the greatest worldwide effort in praising Jehovah.
This preaching work is so important that the Bible clearly connects it with salvation. Romans 10:13-15 reads: “‘Everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.’ However, how will they call on him in whom they have not put faith? How, in turn, will they put faith in him of whom they have not heard? How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach? How, in turn, will they preach unless they have been sent forth? Just as it is written: ‘How comely are the feet of those who declare good news of good things!’”
Last year alone, Jehovah’s Witnesses devoted more than a billion hours to the preaching work. And what good results came from this praising of God! Some 314,000 joined the chorus of praisers by symbolizing their dedication to Jehovah by water baptism.
Yet, what could be said about the 12,288,917 who attended the 1994 Memorial of Christ’s death? Among them were over 7,000,000 who do not yet praise Jehovah as preachers of the good news. But their presence on this important occasion could eventually result in the addition of millions more to the chorus of praisers. What can be done to help these interested ones to become praisers of Jehovah?
Available Help
Many interested persons may have the desire to praise Jehovah but feel that they cannot meet the requirements. They do well to remember the psalmist’s words: “I shall raise my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come? My help is from Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth.” (Psalm 121:1, 2) Evidently, the psalmist raised his eyes to the mountains of Jerusalem where Jehovah’s temple and the earthly seat of the theocratic government were situated. From this we can rightly conclude that help needed to praise God and declare the Kingdom message comes only from Jehovah and his organization.​—Psalm 3:4; Daniel 6:10.
Today, those who desire to praise Jehovah can expect loving assistance from his earthly organization. For example, Jehovah’s Witnesses offer help by conducting free home Bible studies with interested people. This educational program includes more than just learning Bible doctrines. It helps the student to develop an appreciation for what he is learning and for the organization that Jehovah is using.
In harmony with this, the Witness conducting the Bible study tries to make sure that the newfound truths reach not only the head but also the heart. And the teacher should not hold back from showing the student how Jehovah is using His organization to accomplish His purpose on earth. The brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide and the videotape Jehovah’s Witnesses—​The Organization Behind the Name have often proved helpful in accomplishing this.
Christian meetings also play a vital role in assisting prospective praisers of Jehovah. At the very early stages of a Bible study, the student may be invited to attend Christian meetings. In time, he will learn the importance of regular attendance at and participation in all congregation meetings. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) Overseers can provide invaluable help for fellow believers and prospective praisers of Jehovah by preparing meetings that are spiritually upbuilding and practical.
Help Children to Praise Jehovah
Children are among the many who could become publishers of the good news in the near future. Especially do fathers have the Biblical responsibility to bring their children up “in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.” (Ephesians 6:4) When properly trained by godly parents, even very young children can develop the desire to praise Jehovah.
One little girl in Argentina approached the congregation elders repeatedly for several months, asking for their help so that she could qualify as a Kingdom publisher. In time, her parents and the elders agreed to allow her to become an unbaptized publisher. She already presents the Kingdom message effectively at the doors. Even though this little girl is only five years old and does not know how to read, she has memorized the location of some Bible texts. After finding a scripture, she asks the householder to read it, and then she gives an explanation.
It is clear that both elders and parents can accomplish much good by encouraging and helping those progressing toward being praisers of Jehovah.​—Proverbs 3:27.
An Eternal Relationship With Jehovah
Yet, what if you yourself have been associating with Jehovah’s Witnesses for some time but have not yet joined them in their preaching work? It may be beneficial to ask yourself the following questions, ‘Do I believe that I have found the truth and that Jehovah is the only true God? Am I convinced that God’s Kingdom is the only solution to mankind’s problems? Have I abandoned all false religion and worldly customs and practices that offend Jehovah? Do I have a deep love for God and for his righteous requirements?’ (Psalm 97:10) If you can honestly answer yes to these questions, what prevents you from praising Jehovah?​—Compare Acts 8:36.
Praising Jehovah involves more than preaching the good news. If you have taken in accurate knowledge, have true faith, and are conforming your life to divine requirements, you need to solidify your personal relationship with God. How? By making a dedication to him in prayer and then symbolizing this by water baptism. Everlasting life is at stake. Therefore, act now on Jesus’ counsel: “Go in through the narrow gate; because broad and spacious is the road leading off into destruction, and many are the ones going in through it; whereas narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life, and few are the ones finding it.”​—Matthew 7:13, 14.
With the present system of things nearing its catastrophic end, this is no time to hesitate. Take immediate steps toward an eternal relationship with Jehovah. Indeed, now is the time to respond positively to the question, Will you praise Jehovah?

