By Love and Obedience Not Forgetting Jehovah
What and whom were the Israelites not to forget?
One meaning of forget is “to lose the remembrance of; to let go from the memory.” This is the meaning of “forget” as used in God’s commands to the sons of Israel. At Deuteronomy 4:9 they were commanded not to forget “the things that your eyes have seen” in the way of the mighty works Jehovah performed on their behalf.
Then again, they were commanded not to forget Jehovah God himself, “who brought [them] out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slaves.” (Deut. 6:10-12) The danger of doing this would exist after they had entered the land of promise, flowing with milk and honey, and were enjoying all its good things. So Jehovah warned them against becoming materialistic and forgetting him.
Jehovah God by Moses gave his people still something else for them not to forget, at Deuteronomy 25:19: “It must occur that when Jehovah your God has given you rest . . . you should wipe out the mention of Amalek from under the heavens. You must not forget.”a Why were they to do this? Because Amalek “met you in the way and proceeded to strike in the rear of you all those straggling after you while you were exhausted and weary; and he did not fear God.” In due time Israel did “wipe out the mention of Amalek from under the heavens.”​—Deut. 25:18.
What are some of Jehovah’s doings that Christians today should not forget?
David said, “Bless Jehovah, O my soul, and do not forget all his doings.” (Ps. 103:2) Among these doings, as Jesus and the apostle Paul reminded their listeners, is His making provision of the sunshine and rain, the air we breathe and the food we eat. All we need in the way of material things comes from him.
Nor should Christians ever forget that their God Jehovah has provided all the necessary spiritual things. He has given his servants his Word, the Holy Bible. He has given them generously of his holy spirit. He gave them his Son, Jesus Christ, to be their Savior. And Jehovah has given mankind the hope of his kingdom.
Moreover, Jehovah has given his servants the honor of representing him as his witnesses. And he has provided a visible earthly organization, “the faithful and discreet slave,” to feed, direct and care for his people.
How can Christians show that they are not forgetting Jehovah?
By loving obedience to all his commands, such as to “offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of lips.” (Heb. 13:15) They can offer praise by means of their prayers. They can offer it also by having family studies and family Bible conversation. What opportunities there are not to forget Jehovah when Christians meet together at their local congregations! Both by giving rapt attention to what is said about God from the platform and by contributing with public declaration as opportunity affords, they show that they are not forgetting God. (Heb. 10:23-25) And when Christians happen to be together, as when traveling or in social gatherings, what an ideal time to help one another not to forget Jehovah, by talking about interesting field experiences or about new things learned!
Further, God’s servants can show that they are not forgetting Jehovah by being lovingly obedient to all His requirements regarding personal conduct. And, above all, they can show this by telling others, from house to house and at other times, about the good things Jehovah God has done for humankind and all he will soon do.
What rewards come to those not forgetting God?
Those who, by love and obedience, do not forget Jehovah can be certain that he will not forget them. They will be able to call upon him when in distress and he will hear and rescue them. (Ps. 91:15) By not forgetting Jehovah they will have joy, peace of mind, contentment even now in the midst of this world’s turmoil, violence and wickedness. And they will have the blessing of Jehovah that makes rich and that has no regrets, sorrow or pain connected with it. (Prov. 10:22) More than all this, they can have the assurance and firm hope that they will, in Jehovah’s due time, enjoy the blessings of everlasting life in happiness in God’s new system of things so near at hand.​—Isa. 65:17-25.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, January 1, 1969.

