Announcements
CHOOSING NEW WORLD LIFE—Deut. 30:19, 20, AT.
Every sane person chooses to live. That is why we eat, drink, breathe, sleep and work. But more than the doing of these things is required to gain life in Jehovah’s new world. We must demonstrate that we want new world life ‘by loving the LORD our God, by heeding his injunctions, and by holding fast to him; for that will mean life to us’. Therefore one must come to know Jehovah by studying his Word. During February you can help others to learn of Jehovah by offering The Watchtower for one year on a contribution of $1, with three booklets free. Preparing the way for Watchtower subscriptions, you can distribute the small Bible tract Life in a New World. Friends, neighbors, relatives and others will enjoy reading this little two-color illustrated tract of six pages. A supply fits conveniently in your pocket or purse. It is just what you need to have part in spreading the good news. A packet of 200 costs only 25c. Ask for tract No. 8, Life in a New World.
1953 YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
If you have not already written for your copy of the 1953 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses, may we suggest that you do so now. During the past year there was a monthly average of 426,704 active witnesses for Jehovah’s kingdom working from door to door and in the homes of the peoples of the world. The Yearbook reports on their accomplishments in the ministry, both here in the United States and in scores of faraway lands. A great many interesting experiences provide a world-wide view of the public response to the ministry of Jehovah’s witnesses. Also available now is the 1953 calendar. In beautiful colors it depicts various ways in which God’s servants worship him and aid persons of good will. The calendar pad sets forth a Scriptural theme for each month. A contribution of 50c will bring you a copy of the 1953 Yearbook; and calendars may be had for, 25c each, or five or more to any one address for 20c each.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 1: Unhappy Complainers; also, Dispelling the Spirit of Complaint, ¶1-5.
Week of March 8: Dispelling the Spirit of Complaint, ¶6-27.

