Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Here is something new! Something to aid you in making more return visits, and starting more home Bible studies. How?
Well, the Society is planning to print three new booklets for the Watchtower campaign. Each one has been written in a simple manner especially for the public. These three booklets will be offered as a premium with a year’s subscription. Each publisher obtaining a new subscription will want to make a return visit and endeavor to start a home Bible study in the booklet that appeals most to the individual with whom he left them.
The titles of these new 32-page booklets are (1) A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It, (2) There Is Much More to Life! and (3) Is There a God Who Cares?
Of course, you will want to know what they are about, so the public talks to be given on December 14 December 21 and December 28 will be based on these booklets. Each speaker will be given a copy of the booklet that he is to use and he can prepare the talk covering the points in the booklet assigned to him. The publishers can obtain their copy of each particular booklet after the talk is given and can review the questions on the paragraphs so as to be ready for the January campaign.
Now, suppose a person does not subscribe for the magazines for a whole year and get the premium offer. What then? The publisher will drop down to two magazines and these three new booklets and offer them on a contribution of 25 cents. The booklet that the publisher thinks will appeal most to the householder should be on top and he should use that booklet as a talking point. If the person does not want this offer, then present just one booklet for 5 cents. The publisher should then return the following week and talk over that particular booklet’s contents and see if he can get a home Bible study started. In four to six studies he should be through the booklet. If the people wish to discuss another booklet, well and good, but by this time the publisher should know if the person really wants to go ahead with further Bible study. Then one of the pocket-sized books can be selected and used for study.
The whole idea is to get more Bible studies going during this coming winter so as to aid people to take their stand on Jehovah’s side. Whether you get a subscription, or just place two magazines and the three booklets, or place one booklet, you have a basis for a return visit with the hope of starting a home Bible study and arousing the interest of the householder in God’s kingdom. Jesus said we should “make disciples of people of all the nations,” and while we still have the opportunity all of us will want to put forth an extraordinary effort to do just that.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
Congregations that have ordered handbills for December 14, 21 and 28 will find the three subjects that correspond with the titles of the booklets substituted for the ones that they listed in their order. This will be true of all public talks on those dates, including the ones given by circuit overseers and at circuit assemblies. As soon as the booklets are printed we will send sample copies to each congregation, and the presiding overseer will see to it that the speakers each get their copy so as to prepare their talks.
The presiding overseer will also consult with those who handle the movement of literature and those who keep the records of placements and try to determine how many booklets will be needed for at least the first two months of the Watchtower campaign, January and February, and then order the quantity required along with other literature that may be needed. This order should come to the Society sometime after October 15 and no later than November 15. Our suggestion is that you order at least five booklets of each of the three publications for each publisher, unless you think that you can use more. Take into consideration your pioneers too. At the end of January, or maybe earlier, after observing how the booklets are moving, you can place your second order so that you will have a sufficient quantity to take you through to the end of the Watchtower campaign in April.
These are going to be permanent booklets. So you do not have to order only for the campaign. You may order enough for six months, but do it in two orders. You may have to revise your thinking a little bit as to how well booklets will move, because we have not been stressing booklets. But we will do so now during the Watchtower campaign because we would like to use these new booklets to start Bible studies. That is our big aim in this campaign.
Congregations, Please Take Note: All handbills in English that you have ordered for some specific public meeting topic for December 14, 21 or 28 in the United States will automatically be changed by the handbill desk in Brooklyn to the new subjects for these dates. Other handbill orders, which set out just meeting times, will be printed as usual.
We are pleased to make this early announcement of this Watchtower campaign with its special emphasis on return visits and Bible studies. We hope that every publisher of the Kingdom will be enthusiastic about this special effort to start more Bible studies. More will be written later, but we want you to order now the quantity of booklets you will need for your congregation. Please do this after October 15 and before November 15.
Another thing we can all do is to pray to Jehovah that he will bless this arrangement and open up the hearts and minds of many to study the Bible with Jehovah’s witnesses.
Be assured of our warm love and best wishes for an excellent Watchtower campaign.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE
[Blurb on page 8]
Try to Start Bible Studies with Subscribers.

