Jehovah’s Day Is Near!
1 The apostle Peter emphasized the certainty of the coming of Jehovah’s “day.” Regardless of when it would actually arrive, it was something to be reckoned with. For that reason he said: “What sort of persons ought you to be . . . awaiting and keeping close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah.” (2 Pet. 3:11, 12) Today we are living some 1,900 years later, which means that Jehovah’s day is that much closer. We must keep wide awake spiritually, appreciating that Jehovah’s day is now immediately ahead.
2 “Since we are interested in the lives of people, it is important that we urgently warn all whom we can, awakening them to the imminent presence of Jehovah’s day. What a fine aid the Awake! magazine is for doing this excellent work. For 56 years now, Awake! has been used to carry a lifesaving message to the people to alert them to the times in which we live. Every two weeks more than nine million copies in 31 languages currently are put into the hands of the people world wide. It will be a pleasure to feature Awake! again during October. Since most people identify Awake! as a companion to The Watchtower, why not offer both subscriptions, with six booklets, for $3.00?
3 Much good is also accomplished by the distribution of individual copies of the magazines. During October we have outstanding issues of both magazines to use. The special Awake! of October 8 will be titled “A Sound Guide for Modern Living,” and the October 22 issue will also be most interesting on the subject “Does It All End Here?” The October 15 Watchtower will feature the subject of the public talk given at the recent district assemblies, “One World, One Government, Under God’s Sovereignty.” It will accomplish much good if we put forth an extra effort to get these into the hands of many people. Will you have a share?
4 Then, during November, we will enjoy the special distribution of Kingdom News No. 21, presenting the subject “Your Future​—Shaky? or Secure?” It emphasizes the fact that neither politics nor science, but only God’s kingdom will bring us a secure future and deliverance through the coming day of Jehovah. So as Peter said, “What sort of persons ought you to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion!” Our zealous activity in distributing these tracts from November 1 to 10 will be one way to show that we are indeed “keeping close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah.”​—2 Pet. 3:11, 12.
5 Following the distribution of the tracts, we will be privileged to offer in the field for the first time the latest book, Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand!, along with a booklet, for 50c. Among the interesting facts found in this publication are comments about “Jehovah’s day.” This is a special period of time when Jehovah actively moves against his enemies and on behalf of his people.
6 Thus in many ways and by use of various publications Jehovah’s organization is endeavoring to alert the people to the nearness of Jehovah’s day and to help them to appreciate the good news of God’s kingdom. But usually personal attention and instruction are necessary. That is one reason why the booklets are offered with the subscription and also the larger books. Be sure to include with both offers a booklet, such as the “Look!” booklet or “This Good News of the Kingdom,” which are good for starting a home Bible study. Using one of these for study, in just a few weeks you can give the householder a fine insight into Jehovah’s wonderful purposes without feeling a need to offer something else to study first.
7 Jehovah is certainly blessing the efforts of his people with marvelous expansion, and we rejoice to have a share in it. May Jehovah bless our work in the months ahead as we continue to ‘keep close in mind the presence of Jehovah’s day.’
[Blurb on page 1]
Viewing as Close the Presence of Jehovah’s Day.

