Letting Undeserved Kindness Abound
1 Last year throughout the world 127,135 pioneers, on an average, shared in conveying God’s word to others. While many are not in a position to enjoy the privilege of pioneer service because of Scriptural responsibilities, we can all share in letting the light of truth shine.​—2 Cor. 4:5, 6.
2  After paraphrasing Psalm 116:10 by saying, “I exercised faith, therefore I spoke,” Paul commented, “we too exercise faith and therefore we speak.” (2 Cor. 4:13) Is that the way you feel? Do you have that same “spirit of faith” that Paul spoke about? If so, have you asked yourself, “Am I in a position to become a regular pioneer?” Or perhaps you would like to try being a temporary pioneer as a first step toward making full-time pioneer service your way of life, joining the 127,135 who received many blessings due to spending pioneer time in the field service last year.
3  Some have held back from pioneering, feeling that it is more than they can do or that they are not really qualified for such service. Yet the qualifications are not difficult. (See the Organization book, pages 137, 140, 141.) And when a person makes the effort, he often experiences growth in teaching ability and faith.
4 Have you who are pioneers invited other brothers and sisters in your congregation to work with you as you share in this fine service? By doing so you will assist them to extend the hope of Jehovah’s undeserved kindness to others. As Paul wrote: “In order that the undeserved kindness which was multiplied should abound because of the thanksgiving of many more to the glory of God.”​—2 Cor. 4:15.
5 Despite the rising cost of living, shortage of secular work, and the “anxieties of life,” many have found it possible to continue in the pioneer ranks. (Luke 21:34) Some have found the suggestions for part-time employment in Awake! issues of May 8, 1975, July 8, 1975, and August 22, 1975, very helpful. By talking such problems over with the elders and other pioneers, you may gain additional suggestions to deal effectively with these pressures.
6 Regardless of whether we are pioneers or not, we all want to treasure our privilege of declaring Jehovah’s undeserved kindness to others, not giving up, but keeping our eyes on the goal of everlasting life.​—2 Cor. 4:16-18.

