Orderliness, a Fine Quality for All
1 Among the fine qualities required of overseers is that of being orderly. However, cultivating this trait is beneficial for all Christians, young and old, brothers and sisters. Being orderly carries the thought of being decorous, disciplined, regular, mannerly, having a well-arranged or well-ordered life. Do you show these qualities?​—1 Tim. 3:2.
2 In the case of an overseer, he should show that he is orderly by following a pattern that others the congregation can depend on in close adherence to Bible laws and principles, not disorderly. (2 Thess. 3:6, 7) He is self-controlled, balanced even when under pressure. While orderliness is not simply to be equated with punctuality or keeping accurate records, yet an overseer who is orderly would discipline himself to care for things properly and on time. (Note comments in 1973 Watchtower, page 472.)
3 An overseer who appreciates this quality will plan the meetings sufficiently in advance so they will be well-conducted, orderly meetings. By so doing he shows consideration for others and helps to avoid parts that are rushed in preparation and poorly developed.​—1 Cor. 14:40.
4 When problems arise in the congregation, overseers who are orderly will show respect for God’s Word by not being lax in caring for their responsibilities. They also show courtesy by arranging to consider promptly problems that arise, so that the brothers may be given assistance or counsel, rather than their putting things off indefinitely, thus causing frustration and uncertainty for others.​—Prov. 13:12.
5 A father who appreciates orderliness will have things well arranged for his family to get to meetings, and on time, and to share in field service to keep them strong spiritually. If some in the family grow lax in appreciation for theocratic order, he may also have to apply to his own family the suggestion Paul gave at 1 Thessalonians 5:14.
6 In the home a Christian wife appreciates how important it is to apply Bible principles. She knows how good it is to have everything neat and in good order, so that the home reflects the application of godly principles. (Titus 2:4, 5, 10) She trains her children to keep things picked up and in their place. She can be depended on to keep things clean and orderly and to have meals prepared according to her family’s schedule. (Prov. 31:15) Yes, in many ways orderliness can be shown by each one of us. Orderliness is an indication of maturity and a well-arranged life.

