Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 12
10 min: Song 105. Welcome to meeting; discussion of Ezekiel 39:25. Highlight why it is appropriate that Jehovah shows exclusive devotion for his name, and how we also can show such devotion.
20 min: “Jehovah’s Day Is Near!” Questions and answers. Interview publishers who have obtained subscriptions. Did they get them in house-to-house work or on return visits? What seemed to appeal to the subscriber? Have discussion between two publishers, one giving talking points on an article from Awake! and the other from The Watchtower with a view to offering both subscriptions. Ask audience for other helpful talking points.
15 min: Starting Bible Studies During the Subscription Campaign. [Demonstration] Two publishers finished taking subscription; promise to return with new magazines. After leaving, one says may offer Truth book on return visit to try to start study. Other publisher asks, “Why not start study in one of the booklets left with the subscription?” [Chairman] Let’s see how this might be done. [Demonstration] As in original scene, they finish taking subscription. Second publisher calls attention to “Look!” booklet explaining that many people would like to know more about the Bible but have found it difficult to understand. However, Jehovah’s witnesses are offering to help householder find out from his own Bible how God is going to bring back paradise to earth. Comment on cover of Look! booklet. (Brief study is started in “Look!” booklet paragraphs 1-4.) [Chairman] Examining the scriptures in this booklet and discussing them together can be done in relatively few visits. Encourage trying this with all subscribers.
15 min: Concluding comments, including field service report for congregation. Mention distribution of tracts November 1-10: encourage all to plan ahead so as to share fully. Arrangements should be made to cover any territory not covered with previous tract. Discuss highlights of Watchtower article, “Giving God the Exclusive Devotion He Merits,” 6/15/75, p. 380. Song 66.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 19
Building Up Our Spiritual Family
10 min: Song 45. Introduction and discussion of Matthew 12:46-50. (See Aid, page 262.)
15 min: Getting to Know One Another. How many are new in the congregation in the last year or so? We should know our spiritual brothers and sisters well to help them progress to Christian maturity. Interview several. Discuss how they first heard of the truth and any obstacles they had to overcome. What particularly helped them see it was the truth? How have they been encouraged to stay close to Jehovah?
12 min: Helping Each Other Spiritually. Talk highlighting need to progress spiritually. (Heb. 5:11–6:1) New ones attracted to the congregation by the things they learn, appreciating spiritual truths instead of tradition and ritual. How can we help them continue progressing toward maturity? Association in addition to the meetings is especially encouraging. Do you know someone you could help this way? Many need continued help in study even after baptism. May wish to invite new ones to share in your family study at times. Are there some in your book study who would be happy to share in field service with you? Help may also be appreciated preparing a field presentation or a part for the School. We want to offer such spiritual assistance, thus showing we feel the same way toward our spiritual brothers as Jesus did.​—Matt. 12:50.
13 min: Showing Love in a Practical Way. Comment briefly on James 2:15, 16. Do not want to see any of our spiritual family neglected. [Demonstration] Two sisters talking about elderly sister, not getting to meetings, apartment not kept up properly; why don’t elders do something for her? One comments, “Of course, she is our sister in the truth too; maybe we should do something ourselves,” Agree this is a good idea. Plan to take turns picking her up for meetings, seeing what they can do in a tactful way to help her clean her apartment since she is getting feeble. [Ask congregation,] What kinds of things can sisters do to help others in the congregation in a practical way? What can teen-agers do? What can elders do to help others in the congregation? All of us can show love by warmly welcoming all attending meetings. How can love be shown in other practical ways in harmony with John 13:35
10 min: Concluding comments. Accounts report. Since we want to help others come into Jehovah’s spiritual family, invite all interested persons and former subscribers to obtain subscriptions again. Persons who are studying, who put out the free Awake! magazines during October, may be offered five copies of the tract to distribute. Or, if they qualify, invite them to come along with you in this fine work and share in distributing the tracts in the field, thus helping them toward becoming our spiritual brothers. (Luke 18:28-30) Obtain supplies of tract. Song 9.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 26
15 min: Song 18. Introduction; family group discusses contents of Kingdom News No. 21. (As song is sung, distribute copies to any present who need a copy in order to follow discussion.)
12 min: “Orderliness, a Fine Quality for All.” Talk with some audience participation to show various ways all can display this quality.
15 min: Branch Letter. Discuss enthusiastically, with audience participation.
18 min: Concluding comments and pertinent Announcements. Demonstration showing group just back from field service. Their conversation covers (1) plans for tract distribution, getting out often enough to distribute full supply, (2) recent experiences in field service, (3) comment that after tracts are distributed we will be offering new book Man’s Salvation. Discuss talking points, also that free booklet will be placed with the book with a view to starting a discussion of key Bible teachings. Song 24.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 2
12 min: Song 106. Welcome and brief talk on Matthew 11:29, 30. Stress enjoyment that comes from service, doing things Jehovah’s way. Loss of Joy comes when we turn aside. Discuss Question Box with audience.
20 min: Advocates of God’s Kingdom Keep Making Disciples. Talk covering highlights of 1975 Yearbook, p. 234, par. 1, through p. 256, par. 4, with some publishers prepared to comment on the following questions. Emphasize that Jehovah always provides the spiritual food and direction Christians need and prospers their disciple-making work. (1) How have Jehovah’s people shown that they advocate God’s kingdom, not any other form of government? (Pp. 234-237) (2) During the early 1960’s. how did Jehovah give Christians timely direction regarding their relationship to secular governmental authorities ? (Pp. 237, 238) (3) As to disciple,making, what publication and Bible study program were introduced in 1968? (Pp. 239, 240) (4) Why has it been necessary to expand the Watch Tower Society’s printing facilities, and to whom must the credit go for theocratic prosperity? (P. 245) (5) In keeping with divine direction, what adjustments in congregation structure were made among God’s people in 1971 and 1972? What are some benefits of the new arrangement? (Pp. 247-250) (6) What special work was outlined at the “Divine Victory” International Assemblies? How effective has this activity been? (pp. 252, 253) (7) What provision of Jehovah has helped to make true disciples by revealing whether prospective baptismal candidates understand the Scriptures? (Pp. 253, 254) (8) Why should Jehovah’s servants not be complacent now in the disciple-making work? Have we dedicated our lives to Jehovah God only until a certain year? (P. 256)
In conclusion, highlight the need to “keep on the watch,” as we keep making disciples as advocates of God’s kingdom.​—Mark 13:32-37.
13 min: Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand! Talk on highlights of new book that will appeal to the public, with two brief demonstration offers.
Demonstration: (1) Publisher introduces himself as encouraging Bible reading and discussion. Shows householder the new book, highlighting title, (2)  refers to Isaiah 33:2 on opening page (read). (3) Also reads statement on same page that book contains “A candid consideration . . .” (4) Offers book with “Good News” booklet. After offer is accepted suggests that if person has few minutes would like to demonstrate our arrangement for family Bible discussion. Explains that Bible answers questions in paragraph one.
Second demonstration: Publisher introduces self as calling from Kingdom Hall. Wants to share briefly some good news based on a prophecy that will affect us all. Reads 2 Peter 3:13; then says: “To help you know more about this wonderful promise from God, we are offering this new Bible study aid Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand! along with a booklet designed for family Bible discussion, for just 50c. You will particularly enjoy the comments in the last chapter ‘From World Distress into a Peaceful “New Earth.”’” Invites householder to Kingdom Hall for series of talks on new book during November. Offers to demonstrate Bible discussion using booklet.
15 min: Concluding comments. “Letting Undeserved Kindness Abound.” Questions and answers. Mention arrangements to complete distribution of tracts and experiences in that work. Song 84.

