From Our Readers
Holidays  Upon finishing the series “Holidays​—Why Some Children Do Not Celebrate Them” in the November 22, 1993, Awake!, I found tears of joy streaming down my face. I was raised as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and had the same feelings as many of the children quoted. I want to commend our young ones for being such fine examples! As a parent, I am encouraged to know that many children want to please Jehovah at such young ages.
T. K., United States
I am nine, and I never knew that Halloween was so gross and disgusting. I don’t feel I’m missing out.
A. C., United States
When I was a child, I used to long for Christmas and Easter. But I now understand that these are pagan festivals and that it would be useless simply to follow tradition. The explanation given was complete and comprehensive.
S. L. P., Germany
I was raised as a Witness from the time I was 6 years old, and now I’m in my early 30’s. Many people thought that my brother, my sisters, and I were deprived. I explained to them that we received gifts all year round and that our parents freely gave of their time and of themselves. We did many things together. My father was also faithful in having our weekly family Bible study. That was the best spiritual gift! I never resented not celebrating the holidays.
D. Y., United States
I am 14 years old and I can relate to what was said. I am thankful this article was published. It strengthened me to know that other young people are taking a stand for the truth.
C. A., United States
I don’t feel I am missing anything by not celebrating holidays. My family gives me gifts and gives me money as I need it. I have some of the same toys that other kids my age [12] enjoy.
L. C., United States
This article was an answer to many prayers. You don’t really understand the joys and fears of child rearing until you have a pair of tear-​filled eyes staring up at you that seem to ask why someone made fun of her. Our daughter started kindergarten this year, and although we looked up information about the holidays, it was still difficult for her. We prayed every night for her to be strong and courageous at school. Then the Awake! articles came. She can read at a seventh-​grade level, so all I had to do was give it to her to read. Her heart became courageous as she read the expressions of other children and saw their pictures. The very next day she placed a copy with her teacher.
G. M., United States
Some of the kids at school were teasing me because I didn’t celebrate the holidays, so I made copies of the magazine and gave some to them. I’m sure the teasing will stop because now they know I’m not deprived.
K. H., United States
Coach Safari  When I’m feeling low, sometimes I sew and listen to my Awake! cassettes. I was truly amazed at how the article “A Coach Safari to the Center of Australia” lifted my spirits. (June 8, 1993) I seemed to be there, sharing the joys and excitement that these travelers were enjoying. Thank you so very much.
A. W., United States

