Fulfilling Our Kingdom Ministry in the Field
1 Love for Jehovah and for neighbor motivates us to preach the good news of the Kingdom. By skillfully handling the truth, we can overturn “reasonings and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God.” (2 Cor. 10:5) The Watch Tower Publications Index is designed to help us in this regard.
2 The principal heading for references to our preaching activity in the field is “Field Ministry.” Every aspect is covered there, including our personal attitude, introductions, overcoming objections, presentations for individual publications, return visits, and Bible studies. Would you like to illustrate a point with a couple of good experiences? You may find just what you need under the centered heading “Experiences.”
3 Has someone objected that the Bible contradicts itself, perhaps citing specific verses that seem to conflict? Under “Bible Authenticity,” the subheadings “contradictions” and “harmony” give references to general discussions of this objection. Under the subheading “scriptures harmonized,” you will find an extensive list of individual verses that are seeming contradictions and references that clearly resolve them.
4 In certain areas, we must overturn reasonings on basic false doctrines of Christendom, such as Trinity, hellfire, and immortality of the soul. There are main headings for each of these. Under “Trinity” and “Immortality of the Soul,” you will find the subheading “scriptures misapplied to support.” This will direct you to discussions addressing individual texts. A similar feature is found under “Hell,” with its subheading “scriptures misinterpreted.”
5 Do you long to start a Bible study? Or do you have one that does not seem to be progressing? Under the heading “Bible Studies” are the subheadings “starting,” “assisting—,” and “teaching,” each with references to help you find and conduct progressive Bible studies. To help you know when it would be best to discontinue a study, consider the subheadings “terminating unfruitful” and “discontinuing.”
6 Do you desire to reach out for further privileges in the field ministry? The headings “Full-Time Ministry,” “Auxiliary Pioneers,” “Pioneers,” “Missionaries,” and “Serving Where Need Is Greater” direct you to practical material on how to achieve such goals and to delightful experiences enjoyed by those who have already done so.
7 Fulfilling our Kingdom ministry in the field brings great satisfaction. (John 4:34) The Watch Tower Publications Index can help you as you participate in this joyful work.

