Getting the Most Theocratically From Our Summer Period
1 It has been said that the future belongs to those who prepare for it. We have to plan ahead if we want the use of our time to bring us a sense of accomplishment. With the month of June, we enter the summer season when we usually have more time available for personal activities. What plans can we make now to ensure the best theocratic use of our time?
2 A great number of newly interested persons attended the Memorial on March 30. Their spiritual progress depends largely upon the help they receive from us. It would be a blessing for them to attend the district convention. We can make them aware of its many spiritual benefits and assist them with their travel arrangements, perhaps inviting them to go with us or with others who may have space in their cars.
3 Attending the convention opens up added opportunities to do informal witnessing. Advance planning should include packing a supply of the latest publications. We can witness to people who work in gas stations, hotels, and restaurants, as well as those riding public transportation. This is a fine way to enjoy many exhilarating experiences.
4 Youngsters invariably associate summertime with vacation time. While some wholesome recreation is beneficial, can some of this free time be used for a greater share in the witnessing work, such as auxiliary pioneering? Parents can start now to help their children make plans. Perhaps children from different families can enroll and work together as a group. Others not able to enroll can strive to do more, especially in midweek service.
5 Many will have some time off from their secular jobs and will be traveling to other areas. Making plans to attend the meetings of the local congregation and share with them in service can result in a fine interchange of encouragement. You may be going to a locality where there is much seldom-worked territory, enabling you to witness to people who rarely hear the Kingdom message.
6 Many young people have recently graduated or will soon graduate from school. This gives rise to serious concern about their goals in life. Young people who plan their future around theocratic goals are sure to be blessed. (1 John 2:15-17) A decision to take up the regular pioneer service can lead to a satisfying way of life that includes many special privileges.
7 So most of us will be having some extra time available. Let us act wisely, ‘buying out the opportune time for ourselves.’ (Eph. 5:15, 16) Plans that keep us absorbed in Jehovah’s service will bring lasting benefits to ourselves and others.​—1 Tim. 4:15, 16.

