Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the district convention and then for a 30-minute review of the program highlights at the Service Meeting the following week. The day-by-day review may be assigned in advance to two or three qualified brothers who will be able to focus on key points. This well-prepared review will help the brothers remember key points for personal application and use in the field. Comments from the audience and experiences related should be brief and to the point.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 3
Song 202
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: “Practice Godly Devotion as Christ Did.” Question-and-answer coverage, with paragraphs 1-5, 7, 8 being read. Demonstrate offer for the book Mankind’s Search for God as suggested in paragraph 6.
15 min: “Getting the Most Theocratically From Our Summer Period.” Talk and a family discussion.
(3 min.) Chairman discusses first two paragraphs and introduces family discussion. Spirituality of family should not be neglected during summer period. Family heads should make sure that spiritual needs are cared for at all times.​—Deut. 6:6, 7.
(10 min.) Family discussion covering points in paragraphs 3-6. Family head discusses with family the arrangements needed to ensure summer period will include spiritual activities. One member of family obtained address and meeting times of local congregation in area they will be visiting. Family has sufficient literature to participate in field ministry with the congregation, as well as to take advantage of opportunities to witness informally. Mention is made of situations they may encounter that would present opportunities to give a witness. Family head directs attention to plans for attending “Lovers of Freedom” District Convention and reminds them that at end of each convention day, they will review points from that day’s program, and he explains the benefits of doing so. Family comments briefly on appropriate points from inserts to the January and May issues of Our Kingdom Ministry concerning proper conduct while attending the convention. All eagerly look forward to getting the most theocratically from their summer activity.
(2 min.) Chairman concludes with information in paragraph 7. Whatever plans we make, be sure not to neglect spiritual needs of family.
Song 100 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 10
Song 116
 5 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Read Society’s expression of appreciation for financial support of worldwide work. Also, thank congregation for contributions received.
20 min: “Showing Personal Interest in Others.” Questions and answers. Consider with congregation what can be done locally to apply information.
10 min: Experiences in using the book Mankind’s Search for God in preaching activity in local territory, as well as in making return visits and on home Bible studies.
10 min: Question Box. Discussion handled by school overseer.
Song 177 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 17
Song 133
10 min: Local announcements. Highlight one or two points from current magazines. Encourage publishers to have a full share in the field service this weekend.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Magazines in Frequently Covered Territory.” Questions and answers. When considering paragraph 3, have well-prepared youth use current magazine to demonstrate how young publishers can converse with householders and present literature. Could say: “Good morning. My name is ______. I’ve come to bring you some very valuable information about [give subject or title]. I enjoyed this point. [Show specific point or explain illustration.] It helped me [relate how you benefited], and I think you will enjoy it too. If you will read the magazine, I would be happy to leave it with you.” If appropriate, you may explain the nature of our worldwide ministry that is supported entirely by voluntary donations.
15 min: “Put God First in Your Family Life!” Talk based on The Watchtower, May 15, 1991, pages 4-7.
Song 216 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 24
Song 139
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Encourage congregation to support weekend field service arrangements. Briefly highlight one or two talking points from current magazines. Outline service arrangements for July 4.
20 min: “Fulfilling Our Kingdom Ministry in the Field.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Illustrate how points in paragraphs 2-6 can be put to practical use. When considering paragraph 5, have demonstration showing publisher who has difficulty starting Bible study approaching service overseer for assistance. Service overseer uses Index in helping publisher.
15 min: Local needs or Importance of Informal Witnessing. Interview two or three publishers who have received the truth through informal witnessing. Encourage congregation to be alert to opportunities to witness informally.
Song 14 and concluding prayer.

