Presenting the Good News​—With Magazines in Frequently Covered Territory
1 At Acts 8:25 we read that Peter and John gave a thorough witness in Samaria and then declared “the good news to many villages.” Today, we also should be diligent in covering the territory assigned to our congregation so that a thorough witness is given.
2 With the rapid growth in publishers, many congregations are now covering their territory quite frequently. While our initial reaction to working territories frequently may be negative, this should not be the case. With each issue of The Watchtower and Awake!, there are always new and interesting topics that we may share with the people in our territory. Also, since we are covering our territory more frequently, we have an opportunity to spend additional time at each door.
CONVERSE WITH PEOPLE
3 Very brief magazine presentations have been used in order to cover all our territory and give wide distribution to the magazines. However, publishers working frequently covered territories especially do well to take more time to converse with the householders. Even young children can enlarge on what interested them in the article. How can this be accomplished? It is vital to be familiar with the articles in the magazines. This requires time and forethought. When reading the magazines, determine what will appeal to people in your territory. Then, before going in service, look over the magazines and pick out topics you will feature. Consider what article you will feature when encountering different circumstances at the doors. Use one of the fine subjects in a magazine as a focal point in your introduction. Draw out the householder’s views in a friendly conversation. The magazine can be offered where interest is shown.
4 Since we are presenting literature without charge, there is a need to be more discerning in the use of our literature. Taking time to converse can help us to determine if the person is really interested. In this way, we are less likely to leave magazines with individuals who will not take the time to read them. We can thus make wise use of our literature.
KEEP IN MIND OUR PURPOSE
5 Our purpose in going from door to door is not to see how many magazines or books we can distribute. Our desire is to help others come to an accurate knowledge of the truth. Peter and John spoke the word of Jehovah to the Samaritans in a thorough manner, and we likewise want to spend the time necessary to see that people in our territory are given an opportunity to respond to the truth.
6 By effectively using the magazines as a basis for our conversations, we can accomplish this purpose. We should pray for ourselves and others that we may be given “ability to speak . . . to make known the sacred secret of the good news, . . . with boldness.”​—Eph. 6:18-20.

