Showing Personal Interest in Others
1 Jehovah’s interest in others is abundantly evident. Has he not provided generously the material needs of his creation? (Gen. 1:29, 30; 2:16, 17; Matt. 5:45; compare Luke 6:35.) More importantly, has he not shown personal interest in us by providing for our deliverance from sin and death?​—John 3:16.
2 When Jesus was on the earth, he imitated his Father’s perfect example of showing personal interest in others. (Matt. 11:28-30; 1 Pet. 2:21) When a man full of leprosy said to Jesus, “Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean,” Jesus answered, “I want to,” and healed the man. (Matt. 8:2, 3) Approaching the city of Nain, Jesus encountered a funeral procession bearing a young man, the only son of a widowed mother, and moved with pity, Jesus restored him to life. (Luke 7:11-15) Without being asked, Jesus showed personal interest in others. Even small children were viewed as worthy of his time and attention, and he was never too busy to console and encourage others.​—Matt. 20:31-34; Mark 10:13-16.
FAMILY AND FRIENDS
3 We should endeavor to be like Jehovah and Jesus Christ in looking for ways to show personal interest in others. Therefore, let us consider some opportunities to do that.
4 One of the greatest needs is for brothers to take a genuine personal interest in their own family members and not neglect family spirituality. This includes studying with the family regularly. In your family study, do you consider material in such a way that it is interesting and of practical value? Do you also follow through by regularly working in field service with each member of your household? When you do, is it a happy time? Are you building in your children the desire to help other people, thus showing Christian neighborly love? If married and there are no children at home, do you nonetheless have a family study?
5 We want to render spiritual assistance to everyone we can. But in our busy lives, do we forget to show personal interest in members of the congregation who have special needs? (Prov. 3:27; Gal. 6:10) In the Christian congregation, there are fatherless boys, older ones, widows, the infirm, depressed ones, the disabled, and others who have special needs. In imitation of Jehovah and his Son, Jesus Christ, we should not neglect to show personal interest in all our brothers and sisters.​—1 Cor. 10:24; Phil. 2:4; Heb. 13:16.
SHEEPLIKE ONES IN THE FIELD
6 How can we show personal interest in people who are having home Bible studies? Many of these have seen the need to cut off association with worldly acquaintances. Even though we are busy, do we show personal interest in such students and make those who have made changes feel welcome as our new friends? Are we a source of encouragement to them even though we are not the ones studying with them?​—Compare Mark 10:28-30.
7 Can you have a greater share in showing sincere personal interest in people who are willing to listen to the good news? Will you endeavor to help them meet their spiritual needs? Personally, what can you do to have a greater share in the field ministry? Do not hold back if you are now in a position to share more fully.​—Luke 9:60-62.
8 We must imitate Jehovah and Jesus in showing personal interest in others. We need to be compassionate and reach out to help, as Jesus did in the case of that man who was full of leprosy. Yes, we must always be watchful for ways in which we can show personal interest in others.

