page 2 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1611 : page 2 
A NEW LEAF. 



He came to my desk with a quivering lip— 

The lesson was done— 
"Dear teacher, I want a new leaf," he said; 

"I have spoiled this one." 
In place of the leaf, so stained and blotted, 
I gave him a new one, all unspotted, 

And into his sad eyes smiled— 

"Do better now, my child." 

I went to the throne with a quivering soul— 

The old year was done— 
"Dear Father, hast thou a new leaf for me? 

I have spoiled this one." 
He took the old leaf, stained and blotted, 
And gave me a new one, all unspotted, 

And into my sad heart smiled— 



"Do better now, my child." —Selected. 
R1605 : page 2 
A HAPPY NEW YEAR, 1894. 



Dear Readers, we wish you all a very happy 
and prosperous new year. Although the times 
are unfavorable, money scarce, etc., we trust 
that He that feedeth the fowl of the air and 
clotheth the grass of the field will provide for 
our necessities in food and clothing;— giving 
us the needful strength and opportunity to 
"provide things honest in the sight of all 
men." Let us "seek first [chiefly] the Kingdom," 
and make our calling and election sure, 
remembering that "All things work together 
for good to them that love God, that are called 
according to his purpose." 

Although you know it, we will put you in 
remembrance of the fact that joy comes not 
with temporal abundance, but that godliness 
with contentment is great gain. The happy and 
the holy are more often the poor of this world, 
rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom. 
Therefore let us pray:— 

"Give me a calm, a thankful heart, 

From every murmur free." 
Let us not envy those more prosperous. Let 
us count and recount our own blessings, and 
then our hearts will overflow with thankfulness 
to the Giver of every good and every perfect gift. 

"Truth, how precious is the treasure! 
Teach us, Lord, its worth to know. 

Vain the hope and short the pleasure 
Which from other sources flow." 

page 2 

OUR ANSWER TO YOUR WELCOME LETTERS. 



We are rejoiced by the promptness of a large 
number of our readers this year, in the matter 
of renewals of WATCH TOWER subscriptions;— 
not only those responses which contain payment, 
but also those which ask a continuance 
on our List as the "Lord's Poor." To these 
last we would say, You are very welcome to 
the TOWER, dear friends. We rejoice that the 
Lord's bounty permits us as his stewards to 
continue to serve you and all with "meat in 
due season," from his storehouse. 



To all we would say: Your kind words of 
appreciation are very refreshing and encouraging. 
Not that we labor for human approval, 
—for we seek only the "well done" of the 
heavenly Master,— but if in the path of duty 
we have the encouragement of fellow servants 
of the Royal Priesthood our joy is complete; 
for thus the coldness and opposition of others 
is much more than offset. 

Aside from those letters which contain questions 
requiring answers, we hope that our eight 
thousand correspondents will accept this as a 
reply to their welcome letters— together with 
the change of date upon the address tag, which 
will indicate the renewal of their subscription. 
Your letters are attentively read and greatly 
appreciated by us; and the many requests for 
prayer are remembered by name at our family 
gathering around the throne of grace. "Brethren, 
pray for us." 

Many TOWERS will stop with this issue, if 
subscribers are not heard from; for we do not 
wish them to go where not wanted, and a postal 
card is surely within the reach of all. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



Our mailing-privilege for our tracts has 
been temporarily suspended by the Post Office 
Department. 



R1605 : page 3 

VOL. XV. JANUARY 1, 1894. NO. 1. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



EVEN the dullest minds are becoming convinced 
that there is something peculiar 
about our day; that the civilization of competition 
—a selfish civilization— has been tried 
in the balances of experience and is found 
wanting; that the more general the intelligence 
on that line, the sharper the competition between 
the classes whose selfish interests oppose 
each other; and that, as iron sharpens iron, so 
the selfish energy of each class sharpens the 
opposing class, and makes ready for the great 
"day of slaughter"— the utter wreck of the 
present social structure. 



Worldly people not only see the great "battle" 
approaching, but they see that the skirmishing 
is already beginning all along the line 
—in every civilized country and on every imaginable 
issue. Their attitude is well described 
by our Lord's words;— "Men's hearts failing 
them for fear and for looking after those things 
which are coming on the earth."— Luke 21:26. 

The child of God sees the same things; but, 
being forewarned of them, he knows their import, 
their foreordained blessed results. Therefore 
he can lift up his head and rejoice, realizing 
that these dark clouds are the harbingers 
of coming Millennial blessings— that they 
mark the approach of the deliverance of God's 
saints, their exaltation to power as God's Kingdom, 
and the blessing of all the families of the 
earth through that Kingdom. 

It may be claimed with truth that the world 
as a whole never was so rich as to-day; that 
the masses never lived so comfortably as to-day 
—never were so well housed, clothed and 
fed as to-day. But we answer: (1) The taste 
of luxury which the masses have had has only 
whetted their appetites for more; and (2) the 
things considered luxuries thirty years ago are 
esteemed necessities of life under the higher 
intelligence to which "the day of the Lord's 
preparation" has awakened the world. 

When the world was generally asleep, the 
aristocratic class ruled it with comparative 
ease; for not only ignorance, but superstition 
also, assisted. If the people began to awaken 
religiously, and to question the power of pope 
and clergy, the aristocracy reproved them for 
their ignorance on religious subjects and awed 
them into submission to one or another party. 
If the people began to get awake on political 
questions, and to doubt the propriety of submitting 
themselves to the rule of some particular 
family— if they questioned the greater ability 
of some "royal" family to rule, or its right 
to perpetuate its control through unworthy 
members— aristocracy, always fearing some 
abridgment of its "vested rights," has upheld 
even insane royalty, lest, if the principle were 
overthrown, the people should get awake, and 
aristocracy should suffer directly or indirectly. 

Hence, royalty and aristocracy appealed to 
pope and clergy— expecting from them the 
favor, co-operation and support which they received: 
the ecclesiastics assured the people 
that their kings and emperors ruled them by 
divine appointment, and that to oppose their 
rule would be to fight against God. 



R1605 : page 4 

But now all this is changed: the people are 
awake on every issue— political, religious and 
financial— and are challenging everything and 
everybody; and financial, political and religious 
rulers are willing to sacrifice each other 
for self-interest, and are kept busy guarding 
their own peculiar interests, often opposing 
each other to gain popular support. 

Look at Papacy: note her attitude toward 
the French Republic— her praise of and friendship 
for republican principles. Who does not 
know that Papacy has been more insulted and 
opposed by France than by any other nation— 
by the present Republic, too? Who cannot 
see that the policy of Rome is to-day, as it always 
has been, hierarchical and monarchical, 
and opposed to the liberties of the people? 
Yet now Papacy extols the Republics of France 
and the United States to win the sympathies 
of the people and to hide the records of history. 
Her design is to draw to herself the 
opposing classes, deceiving both. 

The German government has felt the influence 
of the pope's smiles and kind words for 
its enemy, France. The growth of socialism, 
too, bids it beware of overthrow at home, and in 
dire necessity the German government appeals 
to the Roman Catholic party for aid in legislation 
to checkmate the Socialist party. The 
price of the support is: the repeal of laws 
framed some years ago expelling Jesuits, a class 
of Romish intriguers and clerical politicians 
which has been expelled or restrained by nearly 
every civilized nation. And now it seems 
that Germany must take back the Jesuits to restrain 
the Socialist influence. 

On the other hand, Italy, Mexico, Brazil 
and other strongly Roman Catholic nations 
are awaking to the fact that the Jesuits had 
drained their treasuries and were the real rulers 
and owners of everything, and now they are 
removing their yokes and confiscating their 
wealth to the use of the despoiled people. 

It is only a question of time, place and expediency 
—this matter of Church and State 
fellowship. Each is for itself, and tolerates 
the other only for use. It is a selfish union, 
and not a benevolent one for the improvement 
of the people. 

The union between money and politics is 
of a closer sort, because, if the rulers be not 
wealthy, they hope to be so soon. Vested rights 

R1606:page4 



must support government; for, without government 

vested rights would soon be divested. 

And governments must support vested rights 

for similar reasons. Indeed, there is great force 

in the argument that the poorest government 

is very much better than no government. 

All can see as quite probable, that which the 
Bible declares will soon be; viz., that although 
wealth and religion will unite with the governments 
for their mutual protection, all will by 
and by fall together before the poor and discontented 
masses. 

Already the power is in the hands of the 
masses in Europe; already they see that their 
condition is an almost hopeless one, so far as 
any rise above present conditions is concerned: 
the few have the power, the honor, the wealth, 
and the brains and education to hold on to 
these. They see no hope under present social 
regulations, and they want a change. Some 
hope for the change by moderate means; as, 
for instance, the Belgian general strike, which 
stagnated all business, to secure political privileges. 
The success of that strike has encouraged 
the masses of Austria-Hungary to hope 
for similar political privileges by a similar 
method; and such a strike is now threatened 
there. 

Others seem to realize that in any mental 
struggle the educated and wealthy classes have 
the advantage; and that, in the end, only a 
revolution of force will succeed. These are 
as yet a small minority, but very active. In 
Spain, France, England, Germany and Austria, 
as well as in Russia, crazy anarchists fruitlessly 
dash themselves to pieces against the ramparts 
of society. Why do not the masses overturn 
the present social order and establish a new 
and more equitable one? 

Because as yet they are only half awake, and 
do not realize their power; because they are 
yet held by the chains of reverence— true and 
superstitious; and because they lack competent 
leaders in whom they can have confidence. 
Reverse the order of the classes and their 
numbers— put the educated and wealthy ones 

R1606:page5 

in the place of the poor, and the poor of to-day 
in the place and power of the rich, and 
there would be a world-wide revolution within 
a week. 

It will probably be some twelve years or so 
future; but sooner or later the masses will get 



thoroughly awake, the chains of reverence, 
true and false, will break, the fit leaders will 
arise, and the great revolution will be a fact. 

In the United States the case differs considerably 
from what it is in Europe. Place 
the masses here upon the same footing with 
those in Europe, and there would be a revolution 
immediately; because the masses here are 
more intelligent— more awake. The restraining 
power here is a different one. Here, not 
only has prosperity been great, but opportunities 
to rise to competency or even wealth 
have been so general that selfishness has kept 
the masses in line,— in support of vested rights, 
etc., under the present social arrangement. 

But the present financial depression shows 
how quickly the sweets of the present arrangement 
might become the bitter of a social 
revolution, if once the hopes and opportunities 
of accumulating wealth were taken out of the 
question. 

The farmers of the West, who eagerly mortgaged 
their farms and promised a large interest 
for the favor, and who in some instances 
speculated with the money, are now many times 
angered almost to anarchism when the mortgages 
on their farms are foreclosed according 
to contract. 

Miners, artisans and laborers are embittered 
in soul as they see wages drop and their hopes 
of owning little homes of their own vanish. 
They realize that somehow they must forever 
be dependent upon the favored few possessed 
of superior brains and more money, who, with 
machinery, can earn daily many times what 
their employees, who operate their machines, 
can earn. Love and the grace of God are 
either lacking or at least none too abundant 
in their hearts, and selfishness in them inquires, 
Cannot I get at least a larger share of the results 
—the increase? Must the law of supply 
and demand bring the teeming human race 
increasingly into competition with each other, 
and above all into competition with machinery? 
If so, the lot of the masses must grow 
harder and harder, and the blessings of inventive 
genius and mechanical skill, while at present 
employing the masses in their construction, 
will become a curse as soon as the world's demands 
have been supplied— which time is not 
a great way off. 

No wonder that the poor masses fear the 
power of money, brains and machinery, and 
seek unitedly to strike against them. The organizations 
and strikes, which are now so 
general, are not so much attempts to grasp a 



larger share of the necessities and luxuries of 
life, as a fear of losing what they now enjoy 
and of being carried farther than ever from 
the shore of comfort and safety;— for they 
realize that the tide of prosperity which lifted 
them to their present level is already turning. 

This is evidenced by the recent coal strike 
in England. Some years ago the miners, by 
a general strike, secured an advance of wages 
of 40 per cent; and the recent strike was against 
a reduction of 25 per cent of this. 

The miners fought with desperation, realizing 
that defeated now would presently mean 
a still further reduction. The mining district 
was reduced to starvation, and many died of 
hunger rather than work for less pay now, and 
still less by and by. A London Press dispatch 
describes matters in few words, thus:— 

"All the relief now being generously poured 
into Yorkshire and Lancashire will not prevent 
the famine there getting worse each week. 
Correspondents on the spot describe the condition 
of thousands in the West Riding as fireless, 
foodless, shoeless, naked, and the whole 
district as one seething mass of misery. The 
death rate has gone up to something dreadful. 
What a crushing blow this long suspension has 
dealt industries of every description can be 
guessed by the fact that the seven principal 
railways, which are coal carriers, show a diminution 
of receipts in the past seventeen weeks 
of $9,000,000." 

It should be noticed, too, that the greatest 
unrest prevails where there is the greatest intelligence, 
and where there has been the greatest 
prosperity for the past thirty years. As 
the United States and Great Britain have been 
the most prosperous, and the peoples of these 

R1606:page6 

have the greatest general intelligence and 
freedom, so these have suffered most from 
financial depression, and in these strikes have 
been most frequent. 

Every one is moved to pity at the thought 
that in these, the two most civilized and most 
wealthy nations, some should starve for the very 
necessities of life. Yet so it is. In London 
there have been several deaths reported from 
starvation, and official reports from Chicago 
state that 1119 persons recently slept upon 
the stone floors of the public buildings, being 
without better provision. The same state of 
want prevails elsewhere, but to a less extent. 
Chicago got the most of this class by reason 



of the prosperity enjoyed by that city during 
the Columbian Exposition. So the United 
States as a whole suffers most just now, and has 
the greatest number of unemployed, because 
until recently it has been so prosperous that 
millions came from less favored lands and are 
now stranded here. 

We have mentioned one principal cause of 
the present and coming world-wide trouble to 
be, the competition of human and mechanical 
skill, resulting in the oversupply of the human 
element— hence the nonemployment of many 
and the reduced wages of the remainder; and 
we have seen that although temporary relief 
will soon come, and prosperity soon again prevail 
on a lower level, yet, the conditions remaining 
the same, the difficulty will become 
greater and greater and another spasm of depression 
will come which will bring wages to 
a yet lower level, and so on. This is, so to 
speak, the upper millstone. 

But we might mention another important 
factor in this depression; viz., money. Gold 
and silver have been the money of the civilized 
from the days of Abraham (Gen. 23:16) 
until recently. Now gold is the only standard, 
silver being used as a subsidiary coin for 
fractional change only. 

While other men were using their brains, 
and knowledge in general was on the increase, 
the wealthy men, "financiers," used theirs also, 
and of course in their own interest. They 
reasoned, truly, that the more abundant the 
wheat or any other commodity the cheaper it 
is— the less valuable— and so with money: 
the more there is of it the less valuable it 
is— the less of labor and other things each 
dollar will purchase. They saw that if silver 
should be demonetized and gold made the only 
standard of money value, every gold dollar 
would gradually become worth two, because 
money would then be only half as plentiful: 
for twice as many people would struggle 
for it. This scheme of the European money-lenders 
was forced upon the nations of Europe, 
because all are borrowers and were obliged to 
comply and make their bonds payable, with 
interest, in gold. The influence of this extended 
to the United States and compelled a 
similar policy here, to the injury of all except 
those who have money at interest. 

The shrinkage of the value of labor and the 
produce of labor of every sort one half, to the 
gold standard, is making it twice as difficult to 
pay off mortgages and other debts previously 
contracted. The farm and the labor on it 



shrink in value, but the mortgage does not. 
It increases in weight; for under the changed 
conditions the interest is more than twice as 
burdensome as when contracted. This is the 
lower millstone. 

"The law of supply and demand" is bringing 
these two millstones very close together, 
and the masses who must pass between them 

R1607:page6 

in competition are feeling the pressure severely, 
and will feel it yet more. 

WHAT IS THE REMEDY? 



Do not people of intelligence see these matters? 
and will they not prevent the crushing 
of their fellows less favored or less skilled? 

No; the majority who are favored either by 
fortune or skill are so busy doing for themselves 
—"making money"— diverting as much as 
possible of the grist to their own sacks, that 
they do not realize the true situation. They 
do hear the groans of the less fortunate and 
often give, generously, for their aid, but as 
the number of "unfortunate" grows rapidly 
larger, many get to feel that general relief is 
hopeless; and they get used to the present 
conditions and settle down to the enjoyment 
of their special blessings and comforts, and, 

R1607:page7 

for the time at least, forget the troubles of 
their fellow creatures,— their brethren after 
the flesh. 

But there are a few who are well circumstanced 
and who more or less clearly see the 
real situation. Some of these, no doubt, are 
manufacturers, mine owners, etc. These can 
see the difficulties, but what can they do? 
Nothing, except to help relieve the worst cases 
of distress among their neighbors or relatives. 
They cannot change the money standard accepted 
by the civilized world. They cannot 
change the present constitution of society and 
destroy the competitive system in part, and 
they realize that the world would be injured 
by the total abolition of competition without 
some other power to take its place to compel 
energy on the part of the naturally indolent. 

Should these few who see the difficulty and 
desire to curtail the operations of the law of 



competition attempt to put their ideas into 

force in their own mills, they would soon become 

bankrupt. For instance, suppose that 

the manufacturer had in his employ fifty men 

at an average wage of $2.00 per day of ten 

hours. Suppose that, under the present business 

depression, caused by "money stringency" 

and "overproduction," his orders decreased 

so that one fifth of his men were idle. 

Suppose, then, that instead of discharging any 

of them he should decrease the hours of labor 

two hours, and make eight hours a day's labor 

at the same price as before. What would be 

the consequence? He would lose money, lose 

credit, become a bankrupt, and bring upon 

himself the curses of the creditors injured by 

his failure, who would charge him with dishonesty. 

His influence would be lost, and 

even his neighbors and relatives formerly assisted 

by him would suffer, and reproach him. 

It is evident, therefore, that no one man or 
company of men can change the order of society; 
but it can and will be changed by and 
by for a perfect system based, not upon selfishness, 
but upon love and justice, by the Lord's 
power and in the Lord's way, as pointed out 
in the Scriptures. 

We have heretofore shown that the Scriptures 
point out a radical change of society. Not a 
peaceful revolution, by which the errors of the 
present system will be replaced by wiser and 
more just arrangements, but a violent removal 
of the present social structure and its subsequent 
replacement by another and satisfactory 
one of divine arrangement. 

We do not say that there will be no patching 
of the present structure before its collapse. 
On the contrary, we assert that it will be 
patched in every conceivable manner. We 
expect many of these patchings during the next 
fifteen years— female suffrage, various degrees 
and schemes of Socialism and Nationalism, etc.; 
but none of these will do, the patches upon 
the old garment will only make its rents the 
more numerous, and its unfitness for patching 
the more apparent. 

THE PROPER COURSE FOR BELIEVERS. 



Shall we, then, advocate the revolution or 
take part in it, since we see that thus God has 
declared the blessings will come? 

No, we should do neither. God has not revealed 
these things to the world, but to his 



saints; and the information is not for the 
world, but for his consecrated people. And 
this class the Lord directs to "live peaceably;" 
not to revolutionize, but to be "subject 
to the powers that be;" not to avenge themselves 
on those who legally oppress them, but 
to wait for the justice which they cannot secure 
peaceably. "Wait ye upon me, saith 
the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the 
prey: for my determination is to gather the 
nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to 
pour upon them mine indignation, even all 
my fierce anger: for all the earth [symbol of 
society] shall be devoured with the fire of my 
zeal. For then [after the complete destruction 
of the present social structure or symbolic 
"earth"] will I turn to the people a pure 
language, that they may all call upon the name 
of the Lord, to serve him with one consent." 
(Zeph. 3:8,9.) Let God's people trust him 
even while they see the waves of trouble coming 
closer and closer. God is both able and 
willing to make all things work for good to 
those who love him— the called ones according 
to his purpose.— Rom. 8:28. 

R1607 : page 8 

To those who are not of the saints, but who 
are seeking to deal justly and who are perplexed 
on the matter, we say: The Lord had 
you in mind, and has sent you a message, which 
reads: "Seek righteousness, seek meekness: 
it may be that [in consequence] ye shall be 
hid [protected] in the day of the Lord's anger." 
--Zeph. 2:3. 

The probabilities are that, in harmony with 
the Apostle's prediction and figure (1 Thes. 5:3), 
the present trouble or pang of travail 
will gradually pass away, and be followed by 
another era of moderate prosperity, in which 
the worldly will measurably forget the lessons 
now somewhat impressed upon them. But let 
all who are awake remember that each succeeding 
pang may be expected to be more severe, 
until the new order of things is born; 
and let each seek, so far as possible, to live and 
deal according to the rules of love and justice, 
the principles of the new dispensation shortly 
to be introduced. 



R1607 : page 8 

ECHOES FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS. 



A GLIMPSE AT THE SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS LIFE OF INDIA. 



[Continued from our last.] 

INDIA'S SOCIAL AND NATIONAL CURSE. 

"It is an unmitigated evil and the veriest 
social and national curse. Much of our national 
and domestic degradation is due to this 
pernicious caste system. Young India has been 
fully convinced that if the Hindoo nation is 
once more to rise to its former glory and greatness 
this dogma of caste must be put down. 
The artificial restrictions and the unjust— nay, 
in many cases, inhuman and unhuman— distinctions 
of caste must be abolished. Therefore, 
the first item on the programme of social 
reform in India is the abolition of caste and 
the furtherance of free and brotherly intercourse 
between class and class as also between 
individual and individual, irrespective 
of the accident of his birth and parentage, but 
mainly on the recognition of his moral worth 
and goodness of heart. 

"Freedom of intermarriage. Intermarriage, 
that is marriage between the members of two 
different castes, is not allowed in India. The 
code of caste rules does not sanction any such 
unions under any circumstances. Necessarily, 
therefore, they have been marrying and marrying 
for hundreds of years within the pale of 
their own caste. Now, many castes and their 
subsections are so small that they are no larger 
than mere handfuls of families. These marriages 
within such narrow circles not only prevent 
the natural and healthy flow of fellow-feeling 
between the members of different classes, 
but, according to the law of evolution, as now 
fully demonstrated, bring on the degeneration 
of the race. The progeny of such parents go 
on degenerating physically and mentally; and, 
therefore, there should be a certain amount of 
freedom for intermarriage. It is evident that 
this question of intermarriage is easily solved 
by the abolition of caste. 

"Prevention of infant marriage. Among 
the higher castes of Hindoos it is quite customary 
to have their children married when they 
are as young as seven or eight, in cases not very 
infrequent as young as four and five. 

CHILD MARRIAGE AS PRACTICED. 



"Evidently these marriages are not real 
marriages— they are mere betrothals; but, so 
far as inviolability is concerned, they are no 
less binding upon the innocent parties than actual 
consummation of marriage. Parties thus 
wedded together at an age when they are utterly 
incapable of understanding the relations between 
man and woman, and without their consent, 
are united with each other lifelong, and 
cannot at any time be separated from each 
other even by law; for the Hindoo law does 
not admit of any divorce. This is hard and 
cruel. It often happens that infants that are 
thus married together do not grow in love. 
When they come of age they come to dislike 
each other, and then begins the misery of their 
existence. They perhaps hate each other, and 
yet they are expected to live together by law, 
by usage and by social sentiment. You can 
picture to yourselves the untold misery of such 
unhappy pairs. Happily, man is a creature of 
habits; and providence has so arranged that, 
generally speaking, we come to tolerate, if not 
to like, whatever our lot is cast in with. But 
even if it were only a question of likes and dislikes, 
there is a large number of young couples 
in India that happen to draw nothing but 
blanks in this lottery of infant marriage. In 
addition to this serious evil there are other 

R1608 : page 8 

evils more pernicious in their effects connected 
with infant marriage. They are physical and 

R1608:page9 

intellectual decay and degeneracy of the individual 
and the race, loss of individual independence 
at a very early period of life when 
youths of either sex should be free to acquire 
knowledge and work out their own place and 
position in the world, consequent penury and 
poverty of the race, and latterly the utterly 
hollow and unmeaning character imposed upon 
the sacred sacrament of marriage. These constitute 
only a few of the glaring evils of Hindoo 
infant marriage. On the score of all these the 
system of Hindoo infant marriage stands condemned, 
and it is the aim of every social reformer 
in India to suppress this degrading system. 
Along with the spread of education the 
public opinion of the country is being steadily 
educated; and, at least among the enlightened 
classes, infant marriages at the age of four 
and five are simply held up to ridicule. The 



age on an average is being raised to twelve and 
fourteen; but nothing short of sixteen as the 
minimum for girls and eighteen for boys would 
satisfy the requirements of the case. Our highest 
ideal is to secure the best measure possible; 
but where the peculiar traditions, customs and 
sentiments of the people cannot give us the 
best, we have for the time being to be satisfied 
with the next best and then keep on demanding 
a higher standard. 

MARRIAGE LAWS IN GENERAL. 

"The Hindoo marriage laws and customs 
were formulated and systematized in the most 
ancient times; and, viewed under the light of 
modern times and western thought, they would 
require in many a considerable radical reform 
and reasoning. For instance, why should 
women in India be compelled to marry? Why 
should they not be allowed to choose or refuse 
matrimony just as women in western countries 
are? Why should bigamy or polygamy be allowed 
by Hindoo law? Is it not the highest 
piece of injustice that, while woman is allowed 
to marry but once, man is allowed (by law) to 
marry two or more than two wives at one and 
the same time? Why should the law in India 
not allow divorce under any circumstances? 
Why should a woman not be allowed to have 
(within the lifetime of her husband) her own 
personal property over which he should have 
no right or control? These, and similar to 
these, are the problems that relate to a thorough 
reform of the marriage laws in India. 
But, situated as we are at present, society is 
not ripe even for a calm and dispassionate discussion 
on these— much less than for any acceptance 
of them, even in a qualified or modified 
form. However, in the no distant future 
people in India will have to face these problems. 
They cannot avoid them forever. But, 
as my time is extremely limited, you will pardon 
me if I avoid them on this occasion. 

"Widow marriage. You will be surprised to 
hear that Hindoo widows from among the 
higher castes are not allowed to marry again. 
I can understand this restriction in the case of 
women who have reached a certain limit of 
advanced age, though in this country it is considered 
to be in perfect accord with social 
usage even for a widow of three score and five 
to be on the lookout for a husband, especially 
if he can be a man of substance. But certainly 
you can never comprehend what diabolical 
offense a child widow of the tender age often 



or twelve can have committed that she should 

be cut away from all marital ties and be compelled 

to pass the remaining days of her life, 

however long they may be, in perfect loneliness 

and seclusion. Even the very idea is 

sheer barbarism and inhumanity. Far be it 

from me to convey to you, even by implication, 

that the Hindoo home is necessarily a 

place of misery and discord, or that true happiness 

is a thing never to be found there. 

Banish all such idea if it should have unwittingly 

taken possession of your minds. 

[Continued in our next.] 



R1608:page9 

THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 

ITS ACCOUNT OF CREATION. 



THE book of Genesis opens with the grandest 
theme that ever occupied the thoughts 
of created intelligences; the Work of God, in 
bringing into being the material universe, and 
peopling it with organic, conscious life. The 
style and manner of treatment are in harmony 
with the grandeur of the theme. In few and 
powerful strokes, the progressive stages of the 
work are pictured to the mind, on a scale of 
magnificence unparalleled in writings human 
or divine. 

It is much to be regretted that these characteristic 
traits of the account of the Creation, 
shadowing forth its impenetrable mysteries in 
broad and general outlines, should have been 
overlooked in its interpretation. This sublime 

R1608 : page 10 

Epic of Creation, with its boldly figurative 
imagery, and poetic grandeur of conception 
and expression, has been subjected to a style 
of interpretation, suited only to a plain and 
literal record of the ordinary occurrences of 
life. Hence, not only its true spirit, but its 
profound teachings, have been misconceived 
and misinterpreted; and its exhibition of the 
mysteries of creative power, which science 
traces in its own observation of Nature, have 
been confounded with popular misapprehensions, 
irreconcilable with the well-known facts 



of science. 

A reconciliation of the Biblical account with 
the facts of Geological science has been attempted 
on a false theory; namely, that the 
several stages in the earth's formation took 
place in an assumed interval of time between 
the first and second verses; an interval of vast 
and indefinite length, unnoticed by the sacred 
writer. During this interval, the successive 
processes in the formation of the earth was 
completed, and the successive orders of vegetable 
and animal life, the remains of which are 
found imbedded in its strata, were brought 
into existence and perished; that the account 
of the present state of things on the earth's 
surface begins with the description in the second 
verse, representing the chaotic condition 
of its surface after the last of its great internal 
convulsions; and what follows, in verses 3-31, 
occurred in six natural days of twenty-four 
hours. 

The objections to this theory are: 

1. There is no foundation for it in the sacred 
writer's statement. He gives no intimation 

of such an interval. It is thrust in, where 
there is no indication that it was present to his 
mind, and no reason for it in the connection. 

2. It assumes that the sacred writer has not 
given us an account of the Creator's work, but 
only of a part of it; that for unknown ages 

the earth was peopled with vegetable and animal 
life, of which no record is made. 

3. It is without support in the facts ascertained 
by science. Scientific investigation 

shows that no such convulsion, as is assumed 
in this theory, occurred at the period preceding 
the creation of man. 

Hence the latest advocates of this theory are 
driven to the assumption, that what is revealed 
in verses 3-3 1 has reference only to a small 
area of western Asia; being nothing more than 
the reconstruction of that little segment of the 
earth's surface, broken up and thrown into 
confusion by an internal convulsion, and the 
creation there of the new orders of vegetable 
and animal life that now occupy the globe. 

On this supposition, the earth had already 
enjoyed the full light of the sun for ages, before 
the work of the first day (verse 3) began. 
Even then all around this little tract, the earth 
was in a blaze of light; but over this tract dense 
mists shut out the rays of the sun. God said: 
"Let there be light!" The mists grew thinner, 
letting in sufficient light for the time, 
though not enough to disclose the forms of the 
heavenly orbs, which were not seen there till 



the fourth day, though visible everywhere else. 
Then follow, in rapid succession of single days, 
the formation of continents and seas, the 
clothing of the earth with vegetation, and the 
peopling of it with the various classes of irrational 
animals, and finally with Man. 

The infinite God has not revealed his work 
of creation on such a scale as this; and its proportions 
are better suited to the conception 
of the timid interpreter, stumbling at minute 
difficulties and seeking to evade them, than to 
the grand and fearless exposition of his work 
from God's own hand. 

4. It is an unworthy conception of the 
Creator and of his work. Why was the work 
of creation extended through six natural days, 
when a single divine volition would have 
brought the whole universe into being, with 
all its apparatus for the support of life, and its 
myriads of living beings? Its extension through 
six successive periods, of whatever duration, 
can be explained only by the operation of those 
secondary causes, which the structure of the 
earth itself proves to have been active in its 
formation, requiring ages for their 
accomplishment. 

It is now established, beyond question, that 
the earth we inhabit was brought into existence 
many ages before man was created. During 
these ages it was in process of formation, 

R1608:page 11 

and was gradually prepared, under the divine 
direction, for its future occupation by man. 
In those vast periods, succeeding each other 
in long procession, it was fitted up for his 
abode by accumulations of mineral wealth 
within its bosom. These processes required 
ages for their completion, as represented in 
the sacred narrative, and recorded by the divine 
hand in the successive strata enveloping 
the earth, and marking the progressive stages 
of its formation.* 



* "Every great feature in the structure of the planet 
corresponds with the order of the events narrated in the 
sacred history."— Prof. Silliman, Outline of Geological 
Lectures, appended to Bakewell's Geology, p. 67, note. 
"This history furnished a record important alike to philosophy 
and religion; and we find in the planet itself the 
proof that the record is true" (p. 30). 

R1609:page 11 



The writer has no claim to speak as a geologist, 
and does not profess to do so. He 
takes the teachings of geology as given us by 
eminent masters of the science, entitled to 
speak on its behalf. But, speaking as an interpreter 
of God's Word, and taking their representation 
of their own science, he sees no 
discordance between the two records, which 
the same divine Author has given us in his 
Word and in his works. The former, when 
rightly interpreted, is in perfect accord with 
the latter, when truly exhibited. And geologists 
themselves assert that the Word of God, 
so interpreted, is in harmony with the teachings 
of their science. This alone is sufficient 
to satisfy the candid and conscientious inquirer. 
But they assert, also, that the divine 
Word explains the divine work, while the divine 
work confirms the divine Word. Moreover, 
no human philosophy could have discovered, 
or conjectured, what is here revealed.* 
The divine record was made when science had 
not yet penetrated the mysteries of Nature; 
when the earth's record of its own history 
was still buried deep in its enveloping strata, 
and had been read by no human eye. As, 
therefore, no one witnessed the scenes described, 
or had read the "testimony of the 
rocks," the written account, if true, as science 
admits it to be, must have been of superhuman 
origin. 

The successive stages in the account of the 
Creation are as follows:— 

1. The act of bringing matter into being. 

Its condition as "waste and empty," and subjection 
to the divine influence imparting to it 
its active properties. Production of light, as 
the first effect of this imparted action. + 

2. Separation of the fluid mass into waters 
above and waters below. 

3. Separation of land and water on the 
earth. Vegetation, beginning with its lowest 
orders. 

4. Sun, moon and stars. 

5. Animal life, beginning with inhabitants 
of the waters, the lowest in the scale, and 
winged species on the land. 

6. Terrestrial animals, in ascending grades. 
Man, and his dominion over all.++ 

These periods of creative activity, and the 
cessation that followed, were presented to the 
mind of the sacred writer under the familiar 
symbolism of the six days of labor and the 
seventh of rest. This was a natural and intelligible 
application of it; the word day, the 



simplest and most familiar measure of time, 
being used in all languages for any period of 
duration, of greater or less extent; and it is 
specially appropriate in such a style of representation 
as we find in this chapter. 

The six days of labor, and the seventh of 
rest, having been adopted as the symbolism 
under which these sublime mysteries are revealed, 
whatever properly belongs to it, and 



*"No human mind was witness of the events; and no 
such mind in the early age of the world, unless gifted 
with superhuman intelligence, could have contrived such 
a scheme;— would have placed the creation of the sun, 
the source of light to the earth, so long after the creation 
of light, even on the fourth day, and, what is equally 
singular, between the creation of plants and that of animals, 
when so important to both; and none could have 
reached to the depths of philosophy exhibited in the 
whole plan."— Dana, Manual of Geology, art. Cosmogony, 
p.743. 

+Styled cosmical in distinction from solar light. 

++"In this succession," says Prof. Dana (Manual of 
Geology, as above, p. 745), "we observe not merely an 
order of events, like that deduced from science; there is 
a system in the arrangement, and a far-reaching prophecy, 
to which philosophy could not have attained, however 
instructed." 

R1609 : page 12 

is essential to its full expression, is pertinent 

to the writer's object. Each period being represented 

by a "day," its beginning and end 

are described in terms proper to represent a 

day: "there was evening and there was morning." 

This was necessary, in order to preserve 

the symbolic representation. 

It should be observed that the sacred writer, 
throughout this account, represents things 
under forms of expression most easily apprehended 
by the common mind. The narrative 
was given to instruct, and not to perplex and 
confound, the common reader, as it would have 
done if expressed in scientific forms, adapted 
to a higher stage of culture than the Bible requires, 
or could properly presuppose, in its 
readers. 

Such a view of the sacred narrative exalts 
our conception of the divine Architect, and of 
his work. He who inhabits eternity has no 
need to be in a hurry. With him, a thousand 
years are as one day. It was not till ages of 
preparation had passed away, that his purposes 



found their entire fulfilment, and his work its 
completed unity, in the creation of man. 

According to the distinguished teachers of 
science— Professors Silliman, Guyot and Dana 
—the account of the creation recognizes two 
great eras, an inorganic and an organic, consisting 
of three days each; each era opening 
with the appearance of light, that of the first 
being cosmical, that of the second solar for 
the special uses of the earth.* 

It need not be supposed that the sacred 
writer read in these wonderful revelations all 
the mysteries which they contain, or that they 
were seen by those to whom the revelations 
were first addressed. It was not necessary that 
he or they should be made wise in physical 
learning beyond the wants of their time; and 
the symbolism itself conveyed all the instruction 
they needed. -T. J. CONANT. 



*"I. Inorganic era: 
1st Day.— LIGHT cosmical. 

2nd Day.— The earth divided from the fluid around, or 
individualized. 

3rd Day.— 1. Outlining of the land and water. 
2. Creation of vegetation. 

II. Organic era: 
4th Day.-LIGHT from the sun. 
5th Day.— Creation of the lower order of animals. 
6th Day.— 1 . Creation of Mammals. 2. Creation of Man." 
—Dana, Manual of Geology, p.745. 



page 12 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1609 : page 12 
THE FIRST ADAM. 



LESSON I., JAN. 7, GEN. 1:26-31; 2:1-3. 



Golden Text— "And God saw every thing that he had 
made, and, behold, it was very good."— Gen. 1:31. 

VERSES 26-30. "And God said, We will 
make man in our image, after our likeness," 
etc. The plural form of the pronoun used 
here calls to mind the statement of John 
with reference to "the only begotten Son of 
God," "the beginning of the creation of 
God," "the first born of every creature," 
that "he was in the beginning [of creation] 
with God;" that "all things were made by 
him, and without him was not any thing 
made that was made"— 1 John 4:9; Rev. 3:14; 
Col. 1:15,16; John 1:2,3. 

Man was created in the image and likeness 
of God, having mental and moral faculties 
corresponding, so that he could appreciate 
and enjoy communion with his 
maker, for whose pleasure he was created. 
"Male and female created he them," not 
only for the propagation of the race, but also 
that the twain might find their happiness 
complete in their mutual adaptability to 
each other and to God. Their dominion was 
to be the whole earth, with all its products 
and resources and all its lower forms of life 
—a wide and rich domain affording ample 
scope for all their noble powers. 

VERSES 31; 2:1,2. "And God saw all 
that he had made, and behold, it was very 
good." The physical earth was very good. 
It was a good storehouse of valuables for 
his intelligent creature, man; a good field 

R1609 : page 13 

for the exercise of his powers; a good place 
for his discipline and development; and 
finally a good and delightful home for his 
everlasting dominion and enjoyment. And 
so with the whole material universe, all of 
which was answering the ends of its creation; 
and so with all the laws which God had 
set in operation, all of which were wise and 
good and for the ordering, perpetuity and 
development of the purposes of their great 
designer. And so also with man, God's intelligent 
creature, created in his own image 
and likeness. Truly he was very good— 
morally, intellectually and physically— a likeness 
which God was not ashamed to own 
and to call his son.— Luke 3:38. 

VERSE 3. "And God blessed the seventh 
day and hallowed it; because on it 



he rested from all his work which God in 
making created." Here God established the 
order of sevens— an order of time to be 
observed throughout his plan subsequently. 
Six periods of equal length were to constitute 
the working days, and the seventh was 
the appointed period of rest. To this principle 
he subjected his own course in the 
work of creation. No special reference is 
here made to the seventh day of the week; 
but rather to the seventh period in any 
future division of time which his plan might 
indicate. In conformity with this principle 
the seventh day was appointed to the Jews 
under the law as a day of rest, a sabbath. 
So also their seventh week, seventh year 
and their culmination in the Jubilee or Sabbath 
year were on the same principle. (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 6.) And 
likewise the seventh millennium or seventh 
thousand-year day is to be a Sabbath, a 
blessed and hallowed day of rest; for so 
God appointed in his ordering of time. 

We have heretofore shown, and will in 
some future volume of M. DAWN again 
present the evidences, that the seventh day 
of God's rest, which began just after man's 
creation, has continued ever since, and is to 
continue one thousand years into the future 
—to the full end of Christ's Millennial reign 
—in all a seven-thousand-year day. During 
this long day Jehovah God rests— avoids interference 
with the operation of the laws 
under which originally he placed all his 
earthly creation. (See Heb. 4:3,10; John 5:17.) 
He rests from or ceases his direct 
work, in order to let Christ's work of redemption 
and restitution take its place and 

R1610 : page 13 

do its work as a part of his divine plan. 

If thus the seventh day be a period of 
seven thousand years, it is but reasonable to 
say that the six days of creation preceding 
were also periods of seven thousand years 
each. Thus the entire seven days will be a 
period of forty-nine thousand years; and the 
grandly symbolic number fifty, following, 
speaks of everlasting bliss and perfection 
in full harmony with the divine plan. 

It will be well to notice in connection 
with this lesson the general disposition of 
teachers and Lesson Papers toward the 
theory of evolution;— denying that God 
made man in his own image; claiming that 



he was practically only a step above the 
orang-outang. Mark such teachings. They 
are misleading and contrary to the ransom. 
For if Adam were not created in God's image, 
then the account of his trial and fall 
(See next lesson) is nonsense; and if man 
did not fall a ransom would be absurd, and 
a restitution (Acts 3: 19-21) would be a 
most undesirable thing. 

If the Evolution theory be true, the Bible 
is false; if the Bible is true, the Evolution 
theory is false: there can be no middle 
ground. We affirm that the Bible is true. 

R1610 : page 13 

ADAM'S SIN AND GOD'S GRACE. 



LESSON II., JAN. 14, GEN. 3:1-15. 

Golden Text— "For as in Adam all die, even so in 
Christ shall all be made alive."— 1 Cor. 15:22. 

In the brief text of this lesson we have 
recorded the cause and beginning of all the 
woes that have afflicted humanity for the 
past six thousand years. It was not a gross 
and terrible crime that brought the penalty 
which involved us all, but a simple act of 
disobedience on the part of our first parents 
against the righteous and rightful authority 
of an all-wise and loving Creator, the penalty 
of which act was death. 

This was the extreme penalty of the divine 
law, and its prompt infliction for the 
very first offense— an offense too, which, in 
comparison with other sins that have since 
stained the race, was a light one— is a clear 
declaration of the Creator that only a perfectly 
clean creation shall be accounted 
worthy to abide forever. A celebrated photographer 
will not permit a single picture 
to leave his gallery which is not up to the 
standard of perfection, even if the party for 
whom it was taken is pleased with it. Every 
photograph must reflect credit upon the 
artist. Just so it is with the divine artist: 

R1610 : page 14 

every creature to whom eternal life is 
granted must do credit to its great author; 
otherwise he shall not survive. God's work 
must be perfect, and nothing short of perfection 



can find favor in his eyes.— Psa. 18:30; 
Hab. 1:13; Psa. 5:4,5. 

The test of character must necessarily be 
applied to every intelligent creature possessed 
of a free moral agency— in the image 
of God. In the case of our first parents it 
was a very simple test. The tempter was 
not necessary to the testing: the tree in the 
midst of the garden, and the divine prohibition 
of the tasting or handling of it were 
the test. The tempter urged the course of 
disloyalty; and this God permitted, since 
both the tempter and the tempted were free 
moral agents, and both were subjects of the 
test. In assuming that position, Satan also, 
as a free moral agent, was manifesting his 
disposition to evil— proving himself disloyal 
to his Creator and a traitor to his government. 
The serpent was an irrational, and therefore 
an irresponsible, instrument of the tempter, 
and in choosing such an instrument Satan 
unwittingly chose an apt symbol of his own 
subtle, cunning and crafty disposition. The 
penalty pronounced upon the serpent could 
make no real difference to the unreasoning 
creature, but in the words apparently addressed 
to it, in man's hearing, was couched 
the solemn verdict of the responsible, wilful 
sinner, which, for the evil purpose, had used 
the serpent as his agent. 

VERSES 1-3. The prohibition was clearly 
stated and clearly understood. They were 
not to eat of the forbidden fruit; neither 
should they touch it, lest they die. So 
should we regard every evil thing, not exposing 
ourselves to temptation, but keeping 
as far from it as possible. 

VERSE 4. The assertion— "Ye shall not 
surely die"— was a bold contradiction by 
the "father of lies" of the word of the 
Almighty— "Ye shall surely die." And it 
is marvelous what a host of defenders it has 
had in the world, even among professed 
Christians, and in the present day. Nevertheless, 
the penalty went into effect, and has 
been executed also upon all posterity ever 
since— "In the day thou eatest thereof, 
dying, thou shalt die"— i.e., in the gradual 
process of decay thou shalt ultimately die. 
The day to which the Lord referred must 
have been one of those days of which Peter 
speaks, saying that with the Lord a thousand 
years is as one day. (2 Pet. 3:8.) Within 
that first thousand-year day Adam died 
at the age of nine hundred and thirty years. 

VERSES 5-7. The reward which the deceiver 



promised was quickly and painfully 

realized. The offenders could no longer delight 

in communion and fellowship with 

God, and with fear and shame they dreaded 

to meet him; and in the absence of that 

holy communion with God and with each 

other in the innocent enjoyments of his 

grace, the animal nature began to substitute 

the pleasures of sense. The spiritual nature 

began to decline and the sensual to develop 

until they came to realize that the fig-leaf 

garments were a necessity to virtue and self-respect; 

and in these they appeared when 

called to an account by their Maker. 

VERSES 8-11. The natural impulse of 
guilt was to hide from God. But God sought 
them out and called them to account— not, 
however, to let summary vengeance fall 
upon them, but while re-affirming the threatened 
penalty, to give them a ray of hope. 
The fig-leaf garments had spoken of penitence 
and an effort to establish and maintain 
virtue, and the Lord had a message of 
comfort for their despairing hearts, notwithstanding 
the heavy penalty must be 
borne until the great burden-bearer, "the 
seed of the woman," should come and assume 
their load and set them free. 

VERSES 12,13. In reply to the inquiry 
of verse 1 1 Adam told the plain simple 
truth, without any effort either to justify 
himself or to blame any one else. Eve's reply 
was likewise truthful. Neither one tried 
to cover up the sin by lying about it. Nor 
did they ask for mercy, since they believed 
that what God had threatened he must of 
necessity execute; and no hope of a redeemer 
could have entered their minds. 

VERSE 14 is a figurative expression of the 
penalty of Satan, whose flagrant, wilful sin 
gave evidence of deliberate and determined 
disloyalty to God, and that without a shadow 
of excuse or of subsequent repentance. No 
longer might he walk upright— respected 
and honored among the angelic sons of 
God, but he should be cast down in the 
dust of humiliation and disgrace; and 
although he would be permitted to bruise 
the heel of humanity, ultimately a mighty 
son of mankind, the seed of the woman, 
should deal the fatal blow upon his head. 

Mark, it is the seed of the woman that 
shall do this; for he is to be the Son of God, 
born of a woman, and not a son of Adam, 

R1610 : page 15 



in which case he would have been an heir 
of his taint and penalty, and could not have 
redeemed us by a spotless sacrifice in our 
room and stead. God was the life-giver, 
the father, of the immaculate Son of Mary; 
and therefore that "holy thing" that was 
born of her was called the Son of God, as 
well as the seed of the woman; and because 
thus, through her, a partaker of the 
human nature, he was also called a Son of 
man— of mankind. 

This lesson should be studied in the light 
of its Golden Text, and in the light of the 
inspired words of Rom. 5:12,18-20. 



R1610:page 15 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 



The number of Infidels heard from, converted 
to faith in the Bible through the instrumentality 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN and the WATCH 
TOWER is truly remarkable. Below we give 
communications from three prison convicts, 
two of whom were Infidels but a short time 
ago. The doctrine of everlasting torment 
which they had all heard for years neither 
drew nor drove them to the Crucified One; 
but the "good tidings of great joy for all people" 
has conquered them. 

Several prisoners hope to enter the "harvest" 
field as "reapers" as soon as liberated. We 
are sure that all TOWER readers will rejoice 
with them. Remember them at the throne of 
grace.-EDITOR. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I acknowledge 
at this late day the receipt of your 
last very kind favor, knowing that you will, 
in the circumstances of my incarceration, 
find apology for my delay. My report to 
you now is full of encouragement. Our 
chaplain recently perfected arrangements 
whereby all who desired (with the exception 
of two who were inadvertently deprived 
the opportunity this time) partook 
of the Lord's table. The number actually 
partaking was fifty-two. A very large percentage 
of these are men who have never 
before made any profession of Christianity. 
All— I know of only two exceptions— have 



begun reading the Bible in prison. Many 

have given up idle habits and evil ways, 

and are pressing on to know the Lord, determined 

R1611 :page 15 

to become "sanctuary" Christians; 
and a very respectable number— say fifteen 
or twenty— are sanctuary Christians. The 
noon prayer-meeting has never faltered, 
but has continued to grow in grace and 
number until, in point of number, we have 
reached a limit beyond which we cannot go. 

Taking every thing into consideration, 
Brother, do you not think the Lord is bestowing 
upon us blessings of a marked character? 
Among those who have come to the 
Lord are two Jews, one of whom, I believe, 
intends writing to you. 

The two sets of DAWN and VOL. I. (which 
I found and which led me to correspond 
with you) are all continually in service. 
They have proved a great blessing to many. 
The copy of TOWER— a most invaluable 
help— is also on the go, and highly appreciated; 
and some of us in the edition containing 
the paper on "The Church of the 
Living God," were impressed to find how 
opposite was the teaching to our own way 
of worshiping. "Surely this is the house 
of God." I doubt not you will hear in 
person from several in this place who have 
derived great benefit from the DAWN series 
and TOWER; for they hold you and Sister 
R. in very high esteem, in Christ. 

I enclose to you herewith two poems, 
written by one of our number. If they 
meet your favor, we will hope to see them 
in the TOWER when space affords. They 
are original, and the author does not object 
either to the use of his name, or the mention 
of the place from which they are written, 
his desire being that they may be used 
in the most effective manner, for the glory 
of our beloved Lord and Savior. 

Speaking for myself, I am, by the grace 
of God and our Lord Jesus Christ, enabled 
to say that I have walked daily in close 
communion with him, ordering my ways 
by his written Word, under the guidance 
and teachings of the holy spirit. I am resting 
now in his keeping power. The conflict, 
in which the spirit of the old man had 
to be broken, was long and severe; but, 
thank God, I was strengthened daily by his 
grace, to the end that in my weakness his 



strength was perfected. I love the brethren, 
yet do I realize that this same love is 
to be made perfect. I cannot tell you, dear 
friends, how much I feel indebted to you 
for a perusal of the helps which you are 

R1611 :page 16 

sending out into the world; but of this you 
may be assured, that both yourself and Sister 
R. and all of your co-laborers are carried 
before the throne of grace in my prayers 
night and morning; and I am confident that 
my prayers are heard. God willing, I am 
due to be discharged from this place next 
summer, after which I may meet you; but 
I lay no plans. Henceforth I belong to Jesus, 
and he is not only able, but willing, to direct 
my efforts, abilities and time; and to him I 
am now fully and wholly committed. 

Praying that you may be continued in the 
service and peace of our Lord Jesus Christ 
until he is ready to bestow the crown, and 
the approval, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant," upon you, I subscribe myself 
Christ's, and yours in Christ unfailingly, 
W. D. HUGHES. 



page 16 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 
I feel I owe a debt of gratitude to you both, 
and I take this opportunity to convey to 
you my expressions of love and esteem, for 
your fearless and noble attitude in DAWNS 
and TOWERS, which I have had the good 
fortune to read, through kindness of our 
brother [writer of the above letter]. I had, 
previous to reading them, accepted Jesus 
as my Redeemer, but was beset by doubts 
and fears on account of the differences in 
my views from those of others I knew, and 
felt I was wrong, until (Praise the Lord) 
your works came to hand, and gave me fresh 
courage; and now I am determined that 
nothing shall separate me from Christ. This 
testimony will, I hope, be all the more acceptable 
because it comes from one to 
whom the very name of Jesus has been one 
of antipathy, from the fact that I am a Jew. 
Though a young man of only twenty-four 
years, I have been all but an open infidel— 
a "fatalist." 

I have read and re-read each page of 



DAWN with increasing interest, and I thank 
God for leading me into his secret— that 
the things spoken by the prophets are now 
fulfilled, and that we are drawing near to 
that day when all things shall be revealed. 
I have read your article in the TOWER on 
Baptism, and I thank the Lord for letting 
me have light on that subject. I have been 
in doubt how I could be baptized without 
assenting to some of the creeds and dogmas 
of the day, which I never could believe, and 
have felt that I must always be beyond the 
pale of the church. But, praise the Lord, 
your views are approved by my judgment- 
reached from the same source, the Word. 
Then I was fearful, lest I was being led 
away by pride; but now I shall, at the first 
opportunity, be immersed into Christ. 
What a beautiful symbol it is of a complete 
surrender of self and a resurrection in Christ. 
It is not a mere empty form, but an actual 
surrender and living. 

Will you kindly send me some information 
as to the work? also a few tracts, for 
here are souls hungry for the bread of life. 
I wish to know all about the work, that I 
may fully determine my attitude now; and 
if the Lord can use me, I am ready. There 
is a mighty work going on within these 
walls, and each day sees another soul step 
out into the glorious liberty of Christ Jesus. 

Dear Brother, my time here is drawing 
to a close, and soon I shall begin the battle 
against the world. I wish you to keep me 
before the throne of grace, as I do you and 
your work. May the Lord bless and keep 
you, is the earnest prayer of 

Yours in Christ, MAURICE ASHHEIM. 



R2254 : page 16 

HE CALLETH FOR THEE. 

H. HARDIE.-A PRISONER. 



There is nothing within me that ever I might 

Give as reason why Jesus should wash my soul white. 

I had mocked at his mercy so often before, 

He might have forsaken my soul evermore. 

But still in his wonderful mercy so free, 

He had room in his heart for a sinner like me. 



I would not attend, though so often he cried, 
"Son! look at my hands and the wound in my side; 
Oh, think of the love that could bring thy Lord down 
To buffeting, hate and a brow-piercing crown. 
I bore all that anguish to set thy soul free." 
But Christ's love and mercy were nothing to me. 

He bore with me long, and he followed me far 
O'er the way where allurements and lusts ever are: 