R239 : page 1 

VOL. III. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY AND AUGUST, 1881. 

NOS. 1 & 2. 

pagel 

(CHART SUPPLEMENT.) 



ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 

C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

R239 : page 1 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... BRADDOCK, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

This paper will be sent to those desiring it, upon application. As 
this constitutes a part of the preaching of the Gospel, it is our 
belief it should be without money and without price. If any one 
wishes to give to the maintenance of this branch of the service, 



let him give according to his estimation of its value and of his 
ability. Free-will offerings and communications may be sent to 
the Editor, addressed as above, and all "money orders," "drafts," 
&c, made payable to him. No agents are authorized to take 
donations for "ZION'S WATCH TOWER." 



pagel 

PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Service held in "Curry Institute Hall," corner Penn avenue and 
Sixth street, Pittsburgh, at 3:00 o'clock P.M., every Sunday. 
Every Wednesday evening, at No. 80 Cedar avenue, Allegheny, 
at 7:30 o'clock P.M. All are cordially invited. 



R239 : page 1 

OUR NEW YEAR. 

This number ushers in our third volume and third year, and we 
take the liberty of wishing both our paper and its readers a 
happy and profitable new year. 

The Editor never enjoyed a year so much~of growth in grace 
and in knowledge and in love-as the one just closed: He hopes, 
and has reason to believe from the expressions of hundreds of 
letters received, that the readers have been similarly blessed. 
And for us all we pray that our bountiful Father and present 
King, may continue to dispense his favors feeding, 
strengthening and enlightening us more and more during the 
year begun. 

This seemed a favorable time for a change in the TERMS of the 
paper, which we accordingly have made, for several reasons. 

First: This is a part of the preaching of the gospel, and it is both 
without price and beyond price; and we believe that it would be 
just as proper to charge for admission to hear the spoken Word- 
or to charge pew rent -as to charge for the written gospel. 

Second: Many of the Lord's purest jewels are very poor, and 
though the paper was offered- "Free to the poor," many of this 
class do not like to ask favors except of the Lord: Such, under 
our new terms, will feel no embarrassment in asking for it; and 
coming to them like all the bounties of heaven— sunshine, air, 
etc., they will appreciate it more as one of the gifts which 
"cometh down from our Father." 

Third: The subscription price was made so low in endeavoring 
to make it burdenless upon the majority of our readers who 
cannot well afford to spend more, that it did not pay expenses. 
(The paper from the first, has only paid about two-thirds of its 



expenses-not to mention the additional cost of Supplements 
during the last six months.) 

Fourth: The truth is worth more than gold, and its price is above 
rubies, and doubtless there are some who could as well pay one 
hundred or one thousand dollars, as others could pay one dollar; 
and the new terms will place the responsibility where it belongs- 
-with each one of us according to our several ability. 

Fifth: If it is the right way, as we believe, it should be followed 
regardless of consequences, and will be. If the means necessary 
for its publication become exhausted, the paper will stop. We 
will not go into debt, neither will we ever beg~It is the Lord's 
business; He is rich~"all the gold and silver of the mountains 
are his, and the cattle upon a thousand hills," and if he does not 
supply necessary means, we should know of no better way of 
judging that he wished the paper discontinued. Therefore, 

READERS TAKE NOTICE 

that all moneys due and in arrears on subscriptions are now 
stricken out, and all who desire "ZION'S WATCH TOWER" 
continued, will please send word immediately. 

Brethren and sisters who have heretofore taken subscriptions for 
this paper, will please notice the change and hereafter collect no 
money, on account of this paper. If disposed, they may take the 
addresses of those who desire and request the paper, and 
forward the same to this office. All free will offerings to the 
WATCH TOWER, should be sent direct to its office. 



R240 : page 1 

ANOINTED TO PREACH. 

"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because he hath 
anointed me to preach good tidings (gospel) unto the meek; he 
hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty 
to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are 
bound; to proclaim the acceptable year (time) of the Lord, and 
the day of vengeance of our God." Isa. 61:1. 

This prophecy Jesus quoted (Luke 4:18) and applied to himself 
and his work. We found that he was thus anointed when, at 30 
years of age he had reached the perfection of manhood, having 
presented himself to his Father—a living sacrifice; indicating his 
surrender or death by being baptized of John in Jordan, and 
symbolizing his faith in the power and will of God to raise him 
from the tomb to newness of life—as a spiritual being. It was 
because John had been a witness of this anointing of Jesus, that 
he bore record, saying— "And I saw, and bare record that this is 
the Son of God." John 1:32-34. 



We next inquire—Of what value to Jesus was this anointing?-- 
and find answer that it was of the utmost importance: though he 
had been a spiritual being yet he had given that up when he took 
our nature, which is not spiritual, but human; consequently he 
no longer had a spiritual body, but a human or fleshly body- in 
fashion as a man. Understand us; we believe that there was no 
sham or pretention in this matter-no false pretence on the part 
of the Father and Jesus: We believe that Jesus actually gave up 
entirely and forever, his existence as a spiritual or heavenly 
being, changing or transferring it for a human or earthly 
existence. We state the matter thus plainly because so many 
have the idea that Jesus retained his spiritual being, merely 
covered, or concealed under the guise or pretence (deception we 
should call it) that he was a man. Such are continually in trouble 
and difficulty to explain away the statement that "He was 
tempted in all points like as we are, yet without sin," and the 
temptation of the devil in the wilderness, etc. 

Now, if he really took a human nature and became a man, we 
can understand how he that was rich (in a better state or 
condition), for our sakes became poor, that we, through his 
poverty, might become rich. If he merely left his riches for a few 
years to return again, and never really gave up his right or claim 
to them, then he did not become poor, but only appeared or 
pretended to do so. 

But we prefer to take it as it says, and believe that God is true, 
though it contradict a great many men's theories-He who was 
rich, became poor-He who was a spiritual being, became a 
human or earthly being; not a depraved and death-condemned 
human being. No; having done no sin, it would have been unjust 
in the Father to have placed him under sin's penalty- "the 
bondage of corruption" -death. No; though of our own nature, 
he was the perfection of it, and stood on precisely the same 
plane that Adam occupied before sin, abundant arrangement 
being made for this in his miraculous birth. 

When he had reached the perfection of manhood (thirty years), 
knowing why he had taken that nature -that it was not because 
he wanted to be a man and live on earth, rather than be a 
spiritual being and live in heavenly conditions- but that he 
might carry out the Father's plans, and redeem mankind from 
death, by giving himself a ransom for them, that, "as by man 
came death, by a man also, came [the right of] resurrection of 
the dead"- that "as by one man's disobedience many were made 
sinners, so by the obedience of one (man) shall many be made 
righteous." Rom. 5:19. 

This was necessary, for according to God's own arrangement of 
an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, and a life for a life, none 
but a human being could redeem or pay the ransom for 
humanity, and hence the necessity that he who was rich should 
become poor. 



As we have seen, Jesus understood the object of his having 
become a man, and hastened at once to fulfill it, saying, in the 
language of the prophet, "Lo, I come ! In the volume of the book 
it is written of me to do thy will, O God. " The Father's will was 
that that perfect being should freely deliver himself up to death 
as a ransom for us all. Did Jesus do this? Yes, everything was 
consecrated~a living sacrifice, there at Jordan~in the symbolic 
water baptism. Earthly life was henceforth to be surrendered and 
spent daily and hourly until it would ALL be gone-swallowed 
up of death— a ransom for many. 

But, having given up his life, unless it was a mere sham and 
pretence, his existence must have forever ended, says some one. 
We answer, yes; he gave all that he had. (Matt. 13:44.) But the 
Father's promise, which he well understood, was that if he were 
obedient in this matter, "even unto death," He, the Father, would 
create him again-a new creation, different from the human 
creatures, and though spiritual also, yet different from and 
higher than the angelic creatures; in a word, he would highly 
exalt him-though before he became a man he had been the chief 
of all God's creation- "the beginning of the creation of God." 
Yet if thus obedient unto death, he was to be exalted far above 
all, and to a higher position and condition than he himself had 
previously enjoyed— to become a partaker of the DIVINE 
NATURE, a sharer of the Divine Glory, Honor and Immortality. 

The value then of the anointing, was, that by it the Father gave 
witness that the sacrifice was accepted; it was the seal or 
evidence to him that the Father would give him the promised 
DIVINE NATURE when he had finished and fulfilled the 
covenant there made, when he had actually given his life. And it 
was more, it was the power of God, which dwelling in him, 
enabled him not only to know 

R240 : page 2 

the Father's will, but also to do it. Thus, because he had entirely 
laid aside his own will, the Father worked in him both to will 
and to do of his good pleasure, so that he could and did say, 
"Not my will, but Thine be done." 

It was of this indwelling spirit or power of God, that Jesus 
spoke, when he said: "The words that I speak unto you, I speak 
not of myself, but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the 
works." (John 14:10.) And it was not merely because he was a 
perfect man, while all others were imperfect, but also because 
his words were indited of the indwelling Spirit of the Father, 
that men said of him: "Never man spake like this man." 

Does any one question this? We refer to Peter's words (Acts 
10:37-39) "That word ye know, which was published throughout 
all Judea, and began from Galilee, after the baptism which John 
preached-how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy 
Ghost, and with power, [thus constituting him Jesus the Christ, 



which means Jesus the anointed,] who went about doing good 
and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was 
with him, and we are witnesses." 

But another result of the anointing was that in consequence of 
his sacrifice, already reckoned complete, (by which he ransomed 
mankind,) he was permitted to preach or declare the good news. 
He was 

"ANOINTED TO PREACH." 

To him who so loved the world as to surrender his life for them, 
it must have been a great pleasure to be permitted to declare to 
the ones being redeemed, the good news of the blessing to result 
to them, and so Jesus preached. 

We next inquire as to the exact doctrines which Jesus was 
anointed to preach, assured that if we can understand it we shall 
get the cream of all true doctrine and the essence of all correct 
preaching. Was he anointed to preach that every one who did 
not believe in the "shorter catechism" and the eternal torment of 
nine-tenths of the human race, would himself be condemned to 
never-ending torments? No. Was he anointed to preach such a 
torment as being the doom of any of God's creatures, no matter 
how wicked, no matter against how much light they had sinned? 
No, the prophet knew nothing about such preaching 
commission. Where then did the preachers of to-day get the 
authority to preach these doctrines, and to make them the back- 
bone of all their teachings? Not from the Law or the Prophets, or 
the Gospel (good news) of Jesus and his Apostles, we are sure:- 
probably from the "tradition of the elders," and the creeds 
formed in the "dark ages," when God's people began to get free 
from what Luther called "the dung-hill of Romish decretals." 
But what, according to the prophet, was Jesus anointed to 
preach? The prophet answers us: "To preach the good news to 
the meek." What is the "good news?" It is "Liberty to the 
captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound." 

How singular-did Jesus tell of the emancipation of slaves-of 
the freedom of the serfs of Russia, or the negroes of America? 
And did he preach that there would be a general discharge of all 
culprits in states prisons? Surely this last would not be "good 
news." 

Ah no my brother; it was slaves— bondmen and bond-women of 
another sort whose freedom he proclaimed. All mankind are 
slaves to sin, bound and crippled by the various maladies which 
sin brought upon them; and millions had gone down into the 
great prison house-the tomb. These were the captives and this 
the prison, and of no others did Jesus preach. But did he in his 
preaching ever refer to these and preach the deliverance of these 
captives? Yes, oh yes, repeatedly; hear him: "The hour is 
coming, in the which all that are in 



R241 : page 2 

the graves shall hear his (Jesus') voice and shall come forth." 
"The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of man and they that 
hear shall live." (John 5:25,28.) Again, "I am the resurrection 
and the life." 

As Jesus preached freedom from evil maladies, and death, he 
exemplified the power and authority of his preaching by 
"healing all manner of diseases," raising the dead to life, and 
turning sadness and mourning into gladness and joy, giving 
"beauty for ashes." And all of those miracles and all of Jesus' 
preaching was but the proof or exemplification of the power by 
which the great work, not yet commenced should finally be 
accomplished. The apostle indicates this when he says 
concerning Jesus' miracles- "These things did Jesus and 
manifested forth [before the time —the Millennial age] his 
glory." (John 2:1 1.) Thus did Jesus preach by word and 
illustration the coming emancipation of mankind from the 
thralldom of disease and death- "liberty to the captives and 
opening of the prison to them that are bound." 

But while Jesus had this general proclamation of deliverance for 
the world he had a special message to some— viz.: an invitation 
to those who would, to enter in at the strait gate and the narrow 
(difficult) way, and become with him joint heirs to "Glory, 
Honor and Immortality." Of this way he truly said- "Few there 
be that find it." And foreknowing that few would take up their 
cross and follow him, he called those who would do so and 
thereby become heirs of the kingdom which God hath promised, 
a little flock- saying: "Fear not little flock it is your Father's 
good pleasure to give you the kingdom." And this feature of 
Jesus' preaching is mentioned by the prophet— "To appoint 
[promise] unto them that mourn in Zion [the repentant] to give 
unto them... the oil of joy for the spirit of mourning; (this is the 
promise of the spirit to all who truly turn to God. Oil, is a 
symbol of the spirit. Thus the "little flock" is promised a share 
of the same anointing as their head-Jesus,) that they might be 
called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord that he 
might be glorified. 

Thus did Jesus preach the "good news" in two parts-First to the 
world a restitution of all things by a resurrection-illustrated by 
his miracles; and second— the great prize and blessing obtainable 
by those who will now walk in "the narrow way" illustrated in 
his own person, for he set us an example that we should walk in 
his footsteps. 

THE CHURCH ANOINTED. 

The anointing spirit power which came first upon the head was 
due and did in due time (Pentecost) come upon the church which 
is his body. And the anointing which she there received abideth 



in her. (1 John 2:27.) Why was the church anointed? The word 
answers-that she might share with her Lord in the present time 
the dishonor and sacrifice and in the coming age of glory be 
joined with him in glory and power. And more -as he was 
"anointed to preach the good news" so must we, his body, be 
anointed to preach the same gospel with its same two parts~viz.: 
that for the world-freedom-restitution through ransom and a 
resurrection; and for the little flock who follow the Lamb-the 
kingdom, through the ransom and consecration. 

This is all of it, just what it is called --"good news." It is what 
the apostles preached- "that there shall be a resurrection of the 
dead both of the just and unjust." (Acts 24:15.) They "preached 
through Jesus (because of the ransom he had paid) the 
resurrection from the dead." (Acts 4:2 and 17; 17:32; and 23:6.) 

The news was so new to them and so good that the Pharisees 
and religious teachers could not believe it to be true; they had 
become so accustomed to binding on mankind burdens which 
they did not help to remove, (Matt. 23 :4) that though the 
common people "wondered at the gracious words (words of love 
and promises of release from death,) which proceeded out of his 
mouth," the church authorities were "grieved." Thus it still is 
and ever will be-the preaching of the cross and its value as the 
price of the peace of all sinners, has always been to all but those 
anointed to preach it- "foolishness." 

WHO ARE TO PREACH? 

We answer all who receive of the anointing spirit and are thus 
recognized as members of the body of Christ (the anointed.) Of 
each member it is true as of the head- "He hath anointed me to 
preach the gospel." We have each gifts and talents differing 
from the other and none of us are like our head, perfect, but each 
is responsible for such and so much preaching as he can do. 
Some can preach to multitudes; others to the twos and threes; 
others from house to house; others can drop a word in season; 
others can distribute tracts; others can give of the consecrated 
money entrusted to their stewardship to help others preach. 
Some can do several of these things, and some can do all of 
them, and all can and should preach by their life and customs the 
power of the good news to transform, for we are all living 
epistles, known and read of all men. 

Are you preaching? We believe that none will be of the little 
flock except preachers. Are you preaching with all your talents 
and all your might? If so, you will by-and-by hear the words: 
"Well done good and faithful!" If not, begin now; remember that 
you consecrated your all before you were anointed, and now you 
cannot be an overcomer and keep back part of the price. (Acts 
5:4.) Paul says: "Ye know your calling, brethren." Yes, we were 
called to suffer with him and to proclaim the good news now, 
that in due time we might be glorified and perform the things 



now preached. We were not called, nor anointed to receive 
honor and amass wealth, but to spend and be spent, and to 
preach the good news. Let us give all diligence to make our 
calling sure and to perform that for which we were anointed. 

FUTURE WORK AND GLORY. 

If Jesus was anointed of the Spirit to preach coming blessings 
and freedom to Death's captives, tell me was his preaching (and 
ours) true? Will there ever be such a wholesale release? Yes, oh 
yes. "As in Adam all die, even so (unconditionally so far as they 
are concerned) in (or by) Christ, shall all be made alive." But the 
preaching of the good news comes before the performance of 
the blessings promised. Now the preaching is going on "to the 
meek"-- those willing and able to hear, in order to develop from 
among them the body of Christ, the joint heirs. 

This work is almost finished, and soon the actual blessing 
(instead of the promise) will be given. Then we shall have Jesus' 
words fulfilled: "Greater works than these shall ye do." The 
works which Jesus did were raising the dead, healing the sick, 
opening blind eyes, etc., and none of the disciples ever did 
greater works, hence the application of this language applies to 
the Millennial Age, and the great works there to be performed, 
of which Jesus' miracles were but illustrations of a less 
important character. The work of the coming Glory Age, 
opening the eyes of men's understanding, that they may 
understand the truth; the unstopping of the deaf ears that they 
may hear and know of "the love of God which passeth all 
understanding;" the making whole of the sin-sick, and the 
healing of the morally lame and crooked, are surely far, far 
greater things than the temporary healings which Jesus 
accomplished and which served only to show forth his (coming) 
glory. 

But some one inquires: What means the prophet when he says, 
he shall "proclaim the acceptable year (period or time) of the 
Lord and the day of vengeance of our God?" 

The acceptable time is this Gospel Age, during which, if any 
man hear the good news and fully consecrate himself to God, a 
living sacrifice, he will be accepted and made a joint heir with 
Jesus Christ our Lord. It is an acceptable time in that, during this 
age, God accepts of all such sacrifices. And it ends with this age 
because the "little flock" will be complete, and no more will be 
accepted to the DIVINE NATURE. 

The day of vengeance of our God is the time of fire, or purifying 
trouble, in which the world and all the church, except the "little 
flock," are to be tried and purged, and made ready for the 
blessings of the Millennial Age. [It is this Day of the Lord," in 
which, from prophetic evidences, we believe we have been, 
since 1 874, and which we believe will continue with increasing 



severity—first, on nominal Zion, and secondly, upon the world, 
until 1914, the first seven years of which, as heretofore shown, 
are years of favor and end in October of this year.] 

Jesus, in applying this prophecy to himself, stopped in the 
middle of this paragraph, and said nothing relative to the "Day 
of Vengeance," because it was not then due. The Spirit, through 
the Word, now shows it to be due. We believe, and therefore 
now declare it. 

How intimate a relationship this shows between Him, as head, 
and us as the body of the Lord's anointed. The special work of 
announcing this "Day of the Lord"~"Day of Vengeance," being 
done now, because now due, is mentioned as being part of the 
good news proclaimed by the Lord's anointed. It is good news 
only as we are able to recognize the blessed results God intends 
shall follow afterward. 

God having called us to preach the Good News, let us see to it 
that we do his will, and with Paul, we should feel, "woe is me if 
I preach not the Gospel." But if you are filled with the subject 
this privilege will be your greatest pleasure and chiefest joy, and 
you can truly say: 

"I love to tell the story. " 



R239 : page 3 



HIS HOLY NAME TO BEAR. 

Oh! patient traveler in life's narrow way, 
Tempted and tried, with hardly strength to pray, 
Rejoice! thy rest is near. 

Think what the Lord to those he loves will give, 
To share his glory, and with him to live, 
His holy name to bear. 

The name which highest angel may not own, 
Which, with his waiting bride He'll share alone, 
She whom He loves to bless. 
Upon His heavenly throne by love installed, 
This is the name wherewith she shall be called, 
The Lord our righteousness. 

I know that steep, and narrow is the way, 
And shadows, sometimes hide the light of day, 
Till our feeble faith is tried; 
But if with Him we're crucified; if for His sake 
We suffer loss, with Him our portion take, 
We shall be satisfied. 

Though now the cross is ours, and we must stay 
Until we hear the summons, "come away! 
The Master calls for thee;" 



How blessed then, to lay the cross forever down, 
And in its place receive the victor's crown, 
To wear eternally. 

Lord guide our feet each step through life we pray, 

Grant we ne'er may wander from the narrow way, 

That leads to life unseen. 

Then let us gaze upon thy glorious face, 

Thou blest Redeemer of a ruined race, 

Without a vail between. 

-MRS. A. AGENS. 



R242 : page 3 



BEHOLD! BEHOLD! 



"There standeth one among you whom you know not. "--(John 
1:26.) 

How difficult a thing it seems, to believe spiritual things; that is 
to say things belonging or pertaining to spiritual beings or 
conditions. Our experiences as men-earthly beings -are so 
constant that our ideas are apt to be entirely from that 
standpoint, while only those who are separated from the earth by 
their hopes and ambitions, and who are continuously making 
spiritual things their study, are able at all to appreciate them and 
to rightly divide truth and discriminate between earthly and 
spiritual things. 

How few there are who know that there is a natural (or human) 
body and there is a spiritual body; their only idea of organization 
is drawn from their daily experiences; they never saw any 
person whose body was not flesh and bones and blood and 
therefore they do not believe that there could be a being 
differently constructed. This is human reason unguided by the 
Spirit and consequently it frequently finds itself in direct conflict 
with the "Sword of the Spirit— the word of God."-(Eph. 6:17.) 
For instance, they can tell you they say, just exactly what they 
will be like in the future-that is just like what they now are 
except free from present weaknesses and ailments; and they 
know too just what Jesus will be like; they say he will be just as 
he was when crucified, the same wounds in hands, feet, brow, 
etc., for they insist that it is "This same Jesus," who shall come 
and reign. Now, we do not blame those who cannot see spiritual 
things for looking at and imagining everything on the earthly 
plane, for we know (The Spirit declares it — 1 Cor. 2:14.) "The 
natural (human) man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of 
God- (they are foolishness unto him,) neither can he know them 
because they are spiritually discerned." But to those who have a 
spiritual eye to see and a spiritual ear to hear we would say: Paul 
teaches such that there will be a complete change from natural 



(human) to spiritual conditions on the part of that "little flock" to 
whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give the kingdom which 
"flesh and blood cannot inherit. "— (1 Cor. 15:50.) So great a 
change we repeat, that "it doth not yet appear what we shall be. " 
The spirit-begotten Apostle knew of the human nature and 
human body, and if we were to be changed to the perfection of 
humanity he well knew how to so express it, but knowing all 
this he positively asserts that after the change it will be a 
spiritual and not a natural body, and that "it doth not yet appear 
what" a spiritual body is or what may be all of its powers~but 
"we shall be like Him." It follows then that Jesus will be 
different from what he was also, so different that Paul intimates 
that though he (and he only- 1 Cor. 15:8) had seen him after his 
change he could not describe him, and we could not understand 
what our change will be, or what his was, until changed and 
made "like unto Christ's glorious body." 

"Who says that the body with nail prints in the hands and feet 
was Christ's glorious body? Certainly there is no one who has 
his senses exercised in spiritual things who cannot see that "the 
body of flesh"-- "the likeness of men"~"the form of a servant" 
was not His glorious body, but the one taken in order that 
"He... might taste death for every man." 

If then, Jesus took a human nature and form that "as by man 
came death, by man also might come the resurrection of the 
dead," (1 Cor. 15:21) and if we are told that he has now another 
nature and spiritual form, shall we not recognize two- first the 
natural (human) afterward the spiritual? It was the man 
(anointed Jesus) who died for our sins; but he is a man no 
longer; he is now a spiritual being. He as a man was "obedient 
unto death even the death of the cross. Wherefore, God also hath 
highly exalted him" (Phil. 2:9) and his is no longer the human 
nature and form, but the Divine. He is now a "glorious body"- 
the express image of the Father's person-of the invisible God, " 
"whom no man hath seen nor can see." Paul as one born 
(resurrected) before the time was granted a glimpse of the 
glorified Jesus, which destroyed his natural sight.— (1 Cor. 15:8.) 
Can we doubt as to the time when Jesus received these forms? 
Was not the natural born of a woman, and after thirty years of 
growth in wisdom, stature, etc., did not the human reach its 
perfection? Did he not immediately (when thirty years of age) 
consecrate that human nature a sacrifice for the world? Was it 
not accepted of God, and did not the Father testify to the 
acceptance of that sacrifice by anointing and filling the man 
with His Spirit? Was not that anointing the begetting of the man 
Jesus to the Divine spiritual nature? Were not the three and one- 
half years of his ministry, years of the crucifying of the flesh or 
(perfect) human will of Jesus? Did he not finish the sacrifice at 
the cross? Was he not raised from the dead the third day? Was 
not that called his birth --"The first-born— from the dead"— 
"First-born among many brethren," etc.? Was that said to be a 



birth of the flesh or of the Spirit? If then He is said to have been 
born of the Spirit, how say some among you that he was still 
flesh— human-does not the Word record that "That which is 
born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is 
Spirit"? John 3:6. Was he not sown a natural body"-"raised a 
spiritual body"? 

If then Jesus is and has been since his resurrection a spiritual 
body, why should we look for him to be a fleshly body at his 
second coming? Do you know of any place in holy writ where it 
says he will be changed so as to become again a human, earthly, 
fleshly body? Is it not foolish for those who have been 
somewhat enlightened by the Word of God to expect that Jesus 
will come in the flesh— to be seen of the earthly eye? 

Have any ever seen spiritual beings -God, or Angels, or Devils- 
- with the human eye (except as a miracle has occurred which 
specially revealed them as recorded in Scriptures)? Did any 
astronomer sweeping the sky by day or by night with powerful 
telescope ever see those (angels) whom Paul declares are 
ministering spirits sent forth to minister for those who shall be 
heirs of salvation"— or did they ever see Him who is called "the 
Devil"— the "Prince of this world"— "the Prince of the powers of 
the air?" Who hath seen such spiritual beings by human eyes 
without a miracle? If there be none why should any look for the 
Lord who at his resurrection became "a life-giving Spirit" to be 
thus visible to mortals? 

But does some one object-Did not the Angels say, "This same 
Jesus shall come? Yes, we answer as frequently before; yes, it 
will be so; but was it the Jesus born of Mary, or the Jesus born 
of the Spirit, a spiritual body, a quickening spirit, of which the 
Angel spoke? You answer that it was he who was raised by the 
power of the Father to the perfection of spiritual being; and we 
answer yes, this same (spiritual) Jesus shall so come in like 
manner as he went away -unknown to the world who were 
eating, drinking, planting, and building and knew not. 

So we believe he has come again, not a man but a Spirit, not a 
man's form of flesh-but a Spirit's form-a spiritual body. Now 
none can see him present but those who have spiritual eye-sight 
and are looking. Some who are thus looking can now see him- 
the eyes of their understanding being enlightened by the light 
shining from the more sure word of prophecy: Such walk by 
faith and not by sight, and may well endure "as seeing him that 
is invisible" to humanity. 

Our mission-those who see the present one-is to declare Him 
to the nominal church— the ripe wheat of which, we expect will 
hear and recognize, while others will in this respect be blind. 
Our position is much like that of John the Baptist at the first 
advent of Jesus when he came in the flesh to "Israel after the 
flesh." John introduced him-announced him as the "Lamb of 



God" who would take away the sin of the world. So we 
announce him now to the Spiritual Israel as the Lord of life and 
King of Glory. 

When addressed by the leading men of the fleshly house as to 
his business and his right to preach outside the pale of the 
Jewish church, he declares it to be his special work to bear 
witness to the light and the truth of the presence of Jesus the 
Lord's anointed. So too when we are asked for our reasons, they 
are these: that the King has come and is calling for the joint- 
heirs and they must needs be made aware of his presence. Now 
as then it is true, that "There standeth one among you whom you 
know not." Behold, see, but "look not at the things that are seen 
but at the things that are not seen; for the things that are seen (by 
the natural eye) are temporal, but the things which are not seen 
are eternal. "--(2 Cor. 4:18.) 

Though you cannot see the "reaper" you can see his work going 
on around you in the nominal church— the wheat and the tares- 
the real and the imitation must be and now are being separated, 
that in due time the wheat may "shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father"-- which flesh and blood cannot inherit. 

This recognition of the Lord's presence we understand to be the 
sanctifying and essential truth necessary to the perfecting of the 
saints now living, and the ability to perceive it, the test of 
spiritual sight now, even as at the first advent: Then, the test was 
not whether the Jewish church believed the Prophets—that the 
Messiah should come sometime, nor whether they believed that 
that coming would be soon, for we read that "All men were in 
expectation" of His coming; but the test to them was, would they 
believe in His presence, in a way they had not expected Him to 
come. So now the test is similar-not who believes Jesus is 
coming-but who can see Him to be present; and only those 
possessed of spiritual sight can see Him. "There standeth one 
among you (in your midst) whom you know not." 



R243 : page 3 

THE TABERNACLE. 

THE LAMPSTAND. 

"And thou shalt make a Lampstand of pure gold: of beaten 
work shall the lampstand be made; his shaft, and his branches, 
his bowls, his knops, and his flowers shall be of the same. And 
six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three branches of 
the lampstand out of the one side, and three branches of the 
lampstand out of the other side; three bowls made like unto 
almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch; and three 
bowls made like almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a 



flower: so in the six branches that come out of the 
lampstand.... Their knops and their branches shall be of the same: 
all of it shall be one beaten work of pure gold. And thou shalt 
make the seven lamps thereof; and they shall light the lamps 
thereof, that they may give light over against it. And the tongs 
thereof and the snuff-dishes thereof shall be of pure gold. Of a 
talent of pure gold shall he make it with all these vessels. And 
look that thou make them after their pattern, which was showed 
thee in the mount." Ex. 25:31-40. 

Light has ever been symbolic of that which brings joy and 
gladness, while by common consent night and darkness have 
been put for ignorance and its accompanying misery. We find all 
about us in nature that light is the cause of the most beneficial 
results, so very early in the world's history among those who 
were in moral darkness, light, fire, the sun, moon, &c, became 
objects of worship and were adored either as symbols of a god 
or as gods in visible form. The natural man has ever been 
desirous of some visible manifestation; he seeks to walk by 
sight; only the just~the spiritual— walk by faith. Perhaps it was 
for this reason mainly, that Jehovah saw fit to give so many 
typical forms to the children of Israel. The nations around them 
all had their objects of sense which, placed where they could 
often see them, satisfied the eye and gave them contentment. 
How often we have seen children, who, not satisfied with 
knowing that their mother was in the house, must follow her 
from room to room, refusing even to have a door shut between 
them. So we find even in this age those who must have 
crucifixes, pictures, relics, &c, to fill the eye, and satisfy an 
untutored conscience. We might come nearer home and speak of 
those who think there is neither life nor power without a 
mourners' bench and a great deal of noise and excitement, but 
we 

R243 : page 4 

remember that there are true children who are but children, and 
we would not offend the least. However, noise is not power, and 
as we are speaking of light, and of light as a symbol of God, it 
might be well to say that although it is one of the most powerful 
forces in nature, it is one of the most quiet. Bonar, who has 
written so much that is pure and true says: 

The light is ever silent; 

It sparkles on morn's million gems of dew. 

It flings itself into the shower of noon, 

It weaves its gold into the cloud of sunset, 

Yet not a sound is heard; it dashes full 

On yon broad rock, yet not an echo answers. 

It lights in myriad drops upon the flower, 

Yet not a blossom stirs; it does not move 

The slightest film of floating gossamer, 

Which the faint touch of insect's wing wo'ld shiver 



The light is ever pure, 

No art of man can ever rob it of its beauty, 

Nor stain its unpolluted heaven lines. 

It is the fairest, purest thing in nature; 

Fit type of that fair heaven where all is pure, 

And into which no evil thing can enter; 

Where darkness comes not, where no shadow falls; 

Where night and sin can have no dwelling place. 

The first recorded words of Deity are, "Let there be light." It 
seems to be a pre-requisite in the formation and development of 
the natural, and our hearts seeking spiritual light and growth, 
echo the cry: "Let there be light." Whither shall we go? as God 
is the source and fountain of all life and love, so is he the source 
of all light. To us he manifests himself through his Words. Not 
the written word alone, but its author Jesus, "The word of God." 
"This is the true light which lighteth every man that cometh into 
the world." "In him was life and the life was the light of men." 

The lampstand then primarily typifies Christ, and consequently 
in some sense every true member of the Christ body. Light is 
peculiarly expressive of the character of God and of his people. 
"God is light," says the beloved John. James calls him the 
"Father of lights with whom there is no variableness, neither 
shadow of turning. Jesus said, "I am the light of the world; he 
that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the 
light of life." Of his followers he says, "ye are the light of the 
world." The lampstand beautifully symbolizes Christ as the hope 
of our fallen race. It stood where there was no other light. Christ 
is the light of life. It had seven branches typifying perfection, or 
as seven is a symbol of that which is complete and entire, it 
represents Christ as the embodiment of light, not only the truth, 
but the whole truth, the fullness of God. 

Light is composed of the seven primary colors, thus symbolizing 
Jesus as the one altogether lovely. The beautiful rainbow-the 
seal of promise -is but an individualizing of the pure white ray; 
so the hope of the world and the promise of its eternal 
preservation is in the manifestation of the various beauties, the 
ineffable glories of the immaculate one; that concentrated beam 
of heavenly light which piercing the dark clouds of despair, 
reflects even from the storm drops a vision of hope and a pledge 
of the covenant of mercy. 

Majestic sweetness sits enthroned, 
Upon the Savior's brow; 
His head with radiant glories crowned, 
His lips with grace o'erflow. 
No mortal can with him compare, 
Among the sons of men; 
Fairer is He than all the fair 
Who fill the heavenly train. 



"And he made the lampstand of pure gold; of beaten work made 
he the lampstand. His shaft, his branch, his bowls, his knops and 
his flowers, were of the same." Ex. 37:17. We feel almost 
discouraged sometimes at the rough handling we seem to 
receive~the knocks and the blows. We forget the branches must 
be like the shaft—all of beaten work. No machine made lords of 
the flock, no church ornaments cast wholesale in a mold, about 
this lampstand; as is the shaft so are the branches-all of beaten 
work. In its structure there was a knop and a flower in 
continuous succession, typifying the beautiful graces of a Christ- 
like spirit accompanying the solid fruit of a Christian life: a sort 
of combination of faith and works. It would also represent a 
vigorous ever-developing plant, always blooming, continually 
fruit bearing; like the trees growing by the river of life, yielding 
their fruit every month. 

The tabernacle as we have seen contained wondrous things, but 
as there were no windows in it, they would have been unseen, 
but for the lampstand. The well furnished table of shew bread 
with its typical spiritual food, ever fresh and fragrant, was 
unknown to natural light; hidden to those without. Here was the 
Altar of Incense and the way to God, but the world by wisdom 
(natural light) knew not God. As Paul said to the Athenians, 
groping in darkness "they seek God, if haply they might feel 
after him, and find him, though he is not far from each one of 
us." In their blindness they erect an altar inscribed, "To the 
unknown God." In our day men still erect altars to baseless 
creeds and isms, and sacrifice themselves upon them. Thank 
God that we can say: "With Thee is the fountain of life; in thy 
light shall we see light." Psa. 36:9. 

The furniture of the Tabernacle was all made of wood, covered 
with gold, excepting this piece, which is frequently called the 
pure lampstand by way of pre-eminence. Like the Laver it was 
made of one material; like the Laver its dimensions are not 
given. They both evidently symbolized the illimitable truth of 
God. Pure and unalloyed, able to stand alone without help of 
human reasonings and imaginings. For long years men have 
been trying to excuse God's character, his dealings and his word. 
The truth requires no bolstering; keep it pure and you keep it 
safe. The poet has said: 

Truth crushed to earth will rise again; 
The eternal years of God are hers. 

To be eternal it must be pure; this is a universal law. 

The Laver and lampstand being without dimensions would seem 
to typify the fact-O that creed worshipers might see it—that 
truth like its author is boundless. The various sectaries scattered 
along the stream of truth ever flowing from the throne, have 
built little mud dams in the sand and have fenced off a little of 
the stream; and claiming that they had secured it all, have 



covered it up carefully from the light and air, until what should 
have been to them a well of life, has become a veritable frog 
pond. Rev. 16:13; 18:2. 

In this age the Word is the lamp (Psa. 1 19:105; Matt. 25:1) and 
the church is the lampstand; (Rev. 1 :20) but we think it will not 
always be so. Jesus said to his followers, "ye are the light of the 
world," and he evidently intended that his light should 

R244 : page 4 

shine through and be reflected by us; but in a deeper sense will 
we be the light of the world, when, made partakers of his 
glorious body, we shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of our 
Father. Matt. 13:43. 

After the earthly Jerusalem has been restored, the heavenly 
Jerusalem will be its source of light and law and will shine 
through it (the earthly) upon the nations. Isaiah (2:23) tells us 
that after the kingdom has been set up--" out of Zion (the 
heavenly) shall go forth the law and the word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem," (the earthly). Before this takes place however, 
Jerusalem must first hear the cry, "Arise, shine! for thy light is 
come and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee." (Isaiah 60.) 
This explains what John says of the new Jerusalem. The Lamb 
(Head and body) is the light thereof. (Also, Isa. 60:19,20.) It is 
evidently this heavenly company, the united and perfected body 
of Christ, that Malachi alludes to as the sun of righteousness that 
shall arise with healing in his wings to bless first the Jewish 
people and ultimately every man that cometh into the world. 
John 1:9. 

The lampstand seems to have been modeled after the Almond 
tree with its knops, flowers and nut-like bowls. The Almond is 
remarkable for its early blossoming (sometimes even in January) 
the flowers appearing before the leaves. The Hebrew word for 
Almond is from a root which signifies "to hasten, " being thus 
descriptive of the tree which hastened to put forth its blossoms 
in spring. Hence, it was regarded by the Jews as a harbinger of 
spring. The lampstand would thus symbolize the church of the 
first-born; and the appearance of this company arrayed in 
beauty, the surety that the winter is past, that the time of the 
singing of birds is come, that soon the voice of the dove will be 
heard in the land. The nations of course, will not see the church 
of the first-born until the eyes of their understanding are opened, 
which will be after the time of trouble has prepared them for the 
reception of the truth. 

While Christ and His bride are clearly the light of the future, in 
this age we are dependent on the written word which is a lamp 
to our feet and a light to our path. (Ps. 119:105.) In one of the 
visions of Zachariah (ch. 4), he saw a golden lampstand between 
two olive trees from which through golden pipes flowed the 
needed oil. The Angel explained that these lamps did not burn 



by human wisdom or knowledge, "not by might, nor by power, 
but by My Spirit; saith the Lord of hosts." The prophet was 
further told that these are the two anointed ones, (Heb., sons of 
oil) that stand by the Lord of "the whole earth." This helps us to 
understand the symbol of the two witnesses in Rev. 1 1 for it is 
written "these are the two olive trees, and the two lampstands 
standing before the God of the earth." Thus we perceive they are 
the Old and New Testaments; the sources of light from which 
the church, (the spiritual channel,) must draw her supply of oil. 
These witnesses were to be clothed in sackcloth (symbolic of 
mourning and probably of the clothing in a dead language, 
Latin) during 1260 years, while they testified for God. They 
were killed in the Babylonian city— Rome—and exposed in one 
of her ten streets-France-during three and one-half years (1793 
and onward). Since then, they have been caught up to heavenly 
places in symbolic language -a position of honor and power, 
and translated into nearly every tongue have witnessed to all 
nations as Jesus foretold. 

The lampstand was the only light available to those in the 
Tabernacle. This shows us plainly where we must go for all our 
light. What if none of the rulers or of the Pharisees have 
believed? Why should they? Very, very few of them have 
entered into the presence of the lampstand. The butterflies love 
the sunshine. Let us be followers of Him who walked in the 
midst of the seven golden lampstands. He was there to trim and 
furnish the light; let us rejoice and walk in it. 

Walk in the light ! thy path shall be 
Peaceful, serene, and bright; 
For God, by grace, shall dwell in thee, 
And God, Himself, is light. 



W. I. M. 



R244 : page 4 



DO YOU LOVE GOD? 



"By this we know that we love the children of God, when we 
love God and practice his commandments." 1 John 5:2. Diaglott. 

This does not read as is generally supposed; it does not say we 
know that we love God because we love his children, but almost 
the reverse: We love the children because we love the Father. In 
a word, it is through our relationship and union with our Head, 
Jesus, that we are permitted to partake of the spirit or mind of 
the Father, and that spirit is the spirit of Love-love toward all 
that is good and noble and pure and just, and consequently, 
hatred of all that is impure, sinful, and opposed to the things 
loved- "hating iniquity"- loving righteousness. 



If then you love God and have become a partaker of His spirit, 
("Let the same mind [spirit] be in you which was also in Christ 
Jesus, our Lord")~"if the spirit of Christ dwell in you," you will 
love all things in which there is any good and hate all evil, 
because it is opposed to good. And not only so, but as John 
expresses it, if we are entirely surrendered to God and to 
obedience to his will, those to whom we will be especially 
drawn and whom we will especially love will be those who are 
begotten of the same spirit—who also love righteousness and 
hate iniquity. 

How you have proved this in your own experience: You met a 
stranger and before you were aware you were acquainted; you 
recognized in each other the spirit of Christ and not the spirit of 
the world, and this was the basis of fellowship. But how shall 
we know whether the ones you love are the children of God or 
not? Perhaps you love worldly people, or perhaps you love 
moral people who are not new creatures, best. How can you tell? 
By the Apostle's rule: "By this we know that we love the 
children of God" -if we love God supremely. 

But does some one say: "How can I know that I love God 
supremely?" We have heard dear Christians pray: "Oh, Lord 
help me to love thee, " and we remember a sweet hymn which 
says: "Let me love thee." And we wish that all who are the 
Lord's might realize that love to him is not a gift to be prayed 
for, and not a thing which is given to us, but a thing which we 
ourselves must develop. The basis of all love for any person or 
thing is knowledge. You can only learn to love good and hate 
evil by becoming acquainted with them; so the way by which we 
come to love God is by becoming acquainted with him. We 
cannot become personally acquainted with him, for no man hath 
seen God, but we can and do become acquainted with his spirit- 
his mind—as we see it manifested in Christ Jesus, our Lord, and 
through the apostles, and through those who are entirely 
consecrated to him now living in the world. And the more we 
see of his spirit-its meekness, patience, long-suffering, charity- 
love, the more we come to love Him who is the fount or source 
of all this— for we realize that God is love. 

Nor is this the only way we can 

R244 : page 5 

learn of God's spirit, for as we look into His Word, (having 
come into harmony with him and consecrated ourselves to him) 
the spirit of God is more and more revealed to us as we come to 
see his great and loving plans therein recorded; and the more we 
see of perfection and beauty and love in the plan, the more we 
will admire and love the great planner- our Father. God desires 
all his creatures to become acquainted with him (and in due time 
will cause "the knowledge of the Lord to fill the whole earth," in 
order that all may have an opportunity to love him- "for his 



mercy endureth forever") but now during this "present evil 
world," or time while evil is allowed to reign, he is revealing 
himself only to those who have eyes to see and ears to hear, and 
who use them. If then we would love, we must know God; if we 
would know, we must make use of the instrumentality and 
search the Scriptures for his plan and will, and seek to know 
what is "that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. " 
"Then shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord." 

In the verse following the one above considered, the apostle lays 
down a rule by which we may know whether we really love God 
or not, viz.: "For this is the love of God: that we keep his 
commandments, and his commandments are not burdensome." 

Are you in the Lord's hands-are you seeking to do his will? If 
so, what motives actuate you-love, or fear? If fear, your service 
will be a drudge; you may perform, but it will be a burden and a 
continuous effort to render obedience to his wishes. If you serve 
God from love your experience will be different—it will be a 
pleasure to do his will; a 

Joy to find in every station 
Something still to do or bear 

— a pleasure to sacrifice earthly comforts or pleasures whenever 
his will thus indicates. 

R245 : page 5 

How simple and yet how absolute is this test of whether and 
how much we love God or fear him! If we fear we may obey 
and find it burdensome, but if we love him we keep his 
commands and do not find them burdensome. 

Oh, how often has this burdensome obedience to God been 
brought to our notice! Some one whom we had supposed was 
serving the Lord in loving obedience begins to tell us how much 
he suffers for Christ's sake, and how much he bears of the 
burden and heat of the day laboring in the vineyard. No, if we 
have the spirit of Christ, we will not feel the commands of our 
Father burdensome, but a pleasant service, and it will be true of 
us as of him: "I delight to do thy will, O God." 

If then the doing of the will of God be unpleasant to us, if it be 
not with us as with Paul, that the sacrifices of earthly things- 
earthly wealth, influence, pleasures, are a privilege and a joy, it 
must be because we lack the love of God, which constrained 
Paul and all the apostles to reckon all these things and life itself 
but loss and dross, on account of the knowledge of the anointed 
Jesus, our Lord, on whose account we suffer the loss of all 
things and consider them to be vile refuse, so that we may gain 
Christ. (Phil. 3:8.) 

Come then, you who labor, you who are burdened in the Lord's 
service, come to Him who speaks, saying: "Come unto me, ye 



that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (Matt. 
11:28) Come, receive of his spirit of entire consecration. Then 
you can with him say: "I delight to do thy will, O God." Thus 
we will know that our obedience is from love of God~if his will 
is not burdensome, but a delight to us. 



R245 : page 5 

THOUGHTS ON THE TABERNACLE. 

Editor Zion's Watch Tower: 

DEAR BROTHER--I send you a few thoughts on the tabernacle 
and the work of the high priest. I presume all admit that the 
tabernacle that God commanded Moses to build was a "figure" 
or "pattern" of, and was designed to teach us the way into the 
"true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man" (Heb. 
8:2); also that the office and work of the high priest prefigured 
the office and work of Christ; and that the high priest making 
atonement with the blood (life) of the victim, carrying it into the 
most holy, "within the vail," and applying it to all that needed to 
be cleansed, foreshadowed the atonement by and application of 
the blood (life of Christ). Therefore, the study of the movements 
of the high priest in his official duties is one of great interest to 
us who are hopefully awaiting the blessing of Him who hath 
entered within the vail for us. 

The 16th of Leviticus gives a pen picture of the official scene. 
The high priest was to be attired with linen coat, breeches, girdle 
and miter. "These are holy garments" (verse 10). He was to 
"wash his flesh with water and so put them on." [Thus clothed 
with "holy" garments -or righteousness --("The fine linen is the 
righteousness of saints, i.e., holy ones. Rev. 19:8)-- he was 
prepared to offer acceptable sacrifice.] 

"And Aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin-offering, which is 
for himself, and shall make an atonement for himself and for his 
house"-- "whose house are ye?" (verse 1 1 and Heb. 3:6). This 
offering of the bullock, in its antitype in the body of Jesus, 
which was prepared for sacrifice (Heb. 10:5) was certainly for 
the church, the body of Christ. The shed blood (i.e., the evidence 
of the completeness of the sacrifice) was carried within the vail 
by the high priest, and atonement made. When that work was 
done he came out- "his house" being typically cleansed. 
"THEN shall he kill the goat of the sin-offering that is for the 
people [type of the world, as the house of Aaron is a type of the 
church], and bring his blood within the vail, and do with that 
blood as he did with the blood of the bullock" (verse 15). 

The point to which I would call especial attention is, the going 
in and coming out of the high priest. If the first going in, with 
the blood of the bullock, was for the "church of the first born," 



and, like the paschal lamb, affected only them, as seems clear, 
then the blood of the goat, which was not for the priesthood, but 
for the people, would not be applied until its blood had been 
carried in and sprinkled, and the high priest would again come 
out. It will be seen that the law teaches that the high priest goes 
in and comes out twice. 

As the bullock represented Jesus, the Head of the church, does 
not the goat represent the church? As the goat followed the 
bullock in the sacrifice, does not the church follow her Head? 
Do not we "fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ?" (Col. 1:24.) The Head suffered first, and the body 
through the Gospel age, under the control of the Spirit, as Christ 
in us, presenting "our bodies a living sacrifice." (Rom. 8:13 and 
12:1.) If we suffer with Him, we shall be glorified with Him, 
and so reign with Him. (Rom. 8:17 and 2 Tim. 2:12.) 

Is not then our suffering as necessary in order that we with Him 
may become the Kings and Priests of the world, in order to their 
salvation, as was His suffering necessary in order that He might 
be our Savior?~it being God's purpose to bless the world, "the 
people," or the nations, through the Seed, Head and Body, made 
perfect through sufferings. 

The thought, then, is, that as the bullock slain represented the 
sacrifice of the flesh- life of Jesus, which secured to Him the 
right and power to shed forth His Spirit-as the power of Eternal 
life—on the church, so the slain goat represented the sacrifice of 
the flesh-life of the church, which secures to her the right and 
power, as the Bride of Christ, to apply her spiritual power for 
the benefit of the people. Then it is certainly a fact that the high 
priest must come out and take this goat-blood (the evidence of 
the completeness of the sacrifice) within the vail, before it will 
affect the world. And will not Christ fulfill this when He gathers 
the saints to Himself and presents them before the Father? Christ 
coming for His saints and our gathering together unto Him is 
certainly the "coming as a thief," but not the appearing with Him 
in glory, which must be a later event. This later event seems to 
be the fulfillment of Zech. 14:5 and of the prophecy that "every 
eye shall see Him." (Rev. 1:7.) 

If the above conclusions are correct it follows that the high 
priest's coming out after making the atonement for "the people" 
by sprinkling the goat's blood, is a type of the open 
manifestations then due— the saints being already with Him. 
Now we desire to fasten this one point, that the high priest did 
not change his clothes nor wash his flesh at the coming out from 
the work of atonement "for his house," but after the sprinkling 
of the goat's blood, on coming out the second time. 

It then follows that the visible or open appearance of Christ is 
not due now, that is when He comes for His saints. And one 
thing more is equally true that the washing of the flesh is not due 



until the change of garments, and therefore cannot be fulfilled 
on the saints, unless they need washing after they have been 
beyond the vail. Some are certainly locating this washing at the 
wrong time according to the law. May we be fully prepared for 
every event in God's order, by the sanctifying influences of the 
word. 

W. F. CARSON. 

DEAR BROTHER: 

We are glad to hear from you and furthermore we are glad that 
our views regarding the teachings of the word on this important 
subject are so much in harmony. Our views on this subject as 
expressed in previous papers, are almost identical with those 
you herein express; the only point of difference perhaps being 
that you (seemingly) expect a manifestation of the great High 
Priest (Christ Jesus the head and his body, the church) in glory 
visible to the natural sight of humanity, while in my view of the 
matter, "the world seeth him no more" with the natural eye, but 
will see or recognize his presence and reign by the eyes of their 
understandings being opened by the judgments of the "day of 
the Lord." Then they all shall see him and us by the light of 
those judgments as we now see him by the light of His Word- 
our Lamp. 

We agree fully that the washing and change of garments from 
those of sacrifice— the linen—to those of executive office of— 
"glory and beauty," takes place after we have been changed and 
been presented in the Father's presence as His Bride or body. 
The significance of the washing and change to our mind is, that 
when he begins to reveal himself to those in the "court" 
(believers-not accounted worthy of translation-and to be a part 
of the Bride) they will be able to recognize the Christ as 
changed and then invested with Glory, Honor and Immortality - 
they will realize him as the one whose blessing is to be desired. 
Afterward (Lev. 9) he goes forward to the gate and there blesses, 
all the people (the world at large, -unbelievers) all of whom 
while he blesses (the work of the Millennial Age) will come to 
recognize Him as the one altogether lovely; in whom all their 
hopes centre and upon whom all the covenants and promises of 
God (the Ephods) depend. 

If we but keep closely in sight the intimate relationship and 
close resemblance between the bullock and the Lord's goat, it 
should continually stir us up to see that we are being crucified 
with Him if we would reign with Him, the "Scapegoat," 
evidently representing 

R246 : page 5 

that part of the church who shall be delivered afterward. After 
"the body" is complete He shall "deliver those who through fear 
of death (crucifixion of pride and self, etc.,) were all their 



lifetime subject to bondage" -Let us not be of this class, but as 
the Lord's goat- "Let us go to him without the camp (nominal 
church) bearing the reproach with him. "--[EDITOR.] 



page 5 

A LETTER 

FROM YOURS AND OURS TO HIS AND OURS. 

"Unto you who are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved 
in Jesus Christ and called; mercy unto you, and peace, and love, 
be multiplied. I thank my God, making mention of Thee always 
in my prayers, hearing (knowing) of thy love and faith, which 
thou hast toward the Lord Jesus and toward all Saints: That the 
communication of your faith may become effectual by the 
acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ 
Jesus." 

I am happy to say to the "little flock," that I am rejoicing in 
"present truth," believing that I have received it in answer to 
prayer. About four years ago I forsook the paths of sin, and gave 
up all for Jesus; since then I have been striving to follow Him. I 
studied His word faithfully in order to know my duty, and can 
say, to the praise of our Heavenly Father, that He permitted me 
to see many precious promises, and faith claimed them mine. 

Within the last year, however, I became convinced that there 
was greater light to be obtained from our "lamp" if it could be 
properly trimmed. I remembered the promises: "Ask and ye 
shall receive." "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God," 
etc. My daily prayer was for wisdom, and an understanding of 
His Word. I believed my prayer would be answered; but, by 
what means, or instrument I knew not. Father uses a variety of 
means to bless His children; and has given those precious things 
to His stewards "to do good and to communicate" them to 
others. Accordingly, in February, 1881, He sent one of His 
messengers (Brother Paton,) who, by the grace of God, "opened 
our eyes 

page 6 

to behold wondrous things out of His law." To-day we can truly 
say, as did David: "The law of thy mouth is better to me than 
thousands of gold and silver. How sweet are thy words unto my 
taste! yea sweeter than honey to my mouth. Through thy 
precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way." 
As Jesus said to the disciples, (John 4:32) so we can say to the 
nominal church, "we have meat to eat that ye know not of." 

During the month of May, I had the pleasure of a visit to 
Pittsburgh, Pa., where I was privileged to meet and hold sweet 
converse on these precious and exhaustless themes with our 



beloved brothers-Sunderlin, Mann, Jones, Adamson and the 
editor of the "TOWER." It is needless for me to tell you that it 
was a delightful and profitable season. 

These precious truths thrill my whole being. I am willing to 
spend and be spent, in telling the "story of Jesus and His Love." 
Pray for me, that I may have wisdom to "rightly divide the word 
of truth," and grace to enable me to suffer with Christ, and with 
you share the glories of the world to come. "Now may the God 
of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that 
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting 
covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, 
working in you that which is well pleasing in His sight, through 
Jesus Christ; to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen." 

ROBERT BAILEY, 

Howardsville, Mich. 



R246 : page 6 

"IT'S ALL IN THE DOCUMENT." 

In conversing with an inquiring soul, who was seeking to find 
how he might know his sins were forgiven, it pleased the Lord 
to use the following illustration, as bringing before him the 
simple message of the gospel as in Gal. 3:13. He could not get 
hold of the truth in the verse, and had been told: "Now, my 
friend, instead of trusting just what that word reveals, and 
accepting your pardon upon the authority of God's word, and 
commencing the service of God as a saved man, you are 
occupied with looking at your feeling or something in yourself, 
in some expected change of heart, as a ground of hope that you 
are saved. Let me give you this illustration: Suppose three men 
under condemnation for crime, and shut up in prison, were to 
receive, each of them, as an act of grace from the governor, a 
pardon. This pardon is a written document signed with the 
governor's name and bearing the seal of state. Now upon what 
ground does the keeper of the prison release these three men 
from the penalty of their crime?" 

"Why, on the ground of the pardon by the governor." 

"Yes, just so. Supposing one of them should come to the keeper 
after having had the pardon handed to him, and should weep, 
and cry, and feel bad on account of his crime. Would his 
weeping and crying and feeling bad be the reason of the keeper 
unlocking the door and setting him free?" 

"No; it would not. He is let go because of the pardon." 

"Supposing another should come after having received the 
pardon, and begin to beg and plead and pray with the keeper in 
very earnest, touching words to be released. Would his begging 



and praying be the reason of the keeper's unlocking the door 
when he finally was released?" 

"No; the keeper lets him out because he is pardoned." 

"Well, supposing the third one should come after he had 
received his pardon, and should say: 'Now, Mr. Keeper, I want 
to get out and have seen the pardon, but of course before I can 
be released I must promise you as to my future behaviour, and 
here are twenty-seven resolutions and promises that I have 
drawn up in writing that I think will cover the ground.' The 
keeper, without reply, unlocks the door and he goes free. Is the 
door unlocked because of his promises and resolutions?" 

"No; it's his pardon, and that alone, that sets him free." 

"Very well; now let us pursue the illustration a little further. Let 
us follow these three men as they leave the prison with their 
pardons safely in their pockets. The first one, we will imagine, is 
met, not far from the prison, by the officer who detected him in 
his crime and was the means of his arrest and punishment. This 
officer knows that according to the law the man should be in 
prison. He does not know of the pardon provided by grace. He 
advances toward the man with keen, suspicious glance. How 
shall the released man act- what reply make to the searching 
question: 'Have you any right to be here? Have you been 
pardoned?' Let us imagine him, if we can, so occupied with 
himself, so lacking in confidence in the seal of the governor, as 
to sadly reply: 'Well, I thought I had been pardoned, but since 
seeing you my crime and my unworthiness come back to me, 
and I do not feel that I have been. I am unworthy of it, and you 
can take me back again where I belong. I was wrong in leaving 
and thinking I was pardoned.' What would you have said to that 
man if you had been near him?" 

"Why, I should have told the foolish fellow to look at his 
document and show it to the officer, who would very quickly 
have let him alone." 

"Just so. Well, let us follow the second man as with his pardon 
in his pocket he is getting away from the prison. He is very 
happy, he is freely and joyfully telling old acquaintances as he 
meets them that he has been pardoned and delivered from 
penalty. Soon an officer also stands in his path, and as he 
recognizes in him a former criminal he asks for evidence of his 
pardon. Let us imagine him so occupied with himself, so utterly 
unappreciative of the grace of the governor, and of his only 
ground of safety, as in the written pardon, as to answer: 'Why, I 
know I am pardoned because I feel I am pardoned. Don't you 
see how happy I am?' The answer of the officer would certainly 
be: 'Well, sir, I make no account of your feeling happy; if you 
have nothing to show as evidence from the governor that you are 
pardoned, you will just come right back with me to prison.' 



Now, what would you have said to that man if you had been 
there?" 

"Why, of course I would have told him to pull out his document 
and show that, instead of talking of his feelings." 

"Very well; now one more illustration, and then for the 
application: We will suppose the third man met by an officer. 
He has bought a new suit of clothes, washed and shaved himself, 
and procured a situation, where he proposes to go to work and 
earn an honest living. We will imagine his reply when asked for 
evidence that he is pardoned. 'Why, sir, you see I have turned 
over a new leaf. I have put on new clothes, I have formed honest 
associations, and purpose to be a new man.' Not a word as to his 
pardon, and no presentation of that as the ground of his liberty. 
The inexorable officer would at once reply: "Sir, your turning 
over a new leaf is all very well, but that cannot deliver you from 
the sentence of the law. If you have no pardon from the 
governor to show, you are my prisoner.' You see the folly of this 
third man's talking about his new leaf, as you saw the folly of 
the first man's talking about his bad feelings, and the second 
about his good feelings, instead of simply showing their pardon 
and relying only upon it. 

"Now for the application: I have read to you the testimony of 
God's word (Gal. 3:10; Rom. 3:19; John 3:18, and other 
passages), that having broken God's law you are condemned by 
the law, and under the penalty of sin. You admit this testimony 
as true, and confess yourself a sinner before God, and are 
anxious to be saved. I have read to you the testimony of God's 
word (John 3:14-17; Isa. 53; Acts 10:36-43) as to the coming of 
the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven to be the Saviour of lost 
sinners by dying on the cross for their sins (1 Pet. 2:24), and 
ascending in newness of life to the presence of God as their 
justification (Rom. 4:25). You say you believe this testimony. I 
now point you to the pardon from God to you, on the ground of 
Christ's death, as summed up in Gal. 3:13: 'Christ hath redeemed 
us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.' Now, 
please read that over; read it again, and again. Do you believe 
that message?" 

"Yes, sir; I do." 

"Very well; are you redeemed?" 

"No. I don't feel-" 

"Hold up-what did you say about that pardoned man who talked 
about his feelings, instead of showing his pardon?" 

"O, I see, I see; it's all in the document, of course. How stupid I 
have been! Christ hath redeemed me; I have never believed the 
word." And a happy smile broke over the inquirer as he looked 
at the word. 



"Well, are you redeemed?" 

"Yes, I am." 

"How do you know you are? Supposing the detective meets 
you? Supposing the memory of past sins comes up?" 

"I know it by believing the word. I accept Christ as my Saviour. 
I have His word that He has redeemed me. I pull out the 
document." 

"That is right, my friend. God has given you light. Make much 
of the document. Rest only upon that as the ground of assurance. 
Now, one word as to the life you are to live as a saved, a 
redeemed man. Redeemed means bought—what did Christ pay 
for you?" 

"His own life." 

"Peter says we are redeemed (bought) not with silver or gold as 
corruptible things, but with the precious blood of Christ. Well, if 
Jesus bought you, whom do you belong to?" 

"To Jesus." 

"Are you willing to have it so, to be His property, to have Him 
to put His name upon you, and you own yourself as His disciple, 
and to live henceforth to please Him, as your Lord and Master?" 

"lam." 

"Well, let us tell him so." 

And we knelt in prayer and the Saviour rejoiced over another 
blood-bought soul, saved by grace. 

D. W. WHITTLE, 

In Messiah's Herald. 

Brother Whittle's illustration is good: We would that all might 
realize that their justification is based not on their feelings, nor 
on good resolutions, but upon the ransom, purchased by the 
precious blood of Christ. 

R247 : page 6 

Death is the great prison-house. Sin is its bolts and bars. Our 
ransom -pardon— opens those bolts and bars, thus setting us at 
liberty to go forth, and the loving voice of Him who redeemed 
us calls us to come forth and become his Bride. Oh! what love! 
Some of (us) the prisoners "have an ear to hear," and have 
accepted gladly the call to become joint-heirs with him in the 
coming kingdom. Others are so degraded by prison life that they 
are "blind and cannot see afar off." Sin hath blinded their eyes, 
and some are so deaf that they have no "ear to hear" the message 
of liberty and ransom. 

But what-how many of those prisoners were ransomed- 
pardoned? Is it only those who now have the hearing ear and 



unclouded vision? If so, Jesus' death will affect but very few. 
But no, the ransom was given for all the prisoners, every child 
of Adam -for those more degraded as well as for those yet 
possessed of sensibilities; 

For all my Lord was crucified; 
For all the world my Savior died. 

We thank God that he is showing us a little of his boundless 
love, and the value of Jesus' death, as being great enough to 
ransom all from the great prison-house of death. He came to 
"bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives 
and opening of prison doors to them that are bound." This was 
the substance of Jesus' preaching, and it is proper, as the theme 
of all the church, which is his body, during this Gospel Age (or 
"acceptable year"). 

But the Millennial reign will not be a proclamation, but a 
performance of the things now proclaimed. The great prison- 
house~death~is to be destroyed, and the blind and deaf shall all 
be brought to know of their redemption through his blood-that 
Jesus Christ (by the grace of God) tasted death for every man-to 
be testified in due time. " 

For the sharing with our Lord as his Bride, in this great work of 
blessing and liberating those who were our fellow prisoners, we 
are called. When this "church," "little flock," "Bride," is 
perfected, at the resurrection (of which they will constitute the 
"first" or chief) "then shall be brought to pass the saying which 
is written" by the Prophet Isaiah 25:6-8. He will destroy the 
covering of death spread over all people and the vail of 
ignorance spread over all nations. He will swallow up death 
victoriously. Then the prisoners will all come forth out of the pit 
(tomb)- "Then the blind eyes shall be opened and the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped." (Isa. 35:5.) -[EDITOR.] 



R247 : page 6 

THE first honors of the graduating class of Yale were taken by 
a Jew. 

Commenting on this fact a New York paper says that in the 
public schools of that city the best pupils are very apt to be 
Jews. They take the lead both in scholarship and deportment so 
often that the principals expect to see Jews at the head of the 
classes. When prizes were given not long ago to the pupils of the 
grammar schools who had made the most creditable record 
during a specified time, the majority of them were carried off by 
boys of Hebrew parentage. 

This is significant; this is the race to be elevated to chief 
position among nations during the millennial age. 



R247 : page 7 



WHAT WE EXPECT. 



The hope of our change from the human, earthly nature, to a 
spiritual, heavenly nature, is of course the grand climax of our 
hopes. As begotten ones, we long for birth into the full and 
express image of our Father's person, into the glory of Christ's 
glorious body. This being the case, it is not to be wondered at 
that this most coveted thing is ever supposed to be the thing 
expected, when any date is referred to as being the fulfillment of 
a prophetic period. 

We continually meet with this difficulty in referring to the 
present year, 1881. Since all know that we expect the Saints to 
be changed from human to spiritual being, and since we 
frequently refer to October of the present year as the terminus of 
a prophetic parallel, some readers have supposed that we expect 
the change at that time. This is not the case; we look to October 
of this year, as the limit of favor~the end of "the acceptable year 
(time or age) of the Lord" -the closing of the "strait gate" to the 
"narrow way" of opportunity to become a member of the Bride 
of Christ and partaker of his Divine Nature. 

The Gospel age has been a period of selecting from the world 
those that have made a covenant with the Lord by sacrifice (Psa. 
50:5, and Mai. 3:17.) They shall be his Bride. It has been a 
period of "sealing" of the saints-a marking of them off as 
separate; and our understanding of the matter is, that this 
choosing and sealing will cease in October and whoever would 
be of the "Bride, the Lamb's wife" must consecrate and sacrifice 
before that time, or it will be too late. Now some one will 
doubtless suppose from this expression, "too late," that we 
expect that the Bride will be withdrawn from the earth, and 
therefore it will be~"too late." Not so, however; we expect that 
while they will all be counted sealed and selected they may not 
be changed for some time after: We do not pretend to know how 
long, but believe that there is a work of instructing the "great 
company," to be done before their translation-change. 

Do you then believe that all those who are not thus consecrated 
and sealed before October are lost?— is asked by some one not 
familiar with our views. We do not believe that they will be 
"lost" in the sense generally understood by that word, viz.: to be 
put into everlasting torments: But we do believe that all such 
will have lost the great "prize of our high calling"— lost forever 
the opportunity of becoming members of the Bride of Christ- 
joint heirs with Him and partakers of the Divine nature. They 
still will have the old or human nature and it, Jesus has 
redeemed, and promises that it (when the Bride is complete-in 
the Millennial age) shall be restored to its original (human) 
perfection. 



If then, we do not expect that the completion of the Bride will be 
indicated by their change, what do we expect as a sign then? We 
expect no sign visible to our physical eye; it has been with the 
eyes of our understandings enlighted by God's word that we 
have seen all that we do see, of what is now taking place- viz.: 
"The Harvest" and the presence of our Lord. And it is by that 
same eye of faith that we expect to see "the acceptable year 
(age) of the Lord" close, and "the day of vengeance of our God" 
commence with October next. This same thought is conveyed by 
the prophet when he says (Isa. 63:4): "The day of vengeance is 
in mine heart for the year of my redeemed is come"— vengeance 
follows immediately upon the completion of the "little flock." 

This transition period following the Gospel age and preceding 
the Millennial age is often mentioned as "a time of trouble," or 
"day of vengeance" designed to punish evil doers and to prepare 
the world for the blessed reign of righteousness under "The 
Prince of Peace." See the following texts: Prov. 6:34, Isa. 35:4; 
and 34:1 to 8, Rom. 12:19, Heb. 10:30 and 2 Thes. 1:8, some of 
which are symbolical. 

This "day of vengeance" began chronologically in 1874, but the 
first seven years of it seem marked off upon the nominal church 
here, as a time both of trial and favor, just as the parallel period 
of seven years, was to fleshly Israel. Seven years there, (the 
seventieth week of Daniel 9:27) of favor-trial and separation of 
"Israelites indeed in whom was no guile" from nominal Israel. 
Seven years here, (the exact parallel) of favor -trial and 
separation of the Christians indeed (entirely consecrated) from 
the nominal church of professors. 

Now if this be the correct understanding of the Word, we may 
expect vengeance to commence in October. As we have already 
shown, this vengeance begins with the nominal church and will 
cause pain, anguish, "vexation" and symbolic "gnashing of 
teeth" among those who are taught and governed by church 
creeds instead of by the word of God-among those who 
recognize Synods, Councils, Conferences, Presbyteries, etc., as 
the heads, "standards" and "authorities" from which emanate the 
laws by which they are governed, instead of recognizing Christ 
as the only head and authority— as Paul puts it: "Holding the 
head (Jesus) from which all the body... having nourishment, 
increaseth with the increase of God" -in grace and knowledge: 
(Col. 2:19.) Whose law -the Word-should be the ONLY "law" 
or "standard" for those who are truly his members. 

Terrible indeed will it be to those, to find their organizations 
crumbling and their laws and creeds torn to shreds and their 
"standards" and "authorities" (their heads) losing power, being 
cast off and disregarded. ["Woe unto them that give suck (teach) 
in those days."] It will be because the true Head, Authority and 
Standard of the church— Christ, shall have taken to himself his 
great power, and begins his reign (Rev. 11:17) that these false 



heads, "standards" and "authorities "--will be overthrown -for 
"His lightenings (shall) enlighten the earth." Light and 
knowledge will so increase that all forms of error and evil will 
be finally dispelled by "the bright shining of the present one. " (2 
Thes. 2:8.) 

Let none hereafter think, that we are expecting translation this 
year; and to those who did so think, we suggest a second careful 
reading of the article in the May number headed 

R248 : page 7 

"The Year 1881." Let us add, that while the "vengeance" or 
"trouble" will be no longer hindered after October, yet, it does 
not follow, that great results need be looked for in a day. It will 
require months and years for its full accomplishment. 

It has been asked what do you mean by saying "come out of 
her"— do you really mean for people to sever their connection 
with the church of Christ? By what authority do you denounce 
the church of Christ-or lay anything to the charge of God's 
elect—in which we know of many undoubtedly the Lord's 
Jewels? 

Ah yes, there is your mistake. We never advised any one to 
sever their connection with the church of Christ ("whose names 
are written in heaven.") No, far, far from that. We never 
denounced that church whose creed is the Word of God, whose 
organization is that of the Spirit; and whose union is in the 
"bonds of love;" and when we quote the denunciations of the 
Word, we do not offend "God's elect"-the Saints-because, 
"Great peace have they that love thy law and nothing shall 
offend them. " Nor have we ever claimed that the nominal 
church is devoid of those whom the Lord calls his "jewels": on 
the contrary it is because there are such in the nominal church, 
that the Spirit through the Word calls to that very class and to 
them only- "Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins and receive not of her plagues." And those who do 
not free themselves and come out from bondage to creeds and 
isms we shall be forced to conclude are so bound by "the fear of 
man that bringeth a snare," that they have obeyed men, rather 
than God, and consequently are not "overcomers." 

Look about you in the nominal churches, you who think that 
they are the church owned by the Lord as the chaste virgin soon 
to be made his bride; apply the scriptural conditions of 
discipleship to them and to yourselves and let them judge 
themselves whether they come near the standard: Jesus said "If 
any man will be my disciple let him deny himself and take up 
his cross and follow me." Now do you think there are many in 
the nominal church who are thus entirely consecrated- time, 
money talents, reputation, all? All of the members of the real 
church are thus consecrated, but few of the nominal. Have you 
any reason for supposing that one in ten of those who are 



professors, are performers of this their covenant? Yet, those who 
are thus following in the footsteps of Jesus, are the only ones 
who are overcoming the world and who will be his joint-heirs. 
Of the others, some are being overcome by the world and others 
never were consecrated, consequently always were of the world. 

In conclusion, let us add: If you realize that we are now in the 
"harvest," you can readily see that the work in order is to 
separate and divide. The work of the Reaper King, now present, 
is to gather his jewels, and he calls his sheep by name, and they 
know his voice and they follow him. 

When we come to see the matter from the right standpoint, we 
realize that nothing is really injuring and crippling the 
usefulness and influence of the truly consecrated "little flock" so 
much as the great worldly-minded institutions claiming the 
honor of being the followers of the meek and lowly Saviour— 
who indeed draw nigh to God with their lips, but whose hearts 
are far from him. By attending to making clean the outside they 
divert their own attention from the real inward condition, and so 
exalt the commandments and creeds of men as to inspire their 
members with a fear of future torment if they should think for 
themselves. It is from these institutions which have gained so 
strong a hold upon society as to be able to threaten with 
ostracism any who venture to gainsay their mandates, which 
"make void the law of God (His word) through (their) traditions, 
that God's word calls, "Come out of her" into a place of freedom 
from man and man worship and creed worship, to a place where 
you can worship God and be taught of God; come out where you 
can grow in grace. 

Many will and have said-are there not many "good people" still 
in the church?— and because of them we cannot condemn it— 
neither will we leave it. Ah but Jesus condemns it and says— "I 
will spew thee out of my mouth."— (Rev. 3:16.) The call comes 
to all these "good people" and will test their goodness. If not 
obedient, they are not reckoned good in God's sight, but as 
partakers of Babylon's sins, and they shall be sharers in her 
plagues. Let not these be stumbling blocks in the way of your 
obedience; consider God's call to you as imperative as though 
you were the only jewel to be saved. 

The call now is, come— from "the housetop," "the bed" and "the 
mill": The message is, "gather my saints (holy ones) together, 
(out from among the tares,) unto me; those who have made a 
covenant with me by sacrifice. "-(Psa. 50:5.) Those who 
sacrifice all in willing obedience are his "jewels." 



R248 : page 7 



THE NEW VERSION. 

The revised version of the New Testament recently published to 
the world by the translators, has excited very general attention 
and criticism among all interested in God's word, as it should, 
being so important. 

Doubtless by this time most of you have examined it and are 
able to judge of its points of merit and demerit for yourselves. 

While it could have been improved upon by more radical 
changes, yet it could have been far worse: and it certainly is in 
many respects much superior to the old version. 

We might offer commendation of their course in omitting 
certain interpolations -passages not found in ancient 
manuscripts, etc., but this is needless for of course it was their 
duty to eradicate all words of men. We regret to notice that all of 
these interpolations have not been excluded -perhaps the most 
important of these stumbling blocks being the first clause of 
Rev. 20:5-"The rest of the dead lived not again until the 
thousand years were finished" -already referred to in these 
columns. 

We notice that the words— Christ and Baptize are left 
untranslated as in the old version; these are Greek words 
transferred into our language and it would have been a help to 
the general reader had the English of them been given, viz.: 
anointed and immersed. The Greek word hades left untranslated 
in the new version, is certainly better than to have it as in the old 
version rendered hell, which to the general reader conveyed 
anything but the correct meaning- though all scholars well 
understood it to mean death or the condition of death. 

We have heretofore called your attention to the fact that the 
Greek words, kosmos, oikoumenee, and aion, are in the old 
version all translated by the English word, world, which does 
great violence to their meaning and grossly misleads the reader. 
We are very much surprised to find that the new translation 
leaves them just the same: we are at a loss to see how men of so 
much learning could do so by mistake, for doubtless each of 
them would if asked, particularly answer that kosmos signifies 
the world of mankind, or present order of things -that 
oikoumenee signifies the habitable 

R248 : page 8 

earth or land; while aion means an age or period of time. It is 
because of the mistranslation of this last word that so many have 
been led to expect "the end of the world" at the second advent of 
Jesus, instead of the end of the gospel age, and hence they are 
expecting "a wreck of matter and a crush of worlds" instead of 
the ending of one age and gradual beginning of another which is 
now in progress. Can it be that the learned translators feared that 
articles of human creeds would have been exposed as false and 



erroneous by a proper rendering? Only error requires covering — 
truth courts the light and always shines the brighter for it. 

The Greek word psukee signifying existence or being is in Matt. 
16:26 rendered life- "What shall a man be profited if he shall 
gain the whole world and forfeit his life—or what shall a man 
give in exchange for his life?" This is certainly a great 
improvement over the much misunderstood word soul. Had 
psukee in every case, as here, been translated life or better- 
being, it would have helped people in the understanding of 
God's word, but, at the same time it would have dissolved some 
of the mysteries with which the traditions of men— the church 
creeds— have surrounded the nature and destiny of man-and that 
might destroy confidence in those creeds-hence psukee is 
generally translated by the mysterious word soul as before, the 
above exception and a few others being made because it would 
here have been very absurd to translate it soul and would have 
conflicted with the very idea the creeds and traditions seek to 
uphold- viz.: that soul is a thing in a man yet separate from him. 
From the orthodox (?) standpoint how absurd it would sound to 
say "Whosoever would save his soul shall lose it."— (Luke 9:24,) 
or to translate the word psukee, soul in Matt. 10:39, or Mark 
8:35, and Luke 17:33. Yet in these the same word occurs which 
elsewhere is translated by the mysterious word soul. 

Another word left by the new version as it was in the old is 

R249 : page 8 

GODHEAD, 

of which H. V. Reed in the Restitution pointedly says: 

"The reader has been led to infer that this was among the most 
approved and clearly stated ideas of the original scriptures. 
Nothing can be more unfair. The word godhead is not good 
English: it means nothing in itself and conveys no idea to the 
reader. What is a godhead? The idea in the original is simple and 
beautiful. We will note the three texts wherein it occurs. Acts 
17: 'Being, therefore, already offspring of God, we ought not to 
be supposing that which is Divine to be like unto gold, or silver, 
or stone, etc. (Rotherham.) Rom. 1:20; 'For his unseen things 
from a world's creation are to be clearly seen by the things made 
being perceived, both his eternal power and divinity.' 
(Rotherham.) Col. 2:9: 'For in him (Christ) dwelleth all the 
completeness of the Divine nature in a body.' The word godhead 
like the word trinity, carries with it the idea of a society, which 
is not the idea of the original. Had the word been left out of the 
revised Testament it would have removed another impression 
from the 'three-in-one-God' theory. Modern criticism has forced 
certain interpretations from the sacred texts, and it will be a long 
time before doctrinal harmony and Biblical exegesis will 
expurge from the creed of man the theories of endless misery, 



the destruction of our globe, and the heathen dogma of the God 
society, or trinity. No effect on the part of authorized versions 
will succeed in bolstering up theories which are contrary alike to 
sound reason and the Scriptures of truth." 

Taken as a whole, however, the new version is as good as we 
could expect: it is better in fact than we did expect, for well we 
all know that a man's creed or belief as to the general teachings 
of the word, must have an effect and bearing upon his 
translation of any particular passage which in his judgment 
would cause it to conflict with the general teachings. Then too, it 
is almost impossible to translate word for word from the Greek 
to the English language and if this were accomplished as is 
attempted with considerable success in the translations known as 
"Rotherham's, Young's and The Diaglott it produces a reading 
so peculiar and rough that it would not meet with acceptance by 
the general readers and any attempt to give a smooth English 
reading gives opportunity and license for the use of the 
translator's personal views on the passages translated. 

We say then: Thank God for the "New Version;" it is a step 
nearer pure light and perfect truth at least; it will serve too to 
draw the attention of all to the basis of all faith-God's Word- 
and away from church creeds -the traditions of men-the sandy 
foundation upon which the faith of most of the nominal church 
is at present resting. 

But as every progress in knowledge is a step toward freedom 
and a blow to bondage so is this comparatively good work, to 
prove a powerful element in the storm which already begins to 
sweep over the nominal church of all denominations, and which 
eventually will sweep away all refuges of lies (Isa. 28:17)~all 
the falsities and errors of those who exalt themselves, their 
words and their churches which they have organized and rule: 
instead of exalting the Lord and His words and His church 
(whose names are written in heaven) which He organized at 
Pentecost and the rule of which He has not given to another. 



R249 : page 8 



CHART SUPPLEMENT. 



We present to each of our readers with this issue, a "Chart of 
the Ages," (unfortunately printed June, instead of July 
supplement) with the suggestion that you hang it in some 
convenient place where it will be often in your sight; that its 
diagram of the narrow way to life, may be a constant and helpful 
reminder to you of the way our Leader trod; that thereby you 
may be enabled to make your calling and election sure. 

We hope too, that you will so place it, that it will be an object of 
interest to all who may visit you, and that you will so familiarize 



yourself with it as to be able to explain its teachings to them; 
thus each reader will be a preacher of the "narrow way to life" - 
to Glory, Honor and Immortality, so soon to close; and also of 
the plan of God for the world's salvation, which is only just 
beginning. May God make you able ministers of his word. 

The Chart should have your careful attention and study for at 
least one month: for this reason, and to allow needed time for 
other parts of the service, this paper and chart supplement will 
constitute the July and August issue. Therefore you may expect 
nothing more until September. 

Subscribers living in this city (Pittsburgh) will please call for 
their charts at the office, and thus save postage. 

Failure to receive your chart (or at any time, your paper) should 
be reported at once. 



R249 : page 8 

CONCERNING TRACTS. 

We have a few thousand tracts of Nos. 3, 4 and 5 which may be 
had for gratuitous distribution, by any who may write for them. 
No. 7 is not yet published. Other Nos. are exhausted. 

We have a number of inquiries relative to tract No. 6, (written 
by Bro. A. D. Jones) asking whether the editor's views are in 
harmony with those expressed in that tract. To which we answer 
that it is quite possible for different persons to have somewhat 
different ideas regarding the manner of the unfolding future, 
though they be entirely agreed with reference to the work of the 
past, present and future. We are for instance, not much in 
sympathy with the idea that the "Perihelion of the planets" is to 
bring "a carnival of death," and for this reason have refrained 
from mentioning the harrowing details furnished by astrologists 
as the probable result. It may be that such a dreadful scourging 
is to come upon the world so soon, but from our understanding 
of prophecy we expect that the carnival of moral pestilence, 
spiritual famine, and death will come first, upon the nominal 
church~the sort of "pestilence" and "arrows" referred to in Psa. 
91 from which nothing will shield but the "truth." (vs. 4.) 

But while we do not expect such literal plagues, we do not 
venture to gainsay the astrologers and their predictions; it is 
possible that both astrology and scripture may be correct 
concerning the coming events, but our confidence and sole 
reliance is on the latter. To compare notes we suggest that 
Scripture indicates that the nominal church is to be given over to 
tribulation and be shown no favor from October of this year; and 
every thing seems ripe for just such a thing: On the other hand 
the astrologers began as far back as 1871 to predict what would 



occur in 1880 and 1881. But though the largest planet Jupiter 
has already reached the point of perihelion (more than nine 
months ago) and though Jupiter and Saturn were in conjunction 
six months ago, yet there is nothing except unusual rain storms 
thus far to justify the awful pictures drawn. 



R298 : page 8 

PRACTICAL PREACHING. 

It is objected that practical preaching is the right kind of 
preaching, and that prophecy is not practical. Is this true? It is 
not true. The preaching of the Ten Commandments, the social 
virtues, and the neighborly and moral duties may be called 
practical preaching by some, but it is not so in the Christian 
sense of the word. The most successful preaching is the 
preaching of the cross in which Paul gloried, and the crown for 
which he waited. The two advents are the poles around which 
the orb of duty rolls—the strong foundation on which the 
morality of the new man reposes. Faith lays hold of the cross, 
the fountain of divine mercy, and out of love to Him that first 
loved us, brings forth in the heart and life of the believer the 
fruits of righteousness. Hope looks forward to the crown, and 
the kingdom, and the promised inheritance, to nerve us for the 
trials and duties of life, and make us victorious over all our 
spiritual enemies. This is practical religion. Doctrine is the root 
and basis and motive of practice; and in the whole range of 
theology there is not a more practical doctrine than the second 
advent -no, not one. I challenge you to show me a duty of 
which it is not in one way or another made the motive. 

Read, and consider the following texts of Scripture. It is the 
motive for patient waiting, 1 Thess. 1:10; for divine hope, Titus 
2:13; for moderation in all things, Phil. 4:5; for prayer to be 
counted worthy to stand before the Son of man, Luke 21:36; for 
long-suffering patience, James 5:8; for heavenly-mindedness, 
Luke 21:34; for perseverance in spite of persecution, 1 Pet. 1:7; 
of godliness and holy conversation, 2 Pet. 3:1 1,12; it is the 
motive for earnest preaching, 2 Tim. 4:1-3; for fighting the good 
fight of faith, 2 Tim. 4:7,8; for reverence and godly fear, Heb. 
12:26-28; for sobriety and watching unto prayer, 1 Pet. 4:7. This 
is practical preaching; but if you preach these duties without the 
Advent, which is their chief motive and strength, you are asking 
the people for bricks without giving them the straw-the steam is 
taken from the engine and the train stops. -Messiah's Herald. 

If the belief of the coming of the Lord has so much power to 
mould and influence the child of God, what indescribable power 
and influence should and does the belief that he has come-is 
now present a spiritual being-the "harvest" now progressing 
under his supervision as the chief reaper, and the gathering of 



the ripe wheat now being in progress and soon to be finished 
and the righteous then made to shine forth as the Sun in the 
kingdom of their Father- what effect as a separator and 
sanctifying power, should this truth have we enquire? What 
preaching can be so powerful? 



R249 : page 8 

CORRESPONDENTS' QUESTIONS. 

Ques. BROTHER RUSSELL- Will it be the work of the 
Millennial age to restore mankind to perfect human being or will 
they be raised from the tomb perfect men— justified to perfect 
life by Jesus' ransom? 

Ans. It will be the work of the entire age to bring mankind to 
perfection of human being: It is called "the times (years or age) 
of restitution" -though all may not reach perfection at the same 
time, yet all who do not then sin against light-the sin unto death 
(second death), will be perfected during that age. 

They are justified in the sight of God (the Father) by the death of 
Jesus for their sins, therefore, the Father's law no longer 
condemns them to the tomb and Jesus by purchase has the 
control of them and during the Millennial age will "restore all 
things;" and when all are brought into harmony and perfection- 
at the end of that age— the Son also delivers up the kingdom to 
God even the Father -(1 Cor. 15:28.) 

Q. When will they who know their Master's will and do it not be 
beaten with many stripes? 

A. The beating referred to (Luke 12:47,48) has reference not to 
the world but to Jesus' disciples (servants) who will be living in 
the end or "harvest" of this age. The "little flock" will be 
"accounted worthy to escape all" while the greater part of Jesus' 
servants because not in harmony with his plan, etc., will go 
through the great time of trouble which closes this age and 
introduces the Millennial age-some of these will pass through a 
severer ordeal than others, (many or fewer stripes) as they had 
neglected knowing and doing the Master's will. But the principle 
will apply during the next age also. 


