Are You Having Them All?
1 What? Public talks. Are you having them all in your congregation? The Society has made available very interesting material in the form of outlines, and the talks will cover a period of two years or more if one is used every week.
2 When the outlines were provided, servants made arrangements so that there would be speakers prepared and available in every circuit who could give every one of the public talks in a series. However, it has developed in some areas that some of the speakers have moved away and we hear that there are some talks not now assigned in certain circuits. So the question that servants should ask themselves in sponsoring this educational program is whether there is someone in the circuit who is in a position to give each one of the talks. Also, what is being done to present each one of the talks in your congregation for the benefit of the “sheep” in your territory? It will definitely be to the advantage of the entire congregation, and especially those many new ones now associating with the organization if, after two years or so, the same talks are repeated. It will be possible for the speakers, in the period of two years, to modify their talks and bring them up to date as far as current events and developments are concerned. Thus, if anyone has heard a talk in the past, there will be new features about it so it will always be interesting to the listeners.
3 The speakers have a great responsibility. They should be careful in preparation and make every effort to practice so there will be truly good delivery. Consider who will be present in a meeting. It is important to use language all can grasp and to apply portions of the talk to certain sections of the audience as the outline suggests. The speaker should keep the theme clearly defined in his mind and thoroughly understand the main points in their relation to the theme. Aids such as maps, pictures, slides or other means can add weight to the material and they may be used, but these must fit what is required, driving home the point clearly and not overshadowing the talk itself or being used simply for entertainment.
4 Make plans now for the 1971 program of activities. You may schedule talks on the Truth and Word of God books too if you wish, and handbills may be ordered for these as well as the other talks.
5 We have observed that in quite a few instances handbill orders are received late. Every effort is being made in the printing department to put the handbill orders through within a day or two after they are received. However, mail service is deteriorating, making shipments slow so we would like you to allow six weeks for filling handbill orders.
6 Make a special effort in the new year to invite all those who are having home Bible studies and interested persons met on back-calls to attend the public meetings.

