Presenting the Good News​—Starting Bible Studies with Subscribers
1 We are thrilled to see that so many are subscribers for The Watchtower, because we know what helpful spiritual information subscribers will regularly receive. If at all possible, we want to help subscribers even more, and this we can do by starting Bible studies whenever possible.
2 The Watchtower subscription offer provides a fine opening for starting a Bible study on the initial call. By including as one of the three free booklets “This Good News of the Kingdom,” the following easy-to-use presentation has been used to start Bible studies.
3 On the initial call, after presenting the Watchtower magazine and making appropriate comments, one might say, ‘You’ll note here on the cover it says, “Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom.” Some have asked us, Who is Jehovah? Are you acquainted with the name Jehovah? [Let them answer or comment. Whether they say yes or no, you can tactfully go on.] At Psalm 83:18 note what the Bible tells us about Jehovah. [Let them read the scripture, and thereafter you make appropriate comments.] In this booklet “This Good News of the Kingdom,” page 5, there is additional information about “The True God,” Jehovah, that will be of interest to you. If you have about ten minutes we can look up these interesting scriptures [point to them in the booklet], which deal with the true God, Jehovah.’
4 Arrange for a return visit to discuss other interesting points in the “Good News” booklet, whetting the householder’s spiritual appetite. Use subjects such as “Jesus Christ,” “Sin, Death, and the Devil,” etc. At an appropriate time the study can be transferred to the Truth book.
5 The approach outlined in paragraph 3 can be used when making a return call on subscribers, when calling to obtain subscription renewals and on many other occasions. To be effective in using this suggestion, it is necessary to have the points well in mind. Practice sessions for starting Bible studies are very helpful. When waiting for others at rendezvous for field service, as a family, with a pioneer partner and on other informal occasions, one publisher could take the position of a typical householder in the territory and the other could use this or other approaches for starting a Bible study. It is thrilling to share in the Bible study work, as this is the foremost means of helping ones of honest heart to learn the truth.

