Thrilling Times
1 “Thrilling, absolutely thrilling!” Is this not a comment frequently heard about the grand increases in Jehovah’s work? The 1971 Yearbook report is thrilling, as are Theocratic News items in Kingdom Ministry concerning additional increases. As Jehovah’s Christian witnesses we keenly feel the spirit of urgency that is surging throughout the ranks of his people in this most momentous, thrilling time of man’s history.​—2 Tim. 4:2.
2 In most congregation territories more and more people express concern over the critical and terrifying problems plaguing this generation and man’s failure to solve them. As a result, thousands of persons who would not take time to listen to us in the past, nor to read the Bible literature we offered, are now both listening and reading, and large numbers of them are also attending our meetings. It is thrilling, isn’t it?
3 During February all of us want to continue to have a share in the thrilling work of helping others to learn of Jehovah and his provisions for salvation, in the Kingdom way. Just as The Watchtower has spiritually enlightened and strengthened us, we know its information will help others, and hence we are delighted to utilize every opportunity to offer a subscription for The Watchtower, with three booklets, for $1, or subscriptions for both The Watchtower and Awake!, with six booklets, for $2. Often double subscriptions are as readily obtained as single subscriptions. Writes a brother: “Recently I tried offering the two subscriptions. I reasoned that I could do it just about as briefly as one.” What resulted? That morning he obtained two double subscriptions, a total of four subscriptions for the morning.
4 A vacation pioneer sister working in Michigan was thrilled to obtain nine subscriptions in one month from not-at-homes. What did she do? She left a Bible study folder where no one was at home in the morning and called back in the afternoon or evening. A good idea!
5 If you cannot be out in regular field service because of inclement weather, sickness, etc., or possibly have only a few minutes on occasion for witnessing, you might like to try the following suggestion: A sister selected names of householders from the phone directory, called and gave a brief witness, and then made the subscription offer. She was thrilled with the results. Eight subscriptions in one day! The next day she obtained two more subscriptions, as well as listing several prospects, by doing the same thing.
6 “I had never before been contacted by one of Jehovah’s witnesses and had never seen a Watchtower or Awake! magazine,” was part of the experience related by a newly baptized brother at a circuit assembly in New Jersey. How was he initially contacted? “A sister entered my place of business, . . . offered me the Watchtower and Awake! magazines.” He accepted the magazines; at the sister’s request a brother made a back-call, a study was started and six months later the businessman was baptized. Now he is thrilled to share the truth with others. In fact, he writes, “I am now selling my home and plan to move . . . ” to where the need is greater. Yes, this helps us to appreciate the importance of store-to-store work and of following up all placements to start Bible studies.
7 When sending in subscriptions for the congregation, an overseer in Michigan was thrilled to write: “A brother decided to make calls upon all persons who had promised to obtain the subscription or who had shown any interest. To his good pleasure he was able to obtain twelve new subscriptions.” Are you keeping record of all “subscription promises” and calling back?
8 Have you experienced the thrill of obtaining a subscription by following through promptly on expired-subscription slips? Publishers and pioneers with a Virginia congregation were thrilled to aid 80 percent to start their subscriptions again.
9 Yes, many are the ways new subscriptions are obtained. In addition to the above, let’s keep in mind gift subscriptions, current and former Bible students, magazine route calls, relatives, friends and incidental witnessing. Too, throughout the Watchtower campaign it would be well to carry one of the pocket-size publications, such as the Truth book, so if people do not take the subscription, the book can be offered for 25 cents.
10 Without a doubt, we are privileged to be living in the most thrilling and momentous of all times! What joy we have in knowing the truth and having a part in making known to others that it is only Jehovah’s kingdom through his Son Jesus Christ that will remedy the unsurmountable obstacles facing the world of mankind.​—1 Chron. 29:11-13.
[Blurb on page 1]
Loyally advocate God’s Word.
[Blurb on page 8]
Plan now to vacation pioneer.

