Announcements
◆ Literature offer for October: Awake! subscription, with three booklets, for $1. For November: Truth book, for 25c; or any other book that you choose. For December: New World Translation, with the Truth book, for $1.25.
◆ The public talk to be given by circuit servants starting in January will be “Decisions You Face​—How Will You Make Them?”
◆ The Watch Tower Publications Index this year will include material printed from 1966 through 1970. Since it is a larger index, it takes longer to compile. Please do not order the Index or Watchtower and Awake! bound volumes until announcement is made in Kingdom Ministry.
◆ Publishers and pioneers will please order all Yearbooks and calendars through the congregation with which they are associated. Congregations may send their order for calendars on October 15. It will help the Society if you make your order complete so that only one order for calendars is sent by each congregation. The calendar will be available in Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish and Swedish. Orders for the English edition of the 1971 Yearbook may be placed starting November 15. The Yearbook will also be available in French, German and Spanish by about December 1. Yearbooks are 50c each and calendars are 25c each. Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1970, may receive a free Yearbook by making request of the literature servant. This will be included in the congregation’s order and, later, credit may be requested from the Society for the pioneer’s copy. Pioneers may obtain additional Yearbooks at 15c each, and all calendars at 25c each.
◆ New publications available:
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (revised)​—English
When All Nations Unite Under God’s Kingdom​—Ukrainian
Sermon Outlines​—Cinyanja
◆ Again available in U.S.A.:
“Peace Among Men of Good Will” or Armageddon​—Which?​—Greek
◆ Out of stock in U.S.A.:
“All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial”​—Spanish
Rescuing a Great Crowd of Mankind Out of Armageddon​—Spanish

