R399 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 
PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER AND NOVEMBER, 1882. 

NO. 4. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars 
by mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money 
Order or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be sixty-five cents a year. Please send us no foreign money 
or postage stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



R399 : page 1 

SUNDAY SCHOOL SUPERINTENDENTS. 

Inasmuch as this number of ZION'S WATCH TOWER will go 
to each of the ninety thousand Sunday School Superintendents 
of all denominations in the United States, it is proper for us to 
introduce our paper to them specially. 

The special mission of ZION'S WATCH TOWER is to clearly 
and forcibly elucidate and present truth on all religious topics, 
without fear or favor of any except our heavenly Master. It is 
strictly unsectarian and follows no formulated creed. Its method- 
-comparing Scripture with Scripture, we believe to be the 
correct one for the elucidation of truth. Thus getting God's own 
explanation of His will and plan, we realize that 

God is his own interpreter, 
And He will make it plain. 

While desirous of the esteem and fellowship of every child of 
God and loath to offend any, we yet stand ready to offend all, if 
a clear and forcible presentation of any Scriptural teaching shall 
have that effect. We discuss all Bible doctrines, not shunning the 
most abstruse-an uncommon thing among Christian journals. 
This feature makes our paper valuable to Sunday School 
Superintendents and Bible teachers, and advanced Bible 
scholars, in this day when infidelity is challenging nearly every 
doctrine held by the churches. Surely there never was a time 
when an open and fearless examination of every point of 
doctrine was so much more needed than practiced. An 
intelligent understanding of Scripture was never more necessary 
than now. 

We desire to assist in this great work, and with others to raise up 
the standard of truth against error in every form. We make no 
claim to defend every theory and creed of Christendom-this 
would be impossible, since many of them contradict each other— 
but we endeavor to draw direct from Scripture its uncolored and 
unbiased teaching on all questions. Believing that the true basis 
of Christian Union is a correct understanding of God's Word, 
rather than an ignoring of differences, we seek for this. 

This sample copy is sent you in order that if desired, it may be 
one of your assistants in seeking for Scriptural truths. We will 
send it on trial. 

THREE MONTHS FREE. 

to all Sunday School Superintendents, teachers and Bible 
scholars. We therefore invite you to send in your names at once. 



R399 : page 1 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The fulfillment of Scripture prophecies as marked by the 
beginning of the return of Israel to Palestine, continues 
increasingly to have the attention of thinking Christians. 

The following is extracted from a letter in an English paper by 
Mr. Charles Reade, the well-known novelist, whose remarkable 
conversion occurred last year. 

THE PROPHETIC ASPECT OF 
THE JEWISH PERSECUTION. 

"The Jewish nation, though under a cloud, will eventually 
resume their ancient territory, which is so evidently kept waiting 
for them. The prophecies are clear as day on two points: That 
the Jews are to repossess Palestine, and indeed, to rule from 
Lebanon to Euphrates; and that this event is to be the first of a 
great series of changes leading to a vast improvement in the 
condition of poor suffering mankind and of creation in general. 
Now, we have here in prospect a glorious event as sure as the 
sun will rise to-morrow. The only difference is that the sun will 
rise at a certain hour, and the Jews will occupy Syria and resume 
their national glory at an uncertain day. No doubt it is the foible 
of mankind to assume that an uncertain date must be a distant 
one. But that is unreasonable. Surely it is the duty of wise and 
sober men to watch precursory signs and lend their humble 
cooperation, should so great a privilege be accorded to us. 

"This sudden persecution of the Jews in the very nation where 
they are most numerous —may it not be a precursory sign, and a 
reminder from Providence that their abiding city is not in 
European Tartary? I almost think some such reminder was 
needed; for when I was a boy, the pious Jews still longed for the 
Holy Land. They prayed, like Daniel, with their windows open 
toward Jerusalem. 

Yet now that the broken and impoverished Saracen would cede 
them territory at one-tenth of its agricultural and commercial 
value, a cold indifference seems to have come over them. I often 
wonder at this change of sentiment about so great a matter, and 
in so short a period, comparatively speaking, and puzzle myself, 
as to the reason. 

Two solutions occur to me. 1. Dispersed in various nations, 
whose average inhabitants are inferior in intelligence and 
forethought to themselves, they thrive as individual aliens more 
than they may think so great a multitude of Jews could thrive in 
a land of their own, where blockheads would be scarce. 2. They 
have for centuries contracted their abilities to a limited number 
of peaceful arts and trades; they may distrust their power to 
diversify their abilities, and be suddenly a complete nation, with 



soldiers, sailors, merchants, husbandmen, as well as financiers 
and artists. 

But it is now proved that sojourning among inferior nations has 
more drawbacks than living at home. True, the Russian yokel 
has for years been selling to the Jews his summer labor in 
winter, and at a heavy discount; but the improvident Russians 
have turned like wild beasts upon them, and outwitted lawfully, 
have massacred them contrary to law. Palestine can be colonized 
effectually from Russia alone, where there are three millions of 
Jews trembling for life and property; and the rest would follow. 
As to the second objection, history is a looking-glass at our 
backs. Whatever Jews have done Jews may do. They are a 
people 

R400 : page 1 

of genius; and genius is not confined by nature, but by will, by 
habit or by accident. What have these people tried and failed in? 
Warriors, writers, builders, merchants, lawgivers, husbandmen; 
and supreme in all! In this history repeats itself. 

"They shall be great in the arts of peace and war, and their 
enemies melt away before them like snow off a dyke. Should 
they seem to require help from any other nation at starting, 
blessed will be the nation that proffers it; and the nation that 
persecutes them will be made an example of in some way or 
other. Therefore, if by any chance this recent outrage should 
decide the Jewish leaders to colonize Palestine from Russia, let 
us freely offer ships, seamen, money —whatever we are asked 
for. It will be a better national investment than Egyptian, 
Brazilian or Peruvian bonds." 

Thus we see that from every quarter thoughtful minds are 
beginning to note the evidences of another great dispensational 
change. It is to be a gradual change from the Gospel Age into 
the Millennial Age. The former closes with a night, the latter 
commences as a dawning day. It is the day foretold by prophets 
when the earth and groaning creation shall be blessed and 
liberated from the effects of sin-blight, and death. It is the day in 
which "the Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in his 
wings"— when the great physician shall heal and revive sin-bitten 
humanity. In him shall all the families of the earth be blessed. 

A thousand years, Earth's coming glory, 
'Tis the glad time so long foretold; 
'Tis the glad day of promise given, 
Prophets foresaw in times of old. " 

The Gospel Age ends, not because it has failed, but because it 
has accomplished its object. It's object was to call out, select and 
perfect a small fragment of Earth's people-a "little flock" of 
overcomers of the world, accounted worthy to be exalted to a 
spiritual plane of existence and to share as the Bride of the 



Lamb of God, in his glorious work of blessing mankind in 
general during the incoming age. 

Fleshly Israel was cast off from all special favor of God when 
this age began, and Paul assures us that when the work of 
selecting the spiritual church is complete, God's favor will again 
cover them as a people. (See Rom. 11:25-32.) The fact that 
favor is now beginning to come to them, is therefore an 
incidental proof of our position-that we are in the lapping time 
of the two ages. 

Encouraging reports of the progress of truth come to us from 
every quarter. Infidels and backsliders, and wholly consecrated 
saints are studying the Bible more than ever before, to see if 
these things in which we rejoice are the teachings of the Word 
of God, and are coming to say of the beauty and grandeur of 
God's plan and word, as the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon — 
The half had not been told me. No, dear friends, we do not 
pretend to have told you half of the goodness and love and 
power of our infinite Father, the God of all grace. We merely try 
to point you to the Word as the inexhaustible fountain of truth 
and knowledge, that together we might be able to some extent, 
to comprehend with all saints, the love of God which passeth 
knowledge. The more of our Father's character we see, the more 
we feel like exclaiming with Paul, "O, the depth of the riches 
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. " 

And the more we come to appreciate God, and His Word and 
plan, the more our hearts burn with a desire to make it known to 
all men; especially to those dear children of our Father, who are 
yet as we ourselves once were, blinded by ignorance of the true 
teachings of His Word, and dwarfed and fettered by the 
traditions of men, the creeds and theories of the sects. Praise 
God that the light is shining more and more, and others as well 
as we are being blessed by it. 

As we each come to see the truth, if it has its legitimate and 
intended effect upon our hearts and lives, it will be our delight to 
use all possible effort in making known the glad tidings to 
others: Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he cometh 
shall find giving meat in due season to the household. (Matt. 
24:45,46.) We should be specially interested in making it known 
to every consecrated child of God, many of whom are almost 
starved. You may have for the asking abundance of reading 
matter for free distribution. 

A very large edition of this issue has been sent out in hope of 
awakening thinking Christians from the lethargy and worldliness 
which has so largely overspread Christendom. The topics 
presented will be new to many of them, and we trust that all 
thoroughly consecrated readers will test it, and decide on its 
truthfulness, not by their prejudices, not by any sectarian creed, 
but by the Word of God, the only proper and infallible test; 



remembering, that the cause of divisions or sects is, that each 
party defends its creed, instead of laying aside tradition or 
accepting the harmonious testimony of Scripture. 

We subjoin a few of the many letters constantly coming to hand, 
that you may know of the deep interest being felt among 
thinking Christians. 



NOTTINGHAM, ENGLAND. 

MY DEAR SIR-Permit me, though a stranger, to assure you 
that I can never feel sufficiently thankful that out of the 
thousands of copies of your book, "Food for Thinking 
Christians," distributed in this town, a copy fell into my hands; 
apparently it was the merest accident; but really I regard it as a 
direct providence. It has thrown light upon subjects which have 
perplexed me for years, and has made me feel more than ever 
what a glorious book the Bible is, how worthy of our 
profoundest study. At the same time, I came from the study of 
your book with the conviction that a very large proportion of the 
theology of our churches and schools is the merest scraps of 
human notions, and that our huge systems of theology, upon the 
study of which some of us have spent so many laborious years- 
only to be the worse confused and perplexed-are infinitely more 
the work of mistaken men, than the inspiration of the allwise 
God. 

However I may differ from the book in a few minor details, I 
found the main argument to be resistless, commending itself to 
both my head and my heart. Again let me thank you on my own 
behalf for the good I have received. 

I find at the close of it you make an offer to send copies to any 
who have reason to believe they can make a good use of them. 
In my church and congregation there is a number of intelligent 
persons who are interested in the second coming, and who 
would be only too glad to read your book. I could distribute 
seventy copies with advantage. You say, "Ask and ye shall 
receive." I have faith in your generosity. Believe me to remain 

Yours most faithfully, 

page 1 

LOUISVILLE, KENTUCKY. 

GENTLEMEN-Having read with the most profound interest 
your publication entitled, "Food for Thinking Christians," and 
being fairly dazzled by the wonderful light it reveals on the great 
subject, I find myself thirsting for more knowledge from this 
seemingly inspired pen. 

Therefore in accordance with the invitation extended by you on 
the cover of this little work I ask that you send me a few copies 
of "The Tabernacle and its Teachings." 



With reference to the first-named book, permit me to say that I 
have never yet read or heard anything equal to that little volume 
in its influence upon my heart and life; and, to my mind, it 
answers most grandly and conclusively the great question, "Is 
life worth living?" Such views as it sets forth are bound to find 
response in the minds and hearts of all unbiased thinking 
Christians, for they bear the stamp of something greater than 
mere human conception. I only wish we could hear it from the 
pulpits; but I think this must shortly follow. It is good seed, and 
in its "due time" will come forth. 

Believe me, I am 

Very truly yours, 

page 2 

MIXER VILL, INDIANA. 

"ZION'S WATCH TOWER"-My dear good friends:-Your 
kind favor, "Food for Thinking Christians," reached me in due 
time. To say that it is an exceeding welcome gift but feebly 
expresses my appreciation and gratitude. I have learned what I 
never knew before, and it has brought to me such a flood of light 
that I am amazed at the grandeur of the scheme and plan of 
redemption. To allow the phrase, I have literally devoured it, 
and my soul is ravished with the indescribable excellency and 
magnitude of God's plan of salvation. Oh, how dull and blunted 
does now appear the common method of Christian instruction. 
Who can read these things and longer doubt and waver about the 
truth, beauty and inspiration of the Bible, or the manner in 
which its glorious truths should be inculcated and demonstrated. 
I trust and believe that the great Author of the Word will prosper 
and bless you abundantly. Whatever else you have of like nature 
for grateful hearts I trust you will favor your present 
correspondent with. 

Yours truly, 



AUSTINTOWN, O. 

DEAR BRO.-The publication entitled "Food for Thinking 
Christians," was duly received a few weeks ago, and I have 
carefully distributed the greater portion of them among such as 
would appreciate such teachings; and they all speak volumes of 
praise. It is indeed food for Christians-rich food. Would to God 
we could only have the whole world read and fully understand. 
May God bless the work, and may the blessed seed sown sink 
deep in each and every heart, and bear much fruit to the honor 
and glory of God. 

Yours, etc. 



R400 : page 2 



MT. CARMEL, INDIANA. 

MY DEAR BROTHER-I have long felt a desire for some 
communication in reference to those blessed matters that make 
us one in our Supreme Head. I have been made better 
acquainted with the way of life recently. The new food has 
revived my slumbering spirit and given me a keener desire for a 
knowledge of the Word of God, and better understanding of his 
ways and dealings. I have been so absorbed with these delightful 
matters that the things of this present life sink into comparative 
insignificance. I can now comprehend the Apostle's 
exclamation, "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and 
knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his righteous acts and 
his ways past tracing out." How privileged and responsible are 
those who are made watchmen upon the towers of Zion, to give 
warning, guidance and instruction to those who are seeking and 
willing to accept truth at all hazards; pointing out to us the 
dangerous reefs and rocks, and the hidden shoals and sandbars. 

O that all would search for and receive present truth, with all its 
joyful satisfaction and the comforting assurances and 
instructions constantly afforded-the near or full completion of 
the Body of Christ to spread universally the "good tidings of 
great joy;" the presence of the glorious Head of the Church, the 
grand parousia, the returning. Blessed thought, can anything be 
more exhilarating than these and other kindred blessed 
assurances, and the ineffable glory of the whole church which is 
to follow. Haste, haste, thou blessed time of glory, when the 
anointed one shall reign and all powers but his shall end.... 

Truly your brother in the Lord. 
R400 : page 2 

GOD'S "LITTLE WHILE." 

Because of the shortness of human life, we act quickly 
ourselves and expect others to act so, and we can scarcely avoid 
carrying the same thought with us when we go to the 
investigation of God's Word. 

We read- "Yet a little while, and He that shall come, will come." 
Heb. 10:37, We think, as we look back at the eighteen centuries 
which have elapsed since our Lord's first advent, that it is not a 
"little while." No, to us it is a long while. Our ideas of long and 
short periods are drawn from our experience. When you were a 
child you thought as a child; you impatiently looked at an hour 
as a long time, and a year seemed an age if it intervened 
between you and some coveted object or enjoyment. Since you 
have grown to manhood or womanhood years are short; how 
quickly they fly. Your plans and arrangements reach out and 
embrace numbers of them. 



We see then that a long time and a "little while" are 
accommodative terms, to be understood in harmony with the 
standpoint of the one using them. When Paul used these words 
he was God's mouthpiece, therefore the word is God's-and it is 
from His standpoint, in whose sight "a thousand years are but as 
yesterday," and "as a watch in the night." If we remember that 
He is from everlasting to everlasting, we can readily see, that 
eighteen hundred years are but "a little while" to Him. In His 
sight it is only "a little while" since He created Adam. Let us not 
be so impatient; there is plenty of time in eternity. 

If we can get this standpoint of time- God's standpoint-it will 
assist us to see how "the Lord is not slack concerning His 
promises. " When God promised Eve that her seed should bruise 
the serpent's head, she doubtless supposed that God's promise 
had failed when one of her sons was slain and the other had 
become a branded murderer; and when Seth was born, as his 
name indicates, she thought him the promised seed. She came to 
death, and yet saw not God's promise fulfilled. Ages rolled on, 
generations came and went, Moses and Israel read the promise, 
but saw no fulfillment. Had it failed? No, four thousand years 
after Jesus appeared on earth; suffered, died, arose, ascended. 
Was the promise fulfilled? No, only in part. Satan's head (vital 
part) is not yet crushed; he rears it higher than ever; his control 
is greater perhaps than ever before. Does God's promise mean 
less than it says? No, give Him more time; it is only "a little 
while" since he promised, and "in due time" it will all be 
fulfilled. Because He saw that we would wonder whether He is 
"slack concerning His promises;" and because Jesus counts us 
His friends ("I have called you friends; for all things that I have 
heard of my Father I have made known unto you." Jno. 15:15), 
therefore He kindly gives us through Paul, a clue as to how and 
when this promise will be fulfilled. Rom. 16:20, reads: "The 
God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly." 

This is the same promise made to Eve, and though Jesus had 
died, Paul well knew that Satan was not yet bruised. 

But God has not forgotten his promise; He will perform, but 
when? "Shortly." Ah, God's "little while" again. But why say 
under your feet? What had the Christians at Rome to do with 
bruising Satan? Had God's Word not said the seed should do it? 
And was not Christ this seed? Yes, Jesus is the head over this 
seed, but we are members of the body under this head, as we 
read: "The God of our Lord Jesus Christ.. .gave Him to be the 
head over all things to the Church, which is His body. " Eph. 
1:17-22. He is the head.. .that in all things He might have the 
pre-eminence. Col. 1:18. 

Satan was permitted to bruise Jesus, the head. "He was bruised 
for our iniquity. " He was made perfect through suffering, and 
we, the members of the body, must suffer with Him if we would 
be made perfect. We must "fill up the measure of the afflictions 



of Christ. " The head suffered most, but we must be sharers of 
the suffering, if we would be glorified together. 

Therefore, "count it all joy," and "think it not strange concerning 
the fiery trial which is to try you as though some strange thing 
happened unto you: But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of 
Christ's sufferings; that when ("a little while," "shortly") His 
glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad, also, with exceeding 
joy." 1 Pet. 4:12,13. Yes, we shall share in the "glory that shall 
follow," and part of that glory shall be to crush the serpent. Now 
he bruises our heel. (Ours are not vital wounds, they will all 
heal.) We shall crush his head (a vital part, indicating the utter 
extinction of evil— when death shall be destroyed, and "him that 
hath the power of death, that is the devil. ") As this has required 
time for its accomplishment, so have almost all the promises of 
God. Take 

THE PROMISE TO ABRAHAM. 

God had promised and sworn to Abraham that his seed should 
be as the sand of the sea -innumerable-and Abraham believed 
it; but as years rolled on he and Sarah thought it a long time. 
They were getting old, and yet had no child. Finally, they 
concluded to help God to fulfill his promise. How many 
Christians want to FORCE a construction on prophecy, in order 
to help God out of a supposed dilemma, and help him to fulfill 
his word. Let us rather wait on the Lord. 

God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain. " 

Yes, they would help God to keep his word, and as Sarah was 
too old, her maid must bear the promised seed. This was a 
human way to fulfill, but God waited fifteen years until they 
were both old, so that both Abraham and Sarah laughed when 
they were told that they should yet have a son Isaac. "After I am 
waxed old shall I have pleasure my lord, being old also?" But 
the answer was: "Is anything too hard for the Lord? At the time 
APPOINTED... Sarah shall have a son." 

O, that we could learn that- 

"It may not be my time, 
It may not be thy time, 
And yet in His own time, 
The Lord will perform. 

Ages have rolled around, yet the seed of Abraham, although a 
nation and partially possessing Canaan for a time, have never 
yet had those promises to Abraham FULFILLED. 

"I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed 
after thee. " "And I will give unto thee and to thy seed after thee, 
the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan for 
an everlasting possession. " 



But Paul shows us that there was a deeper meaning than the 
surface promise couched in the utterances of God to the seed of 
Abraham. Not only the fleshly children, but the children of faith 
have a share. 

"Now, to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He 
saith not, And to seeds as of many; but as of one, 'And to thy 
seed'-which is Christ.". ..And if ye be Christ's (if you have been 
"baptised into Christ, put on Christ," become "members of His 
body," if ye be the antitypical bride of the Lamb"), then (and 
only then, no other way), are ye Abraham's SEED and HEIRS; 
according to promise." Gal. 3:14 and 29. Jesus individually is 
the heir of all, and we by nature have no claims of heirship, but 
by our union (marriage) with Him we become heirs-joint-heirs 
(united) with Jesus Christ our Lord or husband. 

Here again we realize that God's "little while" is to man a great 
while; but surely and steadily the members of the body of Christ 
are being developed, and in due time they will be united to their 
Head, and with Him glorified-constituting in the complete 
sense "the seed"--and then, never fully until then, can it be true 
of Abraham and his seed: -"In thee shall all nations be blessed." 
(Gal. 3:8.) Then "A king shall reign in righteousness and princes 
shall rule in judgment and under that righteous reign and rule 
"all the families of the earth shall be blessed," for then "the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. " But there, are 

PROMISES TO THE NATURAL SEED, 

as well as to the spiritual. They never have and do not now 
possess Canaan as an "everlasting possession." The prophets tell 
us that "the Lord shall yet choose Jerusalem." Zech. 1:17. "I will 
dwell in the midst of Jerusalem;" it "shall be called a city of 
truth." "The streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls 
playing. " "If it be marvelous in the eyes of the remnant of this 
people in these days, should it also be marvelous in mine eyes, 
saith the Lord of hosts?" Zech. 8:3-6. "In that time.. ..I shall 
bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem. " "Then shall 
Jerusalem be holy. " Joel 3:1-17. 

James shows that these promises lacked fulfillment. Acts 15:16. 
After showing the object of the Gospel age to be the taking out 
of the Gentiles, a people for His name-the Bride— His body, the 
seed, after recounting this, James says: "To this agree the words 
of the prophets [or this is in harmony with prophecy."] "As it is 
written, 'After this' [after the seed is taken from among the 
Gentiles] 'I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of 
David which is fallen down, and I will build again the ruins 
thereof.'" Yes, God has good things in reserve for his ancient 
people, and as Paul says, though they were "blinded" and "cut 
off" from the first position of heirs of those promises, yet, "God 
hath not cast away His people whom He foreknew. " "For I 
would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, 



lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness in 
part is happened to Israel. " How long, Paul? "Until the fullness 
of the Gentiles be come in." [That is, until the entire Church, 
which James says God is taking out of the Gentiles, have all 
been taken out and gathered into full sonship, as the seed of 
promise.] And if they are blinded only until that time, it is 
evident that at that time the blindness will be removed. But Paul 
continues, "and so all Israel shall be saved," [not saved eternally 
as individuals, but saved— rescued nationally —brought back to 
power and grandeur.] But Paul goes to the prophets as his 
authority. "As it is written, there shall come out of Zion the 
Deliverer [the seed, the Christ, head and body], and shall turn 
away ungodliness from Jacob [fleshly Israel] for this is my 
covenant unto them. " Paul then gives us his reasons for speaking 
so confidently, "For the gifts and calling of God are without 
repentance. " God's giving us the high calling, and the promises 
on the higher plane, does not interfere with or hinder His 
keeping His promise to the fleshly seed, but all the more 
guarantees it. 

Then he explains how it is that we, who were once Gentiles, had 
God's mercy and truth revealed to us, when and because natural 
Israel was blinded; so we obtained mercy through their unbelief; 
so these have not believed that through your mercy they also 
may obtain mercy. Through whose mercy? Yours, the Church's, 
when the Church is all taken out and glorified, she is with 
Christ, her head, her husband, to mercifully and justly rule the 
world; then Israel shall obtain your mercy. Rom. 11:2-25. 

O, that we could realize that every promise of God is sure, in 
His own due time; it would give us childlike trust and 
confidence for everything; and not to accept them as all sure is 
to make God a liar. 

Paul, as he looked forward and realized how in due time every 
jot and tittle should be fulfilled, and saw the greatness and 
majesty of God's plan, breaks forth in ecstasy and exclaims, "O, 
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of 
God!" "Who hath known the mind of the Lord?" [Who knew 
that God's plan was so comprehensive and full?] And our hearts 
can say, Amen. 

God knows the end from the beginning, and looking at the great 
clock of the ages, declares to us that the things we so much 
desire shall be "shortly," "yet a little while," and the glory, 
power and blessing of the promised Seed will be revealed to all. 
Let us look at things from his standpoint, and so 

Let the little while between 
In its golden light be seen. 



R402 : page 2 



KNOWLEDGE IS LIBERTY. 

When Luther discovered how fully Papacy filled the picture 
given by Paul in 2 Thes. 2:3-8, and the symbols of Rev. 17, he 
felt justified by that knowledge in publicly denouncing that 
system. The knowledge gave him the liberty to thunder the truth 
of God with all its power against the Vatican. God gave the 
liberty by giving the knowledge, and Luther would have been 
unworthy the knowledge and the honor of being the Lord's 
mouthpiece, had he been too cowardly to speak, though Papacy 
was the system then recognized and respected by the world. 

Knowledge of the truth and law, was the ground of Jesus' liberty 
in denouncing the doctors of divinity in his day as "blind 
guides," etc. It was Paul's knowledge of Christ's having made an 
end of the law, that gave him liberty to announce the end of the 
necessity of circumcision in the flesh, and that authorized him to 
say of the Jewish holy days and Sabbaths that they were merely 
shadows. (Col. 2:17.) 

And some wonder at our liberty in speaking of many things 
similar to the above, viz., that as an organization the nominal 
Gospel church is rejected of the Lord, as was her type, the 
Jewish church; that we speak so confidently of the tribulation 
coming upon her, and apply the words "Come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive not of her 
plagues"; that we apply some of the symbols of Revelation 
without a question to her; that we so unhesitatingly and fully 
accept the exceeding great and precious promises of Glory, 
Honor, Immortality and Divinity. They wonder that we brethren 
are not in darkness, as most are, relative to "the day of the Lord" 
in which we live (1 Thes. 5:4); that we lay any claim to a 
knowledge of "things to come" which Jesus told us would be an 
evidence of our being sons, led by the Spirit of God. (John 
16:13.) 

But the liberty which we exercise is inspired by a knowledge of 
and belief in the word of God. "Ye shall know the truth, and the 
truth shall make you FREE." (John 8:32.) And as in Luther's and 
Paul's day, so now those too indolent or too cowardly to express 
truth which they see, prove both by word and act that they are 
unworthy of the knowledge, and consequently they are left in 
darkness. Jesus says, "Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of 
my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also 
shall the son of man be ashamed when he cometh in the glory of 
his Father with the holy angels." (Mark 8:38.) 



R402 : page 3 



"HOW READEST THOU?" 

LUKE 10:16. 

Tis one thing now to read the Bible through, 
Another thing to read, to learn and do; 
'Tis one thing now to read it with delight, 
And quite another thing to read it right. 

Some read it with design to learn to read, 
But to the subject pay but little heed; 
Some read it as their duty once a week, 
But no instruction from the Bible seek. 

Whilst others read it without common care, 
With no regard to how they read nor where. 
Some read it as a history to know 
How people lived three thousand years ago. 

Some read to bring themselves repute, 
By showing others how they can dispute; 
Whilst others read because their neighbors do, 
To see how long 'twill take to read it through. 

Some read it for the wonders that are there, 
How David killed a lion and a bear; 
Whilst others read-or rather in it look, 
Because, perhaps, they have no other book. 

Some read the blessed Book— they don't know why, 
It somehow happens in the way to lie; 
Whilst others read it with uncommon care, 
But all to find some contradictions there. 

One reads with father's specs upon his head, 
And sees the thing just as his father did; 
Another reads through Campbell or through Scott, 
And thinks it means exactly what they thought. 

Some read to prove a pre-adopted creed, 
Thus understand but little what they read; 
And every passage in the book they bend 
To make it suit that all important end. 

Some people read as I have often thought 
To teach the Book instead of being taught. 



R402 : page 3 



NOT ASHAMED OF THE GOSPEL. 

"I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is the power of 
God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first 
and also to the Greek." -Rom. 1:16. 



These words like all of Paul's words in general, are fitly spoken 
and are like "apples of gold in pictures of silver." Gospel 
signifies good tell, good news, glad tidings, something to make 
one rejoice and be glad; it must have been something of very 
great importance, something far-reaching in its nature, 
something supremely grand and glorious, for it had wrought a 
most wonderful change in Paul. He had not always been of the 
opinion which he now expresses, for he had persecuted those of 
"this way" even unto strange cities, and when they were put to 
death, he gave his voice against them. 

What had caused this change in the mind of the apostle? 

Surely the gospel had not changed in its character; no, but he 
had become better acquainted with it. That is the way it ever is 
with the world: the better they are acquainted with the gospel of 
Christ, the better opinion they have of it, and the higher they 
value it. Paul was expecting soon to visit Rome, that imperial 
city, the mistress of the world, and of course if he spoke in 
public he wished to talk about something which he was not 
ashamed of, and this he declared was the thing: "I am not 
ashamed of the gospel of Christ. " Paul proved the truth of his 
assertion not only by his words, but by his actions as well. 

The mighty mind of Paul, in its natural sweep immense, saw 
THAT in the gospel of Christ which was infinitely above and 
beyond everything else. If he could have seen how man, through 
the blinding effects of pride, and superstition, would have finally 
come to consider the gospel of Christ- if he could have stood 
upon the orthodox platform of our day and have looked out upon 
the pile of "wood, hay, stubble," which is built on the 
foundation, Christ, can any one suppose he would have been 
able to say he was not ashamed of it? If the "mother church," 
which is proud of calling 

R403 : page 3 

him her patron saint, and after whom many of her churches are 
named, should through some of her dignitaries expound to him 
the doctrines of penance, papal succession, confession of sins to 
the priest and absolution, the state of the dead in purgatory, etc., 
can we suppose that he would indorse them and say of them, "I 
am not ashamed?" 

If some one were to represent to him the doctrine of 
predestination as held by our Calvinistic brethren, and undertake 
to prove it by Paul's own writings in Rom. 8:29,33: "For whom 
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the 
image of his son," etc., and again in Rom. 9:15,24: "I will have 
mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion 
on whom I will have compassion," etc., and conclude from it 
that God from all eternity planned to bring into being a few, 
favored with advantages of every sort- birth in a Christian land, 
surrounded by Christian influences, and upheld by Christian 



associations and the particular favor of God; but the large 
majority by the same eternal decree were born in the darkness of 
corrupt hereditary taint and association, and although they may 
have dim perceptions of God and truth, and may desire to know 
him, yet, though they may groan and strive, and turn their tear- 
dimmed eyes toward heaven, with untold longings, yet they 
shall go into a night of eternal anguish, "without one cheering 
ray of hope, or star of glimmering day," and the righteous from 
their exalted seats in glory shall look on this display of God's 
wisdom, and justice, and power, and praise him for this 
manifestation of his love. 

This has its good features. It shows God's omniscience. This 
would be our ideal of a great God were it not that it lacks three 
essential qualities of greatness, viz.: mercy, love, and justice. 
None of these qualities would be manifested in bringing into the 
world billions of creatures irrecoverably damned before they 
were born and mocked with protestations of love. 

Is it possible that any thinking man can suppose that Paul would 
endorse this— that this was what he was not ashamed of? But 
would he look with more favor upon the view of our Arminian 
brother, who should say to him: that although the decree was 
made as our Calvinistic brother has stated, yet the provision was 
for all to be saved, the ransom was provided for all, but the 
secret of it is in the words of Jesus, ye "will not come unto me 
that ye might have life. " The table was spread and bountifully 
provided for all, but they "would not and made light of it;" not 
taking into account the fact that more than nine-tenths of them 
never knew that there was any supper provided for them, that is 
to say, that infinite wisdom decreed that a certain number only 
should be informed of it, and be at the table, but had it set for ten 
times as many as he knew would be there to sup, and because 
they were not there, consigned them to eternal torment. Acting 
upon this basis of reasoning, if such it is, our Arminian brethren 
have sent as many missionaries as possible to tell the starving 
millions that there is a supper provided so that the poor creatures 
who are fortunate enough to hear of it may come and welcome, 
but those who do not must starve. 

But this when looked at squarely, our Arminian brethren cannot 
see to be very good news, and so sometimes they conclude 
(though not in a very orthodox way) that these unfortunate 
millions who never heard of the gospel, will be provided for "in 
some way or other," (a good conviction). Can we think this is 
the gospel which Paul had in mind when he said, "I am not 
ashamed of the gospel? Nay, verily! 

But there is still another view that has seemingly strong 
scriptural support, and this includes all men; this surely is a free 
gospel and universal, and Paul is supposed to be its strong 
supporter, for he has given that which is the key note in the 
promulgation of it, viz.: "As in Adam ALL die, EVEN so in 



Christ shall ALL be made alive." 1 Cor. 15:22. So our 
Universalist brother infers from this that in some way, in the 
hour of death, or before, or after, by some means, whether sinful 
or holy, everybody, everywhere shall be saved; and why not? He 
says, did not Christ by the grace of God taste death for every 
man? And if so did he die in vain for any man? But our brother 
of this opinion would not probably dwell with as much 
satisfaction upon the passage, Without holiness no man shall see 
the Lord, Heb. 12:14, and would prefer that murderers and 
pickpockets should occupy a separate apartment in the "many 
mansions." (Here again conviction almost arrives at truth). 

Now candidly, can we suppose that these views, which we think, 
in a plain-spoken way, we have fairly represented as being the 
views held by the churches in general, regarding the gospel, are 
the views held by Brother Paul when he uttered the words we 
have referred to? We cannot think so, and we do think that few, 
if any, who reflect are perfectly satisfied that either of these 
were the views which he held. Then do you stand back aghast 
and say: Can it be possible that all this is error that we have been 
taught so long, and that has so much seeming support from the 
Bible? Do you say, impossible? Then which is your choice, and 
which is good news to you? Can you walk out beneath the starry 
heavens at night and looking up into illimitable space among the 
exhibitions of infinite wisdom and power, and there alone in the 
presence of God lay your hand upon either one of these dogmas 
and say, I believe THIS is the gospel of Christ, of which Paul 
was not ashamed? 

Well, my dear brother or friend, these dogmas are not all errors, 
neither are they all truth. Like the confederation of States, to 
which has been proudly attached the gospel of which Paul was 
not ashamed are "E Pluribus Unum," i.e., one composed of 
many. We understand then that the gospel, of which Paul spoke, 
embraces in its scope many of the ideas held by each of our 
brethren to whom reference has been made, and for whose 
opinions we have respect, but we cannot think that either of 
them is complete alone, and we believe that either of the 
churches who think that its plan or creed is the only and true 
one, while so much at variance with the others, has done much 
to make the man of the world who is uninformed reject the 
instrument (the Bible) upon which he thinks so many variant 
tunes can be played. With force then the question recurs to us: 
what was the gospel or good news of which Paul was not 
ashamed? What was the great and glorious thought connected 
with the gospel that he had in mind? 

Paul's was a critical and calculating mind, and his inspired 
thoughts were stamped with that peculiarity. He "reckons" about 
his sufferings; he "counted all things loss," etc., etc. In this case 
he is "not ashamed of the gospel," for (the reason that) it is "the 
power of God," something above and beyond all human 



institutions, something that the world, the mind of the natural 
man never would have thought of, something supernatural, yes, 
and something from which the mind of man (if left to itself) 
would soon wander; and that is evidently why these truths have 
been torn asunder, and the different parties in the church have 
each taken a piece, and upon it built a superstructure of its own, 
much of it, the "wood, hay, and stubble," to which Paul refers in 
1 Cor. 3:12. Each of these, according to our understanding, has 
already begun to be swept away or to be burned up, and "the 
day" which "shall declare it" is even now begun we fully 
believe, (vs. 13). We feel convinced that the fire which is to 
consume the world (of error) is even "now kindled." 

But, says one, where is the disagreement? Do we not all believe 
that this gospel is the power of God unto salvation? (To every 
one that believeth, our Arminian brother breaks in, but he must 
wait a little). Well, they say so, but in practice deny it. Our 
Calvinistic brother says "unto salvation," and adds (in creed) of 
a few, and unto damnation of the many, i.e., power to save all, 
will to save a few. Our Arminian brother can emphasize the will 
of God to save, but whispers the power, for O ! man opposes His 
will. Our Universalist brother can declare aloud both will and 
power, and take all into glory. 

Let us illustrate the difference between our brethren, and 
suppose three natives of some foreign land, who were totally 
unacquainted with the design or nature of the national emblem, 
"the stars and stripes," were to call at different times upon the 
American Consul in that land, and he was to present to one a 
portion of the flag as a memento, having only the red, at another 
time, to another one, a portion having only the white, and still 
another having only the blue, each might suppose that his 
portion represented in color the whole, and contend that because 
the representative of the nation gave it to him, he was sure that 
was the true color, and so of each of the others, while the fact 
would be that each was right in supposing that he had the true 
color, but erred in the supposition that he had the only color, 
when it was composed of "red, white, and blue, " and that in a 
specific proportion. 

Now, our Calvinistic brother sees so clearly that predestination 
is taught in the scriptures, that he cannot see that there is a 
universal salvation; and our Arminian brother sees so clearly 
that there is salvation provided for all, that he cannot see that 
there is clearly taught the doctrine of predestination and 
election; and our Universalist brother sees so clearly that all will 
be saved, that his conception of God's Love overrides that of His 
Justice. 

But, says one, you seem to agree with each, and disagree with 
each; how is this? They cannot all be right and wrong at the 
same time. Well, not altogether right, but partly so, as in the 
illustration. We are glad to see that each has enough ground for 



his belief to awaken our sympathy and respect. Respect for what 
Paul would have been ashamed of? No, we did not say that 

R404 : page 3 

Paul was ashamed of these brethren, but of the doctrines or 
creeds that have come to be considered the gospel. 

Well, says our Calvinistic brother, is not Predestination or 
Election clearly taught in the Scriptures? 

Yes, my brother, yes. Well, says my Arminian brother, is not 
free will as clearly taught? Yes, my brother; we so understand. 

And is not universal salvation as clearly taught? says my 
Universalist brothers and we answer, we think and believe so. 

Perhaps all of these brethren, including the Papist brother, cares 
to hear no more; if so, perhaps some "fool for Christ's sake" 
will, so we will say on and consider the last question first. We 
consider our Universalist brother's text, "As in Adam all die, 
even so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15:22, as 
unanswerable as regards the universality of salvation: If there 
were not another text in the Bible to teach it, that would. It 
seems to us that nothing can be plainer, and for this reason other 
Scripture somewhat obscure must in some way harmonize with 
it, and so of each of the other texts quoted by our brethren as 
teaching the doctrines of "Election" and "Free will," or 
Arminianism. In the above text, we think no one would 
undertake to make the word "all" in the second place mean less 
than in the first, especially when the first is followed and the 
latter preceded by the words "even so." The misunderstanding 
seems to be as to the kind or mode of life. "As in Adam all die;" 
how do all die by Adam? To answer it correctly, first conclude 
how all lived by Adam. Not spiritual life, was it? Human life 
and its continuance CONDITIONED on obedience, was it not? 
Then he (and all represented in him) lost no more than that, and 
"even so" he (and "all" represented in him) will be made alive 
by Christ, the second Adam. But, says one, is that all the life we 
get through Christ? That is all the universal salvation we can 
find held out to mankind in the Bible, and that we think is "very 
good." God said it was, but thank God there is something more, 
but if any wish to stop there, God has predestinated to let them, 
but if they have heard of the higher life, and neglected so great 
salvation, theirs will be an irreparable loss. 

Then you think, says one, that there are different degrees of 
salvation? O, yes; let us read on a little further (23d ver.): "But 
every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they 
that are Christ's at His coming. " 

Having seen that there are orders or ranks of being, as is also 
shown by the apostle in the 39th verse and onward, we can see 
that it does not follow that because all are made alive through 
Christ, they will therefore come finally to the same kind of 



being, but are brought to life and take position according to 
"order," for "As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; 
and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. " 
(ver. 48). 

With this view, that there are different orders, and that all are 
brought to the restoration of what was lost in Adam, we can see 
how there may be a will in man to gain a position in any given 
order, and how there may be a selection, "Election," or 
"Predestination" (whichever you choose to call it) of God from 
among his creatures of those who are qualified or fitted for the 
different grades, orders, or ranks of being. He has predestinated, 
or established a law, that, "to those who by patient continuance 
in well doing SEEK for glory and honor and immortality, eternal 
life" shall be given. Rom. 2:7. "But unto them that are 
contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, 
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish to every soul of 
man that doeth evil," (verses 8 and 9). Now who disobey? Those 
who know the truth surely. You do not consider your child as 
disobedient until it transgresses a known command; neither does 
God, for "like as a father pitieth his children so the Lord pitieth 
them that fear him. " Many fear him who do not know much 
about him, and do not know what is commanded, or whether he 
has commanded anything or not. Such cannot, of course, obey 
the truth, nor come under wrath, but will come to life (not 
eternal), the life lost in Adam without any will or choice of 
theirs. It was for this purpose that "He by the grace of God 
should taste death for every man." Heb. 2:9. And God 
commendeth his love toward us, in that while we were yet 
sinners Christ died for us. Yes, "WHEN we were enemies we 
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son." Rom. 5:8-10. 

But does some one say, very well, but Paul says here of the 
gospel, that it is the power of God unto salvation to every one 
that believeth? 

Ah, but brother, now you are reaching that point in the mind and 
teaching of the apostle in which is embraced another rank or 
"order": the power of GOD UNTO; we do not imagine that the 
power of God is staid at all when man is brought back to the 
Adamic condition; that is, to a reconciled condition; he lost that 
life without previously 

R404 : page 4 

knowing the nature of sin or death. True, God told him, but like 
children without experience, they disobeyed, and his posterity 
die for it, or because of it; whether they sin or not they all go 
down in death because of the sin of Adam which "taints us all," 
and come up because of the righteousness of Christ that restores 
us all. We die on Adam's account, and live again on Christ's 
account. Now brought back to the Adamic condition we are 
reconciled to God. Well, is there anything more for us? Yes, 



hear the apostle again: "Much more being reconciled we shall be 
saved by his life." 10th verse. What! Saved more? Yes, much 
more by the power of God unto salvation. Will all men be saved 
much more? We are sorry to part company with any, but though 
this is a blessed restored condition, yet we shall have to leave on 
this plane those who do not believe, for this much more 
salvation is to every one that believeth. Now my Calvinistic and 
Arminian brothers stand by and see the beauty of those texts 
which you have had to stretch and twist so. You need not stretch 
them now; they are all right and true. "Whom he did foreknow" 
would be fitted by desire, and faith, and continuance in well 
doing, each and severally for the different orders, "He 
predestinated" them to, and so this gospel, GOOD news is the 
power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth-to the 
Jew first and also to the Greek. " Why to the Jew first? ("He is 
not a Jew which is one outwardly, " "but he is a Jew, which is 
one inwardly." Rom. 2:28-29), because he believes first, here, in 
time to reach the great salvation. Dear brethren, let us desire 
more, study God's word more, believe more, and have the 
"much more" salvation. "Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God 
hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed 
them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea 
the deep things of God. " 1 Cor. 2:9-10. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R404 : page 4 

THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD. 

"But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy 
nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises 
of Him who hath called you out of darkness into His marvelous 
light." 1 Pet. 2:9. 

"Unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in His 
own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and 
His Father; to Him be glory and dominion for ever and ever." 
Rev. 1:5,6. 

"And hast made us unto our God kings and priests; and we shall 
reign on the earth." Rev. 5:10. 

"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on 
such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of 
God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years." 
Rev. 20:6. 

The above scriptures clearly teach that a part, at least, of our 
work in the future will be to officiate as the priests of God. As 
the work of a priest is one of intercession and of instruction in 



righteousness, they clearly prove that the glorious work of 
evangelization will go on after the resurrection has taken place. 
The fact that these offices of "king" and "priest" will exist, 
logically implies that there will be subjects to rule and learners 
to teach; otherwise the names would be meaningless and the 
titles an empty sound. 

It is held by some that the reign of the saints will consist of a 
very brief "reign of terror," during which- with Jesus at their 
head-they will trample their enemies into the dust and utterly 
destroy them. We thank our dear Lord for a better hope. Our 
work will not be one of destruction, but of salvation. We shall 
rule as kings, even with a rod of iron; but the grand object will 
be to humble the nations, and so fit them for the reception of 
truth. "For, when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants 
of the world will learn righteousness." Isa. 26:9. 

What a blessed prospect! what a glorious calling! A royal 
priesthood! 

Who that is imbued with the spirit of the Master; who that has 
but tasted that the Lord is gracious, could desire more agreeable 
employment than to show forth the praises of our Savior King, 
to those sitting in darkness? to bind up the brokenhearted? to 
proclaim liberty to the captive? to give beauty for ashes and the 
oil of joy for mourning? 

To tell the old, old story 
Of Jesus and His love? 

R405 : page 4 

To fit us for such an exalted and responsible position we 
require a peculiar training, and we feel warranted in claiming 
that the trials, temptations and discipline of this present life are 
for that very purpose. 

Many a struggling believer, trying hard to overcome, buffeted 
by the enemy, tried by friends, weighed down by hereditary 
weaknesses in self, discouraged and faint, has cried out, from 
the depths of a loving heart: "Why, O! why this suffering? why 
this severe chastisement?" Let us glance for a moment at the 
pathway trod by the Master-our forerunner-and we shall find 
the answer. 

"So, also, Christ glorified not Himself to be made a high priest; 
but He that said unto Him, Thou art my son... Who in the days of 
His flesh, when He had offered up prayers and supplications 
with strong crying and tears unto Him that was able to save him 
from death, and was heard in that He feared: Though He were a 
son, yet learned he obedience by the things which He suffered, 
and being made perfect, He became the author of eternal 
salvation unto all them that obey Him." Heb. 5:5-9. 



"For it became Him, for whom are all things, in bringing many 
sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect 
through sufferings. Wherefore in all things it behooveth Him to 
be made like unto His brethren, that He might be a merciful and 
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make 
reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that He Himself 
hath suffered being tempted, He is able to succor them that are 
tempted." Heb. 2:10,17-18. 

"For we have not a High Priest who cannot be touched with the 
feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as 
we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the 
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help 
in time of need." Heb. 4:15,16. 

The reason, then, that the Church is called on to fill up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ is, that all the body, 
in like manner to the Head, may be trained to perfect sympathy 
and to perfect obedience through suffering. In this present time, 
we in all our troubles come to our compassionate High Priest 
with boldness, realizing that He, having been partaker of flesh 
and blood, can truly feel for us and pity us; so in the age to 
come, we, the promised seed of Abraham, through whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed (compare Gen. 12:3; Gal. 
3:14,16,29;) shall go forth a royal priesthood, according to the 
order of Melchisedec, fully prepared to sympathize with the 
nations, to lead them to the paths of righteousness, and to 
encourage them in the way of life. 

Shall we shrink then from our cross? Shall we seek to put away 
the bitter cup that is sometimes pressed to our lips? Surely not. 
Tis a loving hand that presents it, 'tis a loving heart (infinitely 
loving) that sees the need of it. It is but the Master fitting us for 
His work; training us for the priesthood; teaching us to rule 
ourselves that we may know how to rule others; opening our 
eyes to the weakness of our own flesh, that we may have 
patience with those over whom we shall be given authority. 
(Luke 19:17,19.) 

Courage, then, my Christian brother or sister, seeking with 
weary step to run the narrow way. Heed not the rugged course; it 
is all hallowed and sanctified by the blessed feet of the Master. 
Count every thorn a flower; every sharp rock a milestone, 
hurrying you onward to the goal. Let every advancing step be a 
"Nearer to Thee": every hillock in the road an "upward toward 
heaven." Keep your eye fixed on the prize. Soon— very soon— 
you may wear the Crown. 

"It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with Him, we shall also 
live with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with Him. " 

W. I. MANN. 



R405 : page 4 

CONSECRATION TO A WORK. 

Among Christians there is much which passes for "entire 
consecration to God," which is in fact a consecration to some 
self-imposed work. 

Some are consecrated and are living sacrifices to business, some 
to their families, some to the temperance work, some to building 
up a denominational church or Sunday school, some to 
ministering to the poor and the sick. Some of these works are 
good enough in their way, but none of them are the proper 
consecration for a follower of Jesus. 

Our consecration, like that of Jesus, should be to do the will of 
our Father in Heaven. Jesus says he came not to do his own will, 
but the will of Him that sent him. (John 6:38.) The fact that you 
have any choice or preference as to what you shall do, is an 
evidence in itself, that your will is not dead— that your 
consecration to God is not complete. 

Consecration to a work of our own choosing merely, will never 
bring us to the great reward. "I beseech you, brethren, that ye 
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable 
UNTO GOD. " Then, if He sends you into the "temperance 
work, " or into any other work, it will be acceptable as unto the 
Lord. 

If seeking only to do his will it will bring us to His Word much 
and often, to learn that will, and "He that seeketh findeth. " We 
leave the subject here, merely suggesting that thus seeking, after 
thus consecrating, some who are now— laboring chiefly for "the 
meat that perisheth" or Temperance and moral reforms in the 
world, or for the extension of sectarian church influence, would 
find directions something like the following: 

This is the will of God even YOUR sanctification. (1 Thes. 4:3.) 
Do good unto all men [in any way] as you have opportunity 
especially to the household of faith. (Gal. 6:10.) The great 
harvest field of the Gospel Age is white to harvest. This is the 
"special" work of the hour, and every one who realizes it fully, 
will rejoice in the privilege of being numbered among the 
reapers as well as among the reaped. Forsake not the assembling 
of yourselves together (Heb. 10:25.) but meet for the purpose of 
"BUILDING UP YOURSELVES on your most holy faith." 
(Jude 20.) 



R405 : page 4 



A SHORT SERMON FROM 
A FAMILIAR TEXT. 

"God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have 
everlasting life." (John 3:16.) 

We learned this text so long ago, some of us in childhood, and 
have heard it so often, that we are now apt to read or hear it 
without noticing its breadth and depth. 

"God so loved." 

Is this true? Orthodoxy says it was Jesus that so loved the world. 
The Father did not love them; no, he was angry, very angry with 
them, because Satan was too smart for him [We feel ashamed to 
have to write such an idea]; but Jesus loved us, and threw 
himself between us and his angry Father, and thus received the 
fatal blow; at least it would have been fatal to us, but Jesus 
being God, could not really die, and so arose when he wished to. 

How much better to believe that "God commendeth his love 
toward us, in that while we were yet sinners [enemies, verse 10] 
Christ died for us." (Rom. 5:8.) "Herein is love; not that we 
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the 
propitiation for our sins." (1 John 4:10.) 

"God so loved the WORLD." 

What! the world? the whole world? This would be blessed news 
indeed, if true. How is it? The nominal church teaches that only 
those who believe before the second coming of Christ-probably 
not one in one thousand of the world's inhabitants so far-can be 
saved. God's Word tells us that through the Abrahamic seed 
shall "all the families of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 12:3.) What 
if the promise has not been fulfilled as yet? Can we not wait 
God's time? Paul tells us that God "will have ALL men to be 
saved [from the Adamic death] and to come unto a knowledge 
of the truth. " What truth? That Christ Jesus "gave himself a 
ransom for ALL, to be testified in due time." (1 Tim. 2:4,6.) 

"He gave his only4?egotten Son. " 

This phraseology brings us into conflict with an old theory, viz., 
Trinitarianism. If that doctrine is true, how could there be any 
Son to give? A begotten Son, too? Impossible. If these three are 
one, did God send himself? And how could Jesus say: "My 
Father is greater than I." (John 14:28.) 

"Whosoever believeth in him. " 

Whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and the promises are only to 
believers. But does it seem reasonable that God so loved the 
world and yet made provision for only one out of a thousand, 
allowing the rest to remain in heathenism to perish? The Word 
says: "How then shall they call on him in whom they have not 



believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have 
not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?" (Rom. 
10:14.) They could not, but our loving Father has provided a 
teacher in that glorious Anointed One— Head and body-who is 
the true Light which lighteth EVERY MAN that cometh into the 
world. " And thus shall all men "come unto a knowledge of the 
truth." Understanding this, Paul could say: "The Scripture, 
foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, 
preached 

R406 : page 4 

before the gospel [good news] unto Abraham, saying: "In thee 
shall all nations be blessed." (Gal. 3:8.) 

This is good news indeed. 

"Should not perish, but have everlasting life." 

So-called orthodoxy would paraphrase this sentence thus: 
Should not live forever in hell, but have everlasting life in 
heaven. Webster gives the primary meaning of "perish" as "to 
die, to lose life in any manner. " But, says some one, Jesus did 
not speak English, and the translators may not have given us a 
good equivalent for the Greek. Well, Liddell and Scott define 
the original word "to destroy utterly, kill, slay, murder. " The text 
really defines its own meaning by placing "perish" as the 
opposite of "life." Life, everlasting or eternal, is promised only 
to the pure. Our Father intends to have a clean universe, and has 
commissioned the Son to do the work for him. This he will do, 
throwing light into every dark corner, washing, scouring, and 
polishing every vessel that can be made available for the 
Master's use, hanging every one in its proper place, sweeping 
out and "utterly destroying" the rubbish, but evidently saving 
and blessing with life everlasting by far the greater portion of 
mankind, so that the saved will be the rule, and the lost the 
exception— else would Satan triumph over God, which is 
impossible. 

W. I. MANN. 



R406 : page 4 



RUN TO DEATH. 



I was lately passing along the streets of a large city, when my 
attention was attracted to a fine large engraving hanging in one 
of the shop windows. (It was in Fleet street, London.) It 
represented a scene in one of the ancient Isthmian games. Two 
persons nearly divested of apparel, with distended muscles, 
occupied the course, stretching every nerve, while around, 
evidently excited with deep interest, was the "great crowd of 
witnesses." 



They were well along in the course, but the attention of the one 
somewhat in advance of the other is diverted for a moment by a 
flower or some shining object that has been thrown into the 
arena by some one of the many witnesses, by which they are 
"compassed about." 

An effort is made to grasp it; evidently the prize for which they 
are running is lost by this one, and no trace of sympathy is 
noticeable on the countenances of the spectators, but great 
rejoicing is apparent among the multitude, at the persistency 
with which the victor has reached the goal: Ignoring everything 
else, keeping the prize only in view he finally won it. I thought, 
that is a true picture of the Christian race which Paul has so 
faithfully and vividly painted in words, and which we see acted 
upon the stage of life. But how appropriately and timely the 
emphasizing of the thought just now. How faithfully that little 
shining object, whatever it may be, represents the besetments in 
the path of the one who is running for the prize of our high 
calling. 

How insignificant compared with the prize and the honor at the 
end of the course. But unless watchful we shall hesitate; one 
moment may cost all, and may make delay sufficient to reach 
the Judge's stand too late. 

What's that in your path? A little worldly praise? Disdain to 
notice it, it is of no value whatever; you are worse off with it 
than without it. At another point do you see an avenue to 
wealth? Never mind; it would not be abiding if you had it. Press 
on. 

Again; do you begin to think of some of the "weights" of value 
(?) left behind, fearing you will never see them again? Don't 
think of them, only to hope you will never be encumbered with 
them more. Do you say or think: "I fear this race will be the 
ruination of all my worldly prospects?" Of course it will so far 
as having any pleasure in them is concerned. 

You will be a very foolish man to divide your energies now, or 
thoughts either. Press on. 

But do you say: "Why there's my reputation right there in the 
dust. " Poor fellow ! how sorry I am you noticed it; but it's only 
the reputation you once had. Don't you know that none of those 
who are noted racers on this course have any reputation? The 
greatest racer who ever stepped on it "made himself of no 
reputation. " 

But do you say: "This awful run will be the death of me? Yes; of 
course it will; but you are a poor culprit under sentence of death 
anyway, and if you undertake to save your life you will lose it, 
but run yourself to death and you'll have a life that is life 
everlasting, and more-immortal. Don't be foolish now. Press on. 



A heavenly race demands thy zeal 
And an immortal crown. " 



J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R406 : page 5 



THE CHURCH WALKING 
WITH THE WORLD. 

The Church and the World walked far apart 
On the changing shores of time, 
The World was singing a giddy song, 
And the Church a hymn sublime. 

"Come, give me your hand, " said the merry World, 
"And walk with me this way"; 
But the good Church hid her snowy hands 
And solemnly answered "Nay, 

I will not give you my hand at all, 
And I will not walk with you; 
Your way is the way that leads to death; 
Your words are all untrue. " 

"Nay, walk with me but a little space," 
Said the World, with a kindly air; 
"The road I walk is a pleasant road, 
And the sun shines always there; 

Your path is thorny and rough and rude, 
But mine is broad and plain; 
My way is paved with flowers and dews, 
And yours with tears and pain; 

The sky to me is always blue, 

No want, no toil I know; 

The sky above you is always dark, 

Your lot is a lot of woe; 

There's room enough for you and me 

To travel side by side. " 

IHalf shyly the Church approached the World 
And gave him her hand of snow; 
And the old World grasped it and walked along, 
Saying in accents low, 

"Your dress is too simple to please my taste; 
I will give you pearls to wear, 
Rich velvets and silks for your graceful form, 
And diamonds to deck your hair. " 



The Church looked down at her plain white robes, 
And then at the dazzling World, 
And blushed as she saw his handsome lip 
With a smile contemptuous curled. 

"I will change my dress for a costlier one," 
Said the Church, with a smile of grace; 
Then her pure, white garments drifted away, 
And the World gave, in their place, 

Beautiful satins and shining silks, 
Roses and gems and costly pearls; 
While over her forehead her bright hair fell 
Crisped in a thousand curls. 

"Your house is too plain," said the proud old World, 

"I'll build you one like mine; 

Carpets of Brussels and curtains of lace, 

And furniture ever so fine. " 

So he built her a costly and beautiful house; 
Most splendid it was to behold; 
Her sons and her beautiful daughters dwelt there. 
Gleaming in purple and gold; 

Rich fairs and shows in the halls were held, 
And the World and his children were there. 
Laughter and music and feasts were heard 
In the place that was meant for prayer. 

There were cushioned pews for the rich and the gay, 
To sit in their pomp and pride; 
But the poor, who were clad in shabby array, 
Sat meekly down outside. 

"You give too much to the poor," said the World, 

"Far more than you ought to do; 

If they are in need of shelter and food, 

Why need it trouble you? 

Go take your money and buy rich robes, 
Buy horses and carriages fine, 
Buy pearls and jewels and dainty food; 
Buy the rarest and costliest wines; 

My children they dote on all these things, 
And if you their love would win, 
You must do as they do, and walk in the ways 
That they are walking in. " 

R407 : page 5 

Then the Church held fast the strings of her purse, 
And modestly lowered her head, 
And simpered, "Without doubt you are right, sir; 
Henceforth I will do as you've said. " 



So the poor were turned from her door in scorn, 
And she heard not the orphan's cry; 
But she drew her beautiful robes aside, 
As the widows went weeping by. 

Then the sons of the World and sons of the Church 

Walked closely hand and heart, 

And only the Master, who knoweth all, 

Could tell the two apart. 

Then the Church sat down at her ease and said 
"I am rich and my goods increase; 
I have need of nothing, or aught to do, 
But to laugh, and dance, and feast. " 

The sly World heard, and he laughed in his sleeve, 
And mocking said, aside— 
"The Church is fallen, the beautiful Church, 
And her shame is her boast and her pride. " 

The angel drew near to the mercy-seat, 
And whispered in sighs her name, 
Then the loud anthems of rapture were hushed, 
And heads were covered with shame. 

And a voice was heard at last by the Church 
From Him who sat on the Throne, 
"I know thy works, and how thou hast said, 
'I am rich;' and hast not known 

That thou art naked, poor and blind, 
And wretched before My face; 
Therefore I from My presence, cast thee out. 
And blot thy name from its place. 



-SELECTED. 



R407 : page 5 



THE EKKLESIA. 



This is a Greek word which is translated church. It signifies a 
company, assembly or body of people bound or compacted 
together. 

To-day there are many organizations claiming to be the church, 
and having various bonds of union; but we wish to know, upon 
the authority of God's Word, what ekklesia, body, or church, 
Jesus established, and what are its bonds of union; secondly, we 
wish to show that every Christian should belong to that church; 
thirdly, the injurious effects of joining the wrong ekklesia or 
church; and fourthly, having joined the right church, what are 
the results of losing our membership. 



First then, the church which Jesus began to gather during his 
ministry, and which was recognized by the Father at Pentecost 
after their ransom price was paid, was the little company of 
disciples who had consecrated earthly time, talents and life a 
sacrifice to God. They were organized and bound together as 
members of one society, and as such had laws and government, 
and consequently a head or recognized ruling authority. The 
bonds were bonds of love and common interest. Since all were 
enlisted under the captaincy of Jesus, the hopes and fears, joys 
and sorrows, and aims of one were those of the other; and thus 
they had a far more perfect union of heart than could possibly be 
had from a union on the basis of any man-made creed. Thus 
their organization was of the Spirit; their law for the government 
of each was love, and all as a whole were put under obedience to 
the "law of the Spirit" as it was expressed in the life, actions, 
and words of their Lord. Their government was the will of him 
who said, "If ye love me keep my commandments." 

Thus we see the early church organized, governed, and in 
perfect unity and harmony under the rulership or headship of 
Jesus. Contrast this church organization with what now affects 
to be a continuance of the same— viz. : the various 
denominational organizations, each of which binds its members 
to a mental union on the basis of some creed or dogma of its 
own (many of them anything but love-ly) and each having its 
own laws. 

These laws emanate from their heads, or rulers and law-givers; 
so it is clearly seen that these present day churches, have and 
recognize as heads, or directing, ruling powers over them, the 
ancient founders of their various creeds, each contradicting the 
other, while their clergy, in conferences, councils, synods and 
presbyteries, variously interpret and enforce the "traditions of 
the elders" which "make void the Word of God." These take the 
place of the true head of the church-Jesus-and the true teacher 
and guide into all truth, the Holy Spirit. Hear the Prophet Isaiah 
express it. (chap. 9:15.) "The ancient and honorable, he is the 
head, and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail." And the 
whole nominal system is described in the Revelation as 
"Babylon"-confusion-Papal mother and Protestant daughters. 

Will they own this to be so? No, for the lukewarm nominal 
church of today believes herself to be rich and increased with 
goods, having need of nothing; not knowing that she is wretched 
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. (Rev. 3:17.) 

"These are hard sayings, who can receive them?" But these are 
not our sayings: it is the warning voice of the "sure word of 
prophecy... whereunto ye do well that ye take heed." And it is a 
loving voice for again our Lord declares: "As many as I love, I 
rebuke and chasten. " 



There are two senses in which the true church of Christ may be 
considered: All who like the early church were fully consecrated 
to the doing of our Father's will, amenable only to Christ's will 
and government, recognizing and obeying none other -these 
saints, from the beginning of the Gospel Age down to its close, 
when all of this class are sealed, constitute the "CHURCH OF 
THE FIRST BORN," whose names are written in Heaven. 
These are all one in aim, hope and suffering, and in due time 
will be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ to the great inheritance- 
heirs of the kingdom which God hath promised for them that 
love him. 

The other sense in which this same class is recognized, is by 
counting a part for the whole; thus all the living of this class 
may be spoken of as the church; or, again, any part of this class 
of living followers who may meet together may properly be 
called the church; for, by the word of Jesus we know that 
wherever two or three are assembled he will be among them, 
consequently that would be a church meeting— an assembly of 
the "church of the First Born." The general assembly will be, 
when all the church are made like, and glorified with, their head- 
Jesus . 

Such, then, is our definition of the church of Christ; it is 
perfectly illustrated by Paul (Rom. 12:4,5) when he compares 
the church to a human body. In this figure Jesus represents the 
head, and all who are his constitute the body, over and through 
which the head rules. Jesus has been and always will be the head 
over his church as a whole; he is likewise the head and ruler of 
the entire living church, and in every assembly where two or 
three meet in his name he is the head, ruler, and teacher. 

If it be asked, in what sense does he teach? we answer, by 
exercising the qualities of the head, or teacher; by using one or 
more of those present as His mouthpiece in unfolding truth, 
strengthening faith, encouraging hope, inspiring zeal, etc., just 
as the head of your body can call upon one member to minister 
to another. But here a word of caution: If one becomes as useful 
an instrument as a right hand, he should take care that he aspire 
not to become the head. Be not puffed up; pride will paralyze 
and render useless. "Be not ye called Rabbi (master, teacher) for 
one is your master (head) even Christ, and all ye are brethren. " 
And let not the least member despise his office, "for if all were 
one member, where were the body?" "Nay, those members of 
the body which seem to be more feeble are necessary"— "God 
hath set the members every one of them, in the body as it hath 
pleased him. " 

How simple, beautiful, and effectual is God's plan of 
organization! 

This brings us to our second proposition, viz. : that all Christians 
should be joined to this organization. In the light of what has 



just been said as to the class constituting the church which Jesus 
organized, it is evident that if you have given up all your will, 
talent, time, etc., you are recognized by Jesus as a follower, and 
member of the ekklesia, or body of which he is the head, whose 
names are written in heaven. Thus we join Jesus' church and 
have our names recorded as members by consecration. But says 
one: Must I not join some organization on earth, assent to some 
creed, and have my name written on earth? No; remember that 
Jesus is your pattern and teacher, and neither in his words nor 
acts will you find any authority for binding yourselves with 
creeds and traditions of the elders, which all tend to make the 
word of God of none effect, and bring you under a bondage 
which will hinder your growth in grace and knowledge, and 
against which Paul warned you, saying, "Stand fast, therefore, in 
the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not 
entangled again with the yoke of bondage." (Gal. 5:1.) 

But say some: If it is not proper to unite with any of the present 
nominal churches, would it not be well to form a visible 
organization of our own? Yes, this is what we have— an 
organization modeled after that of the early church. We think we 
have come back to primitive simplicity. The Lord Jesus alone is 
our head or lawgiver; the Holy Spirit is our interpreter and guide 
into truth; our names are all written in heaven; we are bound 
together by love and common interest. 

Do you inquire-how shall we know one another? We reply, 
how could we help knowing one another when the Spirit of our 
Master is made manifest in word and act, and manner and look? 
Yes, the living faith, the unfeigned love, the long-suffering 
meekness, the childlike simplicity coupled with the constancy 
and zeal of maturity, make manifest the sons of God, and we 
need no earthly record, for the names of all such are written in 
the Lamb's book of life. 

Do the sick need visiting or assistance? —these stand ready with 
consecrated time. Does the Lord's work require money?— these 
stand ready with consecrated means. Does his work bring upon 
them the reproach of the world, and of a degenerate nominal 
church— these have also sacrificed reputation— all— all to God. 

But again, do you inquire how shall we deal with one who walks 
disorderly in our midst; if we have no organization such as we 
see about us, how can we free ourselves from such, as the Lord 
requires us to do? We answer: Do just as Jesus and Paul 
directed. 

Now, as in the early church, there are various degrees of 
advancement among the individual members, and Paul says (1 
Thes. 5:14,) some are feeble-minded, comfort them; some are 
weak, support them; but while you should be patient toward all, 
warn the disorderly (those who are drifting away from the true 
spirit of Christ). Don't mistake the disorderly for the weak, and 



comfort them; nor for the feebleminded, and support them, but 
patiently, lovingly, warn the disorderly. Whom does he call 
disorderly? Doubtless there are many ways of walking 
disorderly, but in 2 Thes. 3:1 1, he speaks of some who work not 
at all, but are busy-bodies, and says they should do as he did— 
work that they be not chargeable to any; and if any will not 
work, neither should he eat. Thus he said he did, that he might 
be an example to others. He warns us also against immoral and 
unjust persons and those who wrest (twist) the Scriptures and 
thus turn the truth of God into a lie. Then again, vs. 14: After 
you have warned such a one, if he "obey not... note that man, and 
have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. "Yet, 
count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. " 

Again Jesus gives explicit directions where there is a matter of 
offence between two brethren, Matt. 18:15,17: "If thy brother 
shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee 
and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy 
brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or 
two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every 
word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, 
tell it unto the church: (the company of brethren who assemble 
together), but if he neglects to hear the church, let him be unto 
thee as an heathen man and a publican." If, under the 
organization of our Head, we heed his commands, which we 
will do if we love him, how few will be the misunderstandings 
and difficulties among the brethren. 

This organization has its evangelists, pastors and teachers 
appointed and directed by the Lord. They need no laying on of 
hands by the so-called Apostolic succession; for the "Spirit of 
the Lord hath anointed" all the members of the body "to preach," 
etc. (Isa. 61:1), and it is the duty of every member of the body to 
exercise his office for the edification of the other members. How 
complete is the organization of the church of Christ with its 
heaven- written, love-bound and Spirit-ruled membership, and 
how sad the error of mistaking the nominal for the real church! 

The importance of our fourth proposition need not be urged. It 
would indeed, be a dreadful calamity to lose our membership in 
the true church or body of Christ. And no member is out of this 
danger except when keeping a vigilant watch over the old 
nature, counted dead, lest it come to life again, and assert itself 
in the form of pride, selfishness, envy, evil-speaking— or what 
not? But if filled with love (the love that prompts to sacrifice) 
and clothed with humility, and under cover of the redeeming 
blood, we are safe in the church (body), having the assurance 
that it is our "Father's good pleasure to give us the kingdom. " 

Yes, the kingdom is the glorious destiny of the true church-the 
"little flock"— now treading the pathway of humiliation and 
drinking the bitter cup of death. The glory that shall be revealed 
in us, doth not yet appear except to the eye of faith, but the 



temptations and trials are very apparent on every hand. "Let us, 
therefore, fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his 
rest, any of you should seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) 

Thus Paul warned others and thus he feared, lest (even after) 
having preached to others, he himself should be a castaway. (1 
Cor. 9:27.) We may have our names cast out as evil by those of 
the nominal church, and yet "rejoice and be exceeding glad 
because our names are written in heaven. " They may frown 
upon you and despitefully use you and say all manner of evil 
against you falsely, or they may seek to win you back by 
flattery, saying they cannot afford to lose your influence— you 
could do so much good by remaining among them. Oh, how 
necessary in this "evil day" is the faith— 

That bears unmoved the world's dread frown, 
Nor heeds its flattering smile; 
That seas of trouble cannot drown, 
Nor Satan's arts beguile. " 

Dearly beloved, let us again repeat the warning: "Stand fast in 
the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not 
again entangled with the yoke of bondage" -not even in the 
slightest degree. 



R408 : page 5 

THE DAY OF JUDGMENT. 

"God hath appointed a day in the which he will judge the world 
in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained"- "Jesus 
Christ the righteous. " "For the Father judgeth no man, but hath 
committed all judgment unto the Son." (Acts 17:31. John 5:22.) 

The word judgment sometimes signifies merely the execution 
of a verdict, or decision reached, but it means in a fuller sense 
the process of trial, including also the decision or result of trial. 
The human race represented in its head, Adam, once stood on 
trial before God. It failed to prove itself worthy of life, and in 
Adam all were condemned, the penalty or verdict being death. - 
"Dying thou shalt die." (Gen. 2:17 -margin.) 

Seemingly, Jehovah had forever sealed the final doom of his 
creatures, the trial being ended and they all condemned to death. 
But not so; he had thus condemned all through one 
representative (Adam), that he might have mercy upon all 
through another representative-Christ Jesus (Rom. 5:19). 

In due time Jesus was placed on trial as a second representative 
man. He was in all points tempted (tried) like as we are, yet 
without sin (Heb. 4:15). In his trial Jesus was a victor; he was 
thus proved 

R408 : page 6 



worthy of life according to his Father's law. Then by giving 
himself (his humanity) a ransom for all (1 Tim. 2:6), he 
purchased all of the fallen race from, or out of death. The object 
of the ransom was not to justify sin, nor to bring back the sinner 
to continue a life of sin, but to afford each an individual trial for 
life in hope that all, having had a taste of the bitterness of sin, 
might return to harmony and communion with God through 
Jesus, and live. It is for this reason that the world is to be judged 
again. They were tried and condemned once already through 
Adam, as we have shown, and a second chance for life comes to 
all the race through Christ Jesus-an individual chance. 

The second judgment or trial of the race, unlike the first, will be 
an individual trial, when every man who dies shall die for his 
own sin and not for Adam's (Jer. 31:29,30). This individual trial 
will be under the most favorable circumstances, and will decide 
their final everlasting destiny. But before they can have such a 
trial, they must first be redeemed from the consequences of the 
first trial. 

It should be remembered that the church selected from the world 
during this Gospel age is not reckoned as a part of the World. 
Jesus said, "They are not of the world, even as I am not of the 
world." (John 17:16.) This Gospel age, has not been the World's 
day of trial or judgment, but the church's only. Only a small part 
of mankind have yet been blessed with knowledge sufficient for 
a full, fair trial as individuals. But we thank God that he has 
"appointed a day (period) in the which he will judge the World 
in righteousness "-fully and fairly, as our text affirms. 

Our hearts rejoice with gratitude and praise as we realize the 
blessings to come to all mankind, when the knowledge of the 
Lord shall fill the whole earth, for all must have full knowledge 
in order to a full and righteous trial. God could have had the 
World's trial-day begin where ours did, (the church's) at 
Pentecost, but it pleased him to permit six days of evil (six 
thousand years) to pass, and then to bring in a seventh day of 
rest from the dominion of evil (the millennium, or seventh 
thousand years), in which the World should have a more 
favorable individual trial under the reign of Jesus. All who will, 
may then have back all that was lost through Adam's sin— human 
perfection 

R409 : page 6 

of life and happiness. 

As heretofore shown, the trial of the church, now in progress, is 
not a trial of men to see whether they are worthy of human life 
and perfection eternally, but it is a trial of new creatures. Certain 
ones, justified from sin by faith in Christ, have presented 
themselves as human sacrifices to death— the death of all human 
aims and hopes and being. Their trial is to see whether they will 
fulfill this their covenant. If they do it, they will be doing with 



their humanity what Jesus did with his, and such shall share with 
Jesus, their Lord, the glory and honor of the divine nature. 

The trial of the World when Satan and evil are bound (Rev. 
20:2) will be less severe and the prize for which they will be 
running (a right to existence as perfected human, or earthly 
beings) will be less glorious than that for which we run. Theirs 
will be a gloriously satisfying portion, however, since the 
natural man cannot receive the things of the spirit, for they are 
spiritually discerned. What a loving and wise provision! All will 
be perfectly satisfied- they on the earthly plane, we on the 
heavenly. 

When the World is on trial (during the millennial age), not only 
Jesus will be their Judge, but his Bride— the overcomers now 
being selected, then made one with him, will sit with him in the 
throne and judge the world, as we read: "Do ye not know that 
the saints shall judge the world?" (1 Cor. 6:2.) 



R409 : page 6 

THE DAY OF THE LORD. 

"The great day of His wrath is come, who shall be able to 
stand?" Rev. 6:17. 

"The day of the Lord" is a scriptural name for a period of time, 
during which the Gospel and Millennial ages lap; the one 
ending, the other commencing. Concerning it we read— "Shall 
not the Day of the Lord be darkness and not light, even very 
dark, and no brightness in it?" (Amos 5:20.) "Ho (improperly 
translated woe; see Young's translation) you that desire the Day 
of the Lord: The Day of the Lord is darkness and not light." (vs. 
18.) 

It is "The great day of His wrath. " This dark day is at once the 
closing scene of the night of weeping, and the dawn of the 
morning of joy. We desire your attention not merely to the 
Scripture evidence that there will be such a day, or time, but 
especially to the events that will transpire during that day, and 
their chronological order. 

This time of trouble comes first upon the nominal church. We 
read, "The harvest is the end of the world" (age). It includes the 
sifting of the true wheat from among the tares in the nominal 
church, and the burning of the tares. This work has been rapidly 
progressing in our midst during the past seven years. The sickle 
of truth has been gathering and separating from the world, the 
truly consecrated children of God who faithfully follow the 
leading of truth, and such shall be accounted worthy to escape 
the tribulation coming (Luke 21:36), while lukewarm and 
merely nominal Christians shall share it with the world. 



This separation of truth from error, and of truth-seekers from 
time honored systems of error, brought about by the unfolding 
of truth now due to the household of faith, causes great trouble 
and final overthrow to those systems. The light reveals and 
condemns the darkness, and the real "children of light" rejoice in 
it, while those not in the light "weep and lament," as foretold in 
Rev. 18. The tottering and overthrow of the nominal church is 
the beginning of the trouble on the world, since the interests of 
the church and world are so closely linked. The Church, both 
Papal and Protestant has exerted a mighty influence upon the 
masses of the people, and has greatly aided governments in 
controlling them. Therefore the great, the mighty, and the rich, 
will weep and lament her fall. 

The trouble of the nations during "the Day of the Lord," is a 
natural consequence of the transfer of authority and rulership 
from the Devil, who is the prince of this world-age (John 
14:30), to "Him whose right it is"— Christ-who, in the beginning 
of the Millennial Age, "takes to himself His great power and 
reigns;"-"And the nations were angry and thy wrath is come," 
read along connectedly. Rev. 11:17. 

Unquestionably the kingdoms of this world are loyal to their 
prince. They are mainly controlled by evil, selfish, corrupt men, 
the agents and representatives of the "Prince of Darkness," who 
do his will. When the new Prince takes control, the dominion is 
to be given into new hands, and the Lord proclaims: "I will 
overthrow the throne of the kingdoms and I will destroy the 
strength of the kingdoms of the Gentiles." Hag. 2:22. 

Thus by "breaking in pieces "—throwing down- "the kingdoms of 
this world become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ," 
"and he shall reign forever." Rev. 11:15. Under the new rule 
there will be new rulers, and we read, "The saints of the Most 
High shall take the kingdom, (dominion) and possess the 
kingdom forever," Daniel 7:18. "All peoples, nations and 
languages shall serve Him. " At present they do not, and they 
must be brought to submission by chastisement; and this is 
accomplished in "The day of the Lord." The overthrow of 
nations and society will necessarily involve individual trouble. 
But, when the judgments of the Lord are in the Earth the 
inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. Isa. 26:9. 

This trouble is graphically described by the Prophet: "That day 
is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of 
wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess. I 
will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, 
because they have sinned against the Lord. Neither their silver 
nor their gold shall be able to deliver them, in the day of the 
Lord's wrath." Zeph. 1:15,18. "Therefore wait ye upon me, saith 
the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey: for my 
determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the 
kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my 



fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of 
my jealousy. For then will I turn to the people a pure language, 
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve Him 
with one consent." Zeph. 3:8,9. 

So extreme is the trouble here described, that the world is 
symbolically said to be burned up by the Lord's anger-yet it has 
a good effect, for after all the indignation against, and 
destruction of governments, the people remain [The destruction 
is that of government life,] and having experienced the misrule 
of the "Prince of this World" they are prepared to have the Lord 
take His great power and reign, and to "serve the Lord with one 
consent. " 

We expect that this distress and trouble, will all come about in a 
very natural way. Very many Scriptures seem to teach that the 
kingdoms of the earth will be overthrown by a rising of the 
people, goaded to desperation by the oppression of unjust 
governments. Such a rising and overturning, Socialists, 
Communists, and Nihilists of to-day are organizing for, and will 
gladly bring about when they can. 

Now, while Scripture recognizes wrong and oppression as 
existing in the nations, and foretells this as the way in which 
they will be overthrown, and says: "Go to now ye rich men, 
weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you; ye 
have heaped treasure together for the last days. Behold the hire 
of the laborers, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth." Jas. 
5:1.— yet it does not recognize this Communism as right, but the 
contrary, rather instructing believers to "obey the powers that 
be" as long as they last, saying to us-be patient therefore, 
brethren, unto the coming (presence) of the Lord. " 

Rev. 6:15, figuratively describes that time of falling of 
kingdoms when every mountain (kingdom) and island shall be 
moved. The kings and chief ones as well as bondmen will 
recognize in this trouble that "The great day of his wrath is 
come," and will seek to be covered and protected by the great 
mountains (kingdoms) of earth, and to be hid in the great rocks 
of this world (secret societies). But they shall not be able to 
deliver them in the day of the Lord's anger, for all the kingdoms 
of the world shall be thrown down, and instead of these 
mountains (kingdoms) "the kingdom of the Lord becomes a 
great mountain, and fills the whole earth." Daniel 2:35,45. 

Malachi 4:1, describes the coming day of trouble and sees the 
anger of the Lord there displayed- "the fire of God's jealousy." 
"Behold the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the 
proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day 
that cometh shall burn them up. " Here the wicked are 
symbolized by stubble, God's wrath by fire, and the righteous by 
"calves of the stall." vs. 2. 



Peter (3:10,12) describes this "Day of the Lord," and under 
symbol of heavens, refers to the governments. "But the day of 
the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the 
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, [overthrow of 
governments with great confusion] and the elements shall melt 
with fervent heat. The earth also, and the works that are therein 
shall be burned up. " [The elements of the (heavens) 
governments as well as of (earth) society in general, will be 
dissolved in the great trouble (fire) of that day. The word here 
translated elements is the same that Paul uses in speaking of "the 
beggarly elements" of this world. [Gal. 4:9.] 

R410 : page 6 

Scripture teaches that in the Millennial age fleshly Israel will 
be the chief nation, "the joy of the whole earth." And we find 
that whilst other nations fall during the day of the Lord, they 
gradually come into prominence until in the latter part of that 
"day of wrath;" when "the battle of the great day" is fought, we 
find Jerusalem safely inhabited, her people having much cattle 
and goods. (Ezek. 38:12.) They will doubtless go to Palestine, 
not through respect to promises of God, nor with the expectation 
of restoration to national power, but with true Jewish perception 
they will realize before others the dangers to which property, 
etc., will be exposed during this overthrow of order; and they 
will choose to be far away from the strongholds of communism. 
Yet even there they will not be entirely secure, for God and his 
bands say, "Come, let us go up to take a spoil and prey," and 
they come against Jerusalem a great company to pillage and rob 
the wealthy Jews there gathered from all quarters of the globe. 
(Ezek. 38:8,12.) 

Zech. (14:1,4) describes the battle then fought. "Behold, the day 
of the Lord cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst 
of thee. For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; 
and the city shall be taken and the houses rifled, and half of the 
city shall go forth into captivity. " Here God interposes and 
defends them, and here they come to recognize Jesus as the Son 
of God, for "the Lord my God shall come, and all thy saints with 
thee." 

In Zech. 12:3, God declares that he will deliver them, "though 
all the people of the earth be gathered against them." Verse 10 
describes the recognition of him whom they have pierced, and 
their sorrow when, in that day, God "pours upon them the spirit 
of grace and supplication. " 

Here are a number of events: The "time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation, "-the return of the Jews to Palestine 
and the reorganization of the Jewish nation, though not 
independent -the gathering of great wealth to Jerusalem, which 
tempts the hordes of Gog, Togomar, and many peoples, to go up 
"to take a spoil"--"the battle of the great day of God Almighty," 



fought at Jerusalem— the partial success of the invaders, and in 
the hour of darkness to the Jew, the power of Messiah 
manifested, in some way effecting their deliverance and their 
recognition of the long waited for Messiah, with the cry, "Lo, 
this is our God, we have waited for him and he will save us." 
Then they will recognize him as the one whom they had once 
rejected, and as they look upon him "whom they have pierced" 
when God will "pour upon them the spirit of grace and 
supplication," and they shall mourn for their sin, and be 
accepted again into fellowship with God. The Day of the Lord is 
"the day of Jacob's trouble, but he (Israel) shall be saved out of 
it." These events we expect in about the order mentioned. We 
believe that the word of God furnishes us with indubitable proof 
that we are now living in this "Day of the Lord," that it began in 
1 874, and is a day of forty years' duration, as was "the day of 
temptation in the wilderness," when Israel proved God, and saw 
his works "forty years." (Heb. 3:9.) 

And it is astonishing how very rapidly these things, once looked 
at as absurd and impossible, are becoming realities. When we, 
with a few others, declared these things a few years ago, and 
called attention to the fact that Scripture taught that this trouble 
would be occasioned by a rising of the people and the overthrow 
of governments —Communism— the idea was ridiculed. 
Communism was at that time little known or felt; but to-day 
every nation is in dread, and Nihilism, Communism, and 
Socialism are household words, and we see "men's hearts failing 
for fear and for looking after those things coming on the earth, 
for the powers of heaven (governments) shall be shaken. " (Luke 
21:26.) 

Of recent years the Jew has been coming into prominence, 
furnishing the world as capitalists and statesmen, such names as 
Rothschild, Disraeli, Gambetta, and Montefiero, while yet more 
recently, complications of other nations are placing the control 
of Palestine in the hands of Hebrews, and opening it to them as a 
people for their home, whither the poorer classes are now 
flocking in great numbers from Russia, where one-third of the 
race are said to reside. And what can be more probable than that 
the wealthy ones, as already suggested, should flee there to 
escape the anarchy and insecurity of earth's falling empires? 

Thus there is abundant evidence for all who will "take heed to 
the sure word of prophecy," and who are found watching for its 
fulfillment, that the Day of the Lord is indeed upon us- "Who 
shall be able to stand?" "Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth 
his garments." 



R410 : page 6 



THE LAW OF GOD. 

Christians are in the habit of looking at "the law" as a great 
enemy. Why? Because it does not countenance the least sin. It 
says, "walk before me and be thou perfect." Is that not right- 
could a perfect God recognize or make a law in any way 
imperfect? Surely not. The reason men count the law their 
enemy is that all have sinned, and ever since the disobedience of 
Adam they have been in the condition known as "sinful flesh." 
Prior to sin's entrance, the law was Adam's friend, and justified 
him; but the condition of death obtained after sin had entered, 
and man in this fallen condition of death finds it utterly 
impossible to so live and act in harmony with his Maker, that 
God's perfect law would not condemn him. And since all are 
sinners, of course none but a defective law could recognize such 
persons as perfect. The law of God has condemned all, and 
every one who has reasoning faculties seems to recognize that 
he is not perfect. 

God has always had a law; even before the giving of it at Mount 
Sinai. Since God always has been perfect, His laws always have 
been perfect and condemned and opposed even the slightest sin. 
Abel, Noah, Abraham and all the patriarchs recognized the fact 
that they were sinners when they made altars and sacrificed 
thereon, before attempting to hold communion. Thus they 
acknowledged themselves sinners and unable of themselves to 
approach God. How different from the way Adam and God 
walked and talked in the Garden! No sacrifices or offerings for 
sin were there needed, for Adam was justified, or recognized as 
right by God's law. Thus we see that what the patriarchs knew of 
God's law condemned them. 

The giving of the full law from Sinai did not take away man's 
sin. No, it only showed it the more fully. Did the keeping of it 
ever justify any of them? No; "By the deeds of the law shall no 
flesh be justified 

R410 : page 7 

in His (God's) sight. " Was the fault in the law, or in the people? 
"The law is holy," and God's commands "holy and just and 
good." (Rom. 7:12.) The imperfection was with mankind. Since, 
then, the law did not justify them, it must have condemned 
them, even as it had condemned the patriarchs. Not any more 
really (for there is only one penalty-death) but more loudly. 
They were no greater sinners than those of the Patriarchal Age 
who had not had the full law given them, but they were shown 
their condition as sinners more clearly. Why? That they might 
see their own fallen and imperfect condition and learn the 
exceeding sinfulness of SIN. (Rom. 7:13), and by this 
knowledge be prepared for the Redeemer. 

We have seen that God always has had a perfect law which 
condemned every sin in every being, and how it was shown in 



different degrees to the patriarchs and Israel, yet that the effect 
was the same— condemnation— only more fully realized by those 
who saw the law most clearly. Now, how about the great 
heathen world? Surely a righteous law could not say: The 
heathen are RIGHTEOUS; unless they live in harmony with 
God. And if you thought they were living in harmony with God 
you would not send missionaries to them. No, they too, are 
condemned by God's law. And as Paul says: These that have not 
the law (the full written law as given to Israel) "show the work 
of the law written in their hearts," a spark of that principle of 
justice and knowledge of right and wrong which must have been 
an important part of the natural organization of the first perfect 
man, Adam; a spark merely, not quite extinguished by the 
degrading effects of sin. 

What did this spark of conscience do for them? It sometimes 
justified, and sometimes condemned. But if their spark of 
conscience condemned them only ONCE during their lifetime, it 
showed that they were imperfect— sinners-hence subject to the 
sin penalty, death. 

Now, "all unrighteousness is sin," and "sin is the transgression 
of the law," and "the wages of sin is death. " So we see that the 
only voice of the law of God to any who hear it, is: You cannot 
live. "All have sinned and come short of the glory of God": 
Therefore must "every mouth be stopped and all the world 
become guilty before God." (Rom. 3:9,19.) 

There lay the whole human family dead and dying through sin, 
the law hanging up before them, they admit, is grand, "just" and 
"holy. " They were told that "The man that doeth these things 
shall live." (Rom. 10:5, Gal. 3:12.) But O, they could not do 
them. Some tried hard, as Paul describes, Rom. 7:14-24. When 
with their minds they resolved to "do those things and live, " 
they found sin in their members hindering and preventing. When 
the striving ones found they could not deliver 

R411 : page 7 

themselves from death, they exclaimed: "Wretched man that I 
am, who will deliver me from this body of death?" (Diaglott) or, 
from the sin and death which has gotten possession of me. When 
he so cries out, he has reached the place God wanted to bring 
him to, i.e., to realize that he can NEVER deliver himself from 
death and sin. But some one asks: If he dies does not the act of 
dying fill all the requirements of the law, and could he not, after 
thus dying, be raised up by God? No, you err in supposing that 
the act of dying is the penalty. Man has been dying ever since 
sin entered the world, but the penalty will not be entirely 
inflicted until all are dead. The penalty is, that sinners shall have 
life no longer; they forfeit their right to live. 

But when will the law of God release the sinner from the 
bondage of death? Never; if he could not obey the law while 



partially dead, he certainly cannot when completely so. Ever 
since the "fall" from perfect manhood through sin, man has been 
in a dying condition, sometimes spoken of as already dead (see 
Matt. 8:22). And none but a perfect man could keep a perfect 
law. But, says one, did not God send his Son into the world to 
show us how we could work our way up to spiritual life- 
appearing among us on the lowest round of the ladder, did He 
not point out to us the way; he being thus "our forerunner?" 

This view in many respects is held by a great many, mostly 
"Unitarians" and "Universalists" and like many other views has 
a mixture of truth in it; but as a whole is far from being "the 
truth" on this subject. Jesus did indeed "lay aside the glory 
which he had with the Father, before the world;" He did appear 
to "set us an example that we should follow in his footsteps" and 
to be "our forerunner," but more, he is also our "Redeemer" 
from the curse of the Law. The curse of the law upon us as 
sinners is death. How did he redeem us from death? To redeem 
is to purchase back. He therefore is said to have "bought us with 
his own precious blood." Blood represents life- "The life of the 
flesh is in the blood" (Lev. 17:11), therefore shed blood 
represents death or sacrificed life. "He gave his life; " "He shed 
his blood;" "He tasted death;" all have the same meaning. But 
how could his life purchase or redeem or buy ours? He as a man, 
a perfect man, kept the perfect law; and was therefore 
uncondemned by it. Therefore the same law which was the 
sinners' enemy condemning us to death, was his friend and 
guaranteed life to him. But was he not born into the world under 
condemnation of death, as much as any other son of Adam? No, 
he was a direct creation of God- "made in the likeness of sinful 
flesh," but "in him was no sin." If he had done sin or been born a 
sinner, his life would have been forfeited as was ours. 

If born under condemnation as other human beings he would 
have been as much a sinner as we, and as such would have been 
obliged to die for himself and consequently would have nothing 
to give as a ransom for our life. But he was perfect, kept the law, 
had a right to perfect human life forever; "But for the joy set 
before him, " by the promise of the Father to raise him from the 
dead a spiritual body, he renounced the natural, human life, and 
gave it for our ransom. 

But when he arose from death, was not that a taking back of the 
price? Yes, if he had taken back the same life which he had laid 
down; but he did not take back the human; he was quickened by 
the Spirit -"made a quickening Spirit," raised a "spiritual body." 
There is a natural, human body and there is a spiritual body. 

Thus "by his precious (valuable) blood" (life), we were 
"redeemed from the curse of the law" -death. To what kind of 
life were we redeemed? The same which man had before death 
(the curse) came; the same kind that Jesus gave for us, i.e., 
human life. But we are promised spiritual life, and that we shall 



be made like unto Christ's glorious body? Yes; it is a part of 
God's offer to us (during the Gospel age), that if we die to 
earthly and fleshly— natural— life, we may be reckoned as 
"members of his body," and partake of the same kind of life as 
our Head. If we leave our Father's house (the human) we may 
become espoused to the Lord of glory as His Bride. In this 
arrangement, we are reckoned as being justified to the perfect 
natural life first, else we could not give our lives. Being justified 
to life, Jesus says to us, you can either have this natural life, or, 
if you will renounce this natural, as I did, and become dead to 
the world, you shall have instead, the spiritual life and body. "If 
we be dead with Christ, we shall live with him." Rom. 6:4-8. "It 
is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also 
live with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him. " 2 Tim. 
2:11. "Ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings." 1 Pet. 4:13. "Joint 
heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may 
be also glorified together." Rom. 8:17. 

And it is because God thus waits until the elect number, the 
bride, the body, the Church, has "filled up the measure of the 
afflictions of Christ, which are behind, " that the "restitution of 
all things," purchased for the world by the blood of Christ, is 
delayed and yet future. The Head suffered and died over 
eighteen hundred years ago; but all of the suffering and death of 
the body are not yet completed. Not noticing this, has caused 
wonder on the part of almost all, that the benefits and results of 
the ransom have not sooner come. (See typical sacrifices, in the 
Tabernacle Tract.) 

But would it be right for God to reckon the one righteous life 
given, as a full payment for the lives of the millions of sinners 
who have died? Does not the price-one, for a billion or more- 
seem like a short payment? 

This is a reasonable question, and we will allow Paul to give it a 
reasonable answer. He is a logical reasoner, as well as an 
inspired Apostle, and argues that, as God had seen proper to 
condemn all men to death on account of Adam's disobedience, 
so he had a right to reckon the second Adam a representative 
man, and justify to life all the race, in return for the sacrifice of 
this one perfect life. "For as by one man's disobedience many 
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be 
made righteous. "Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment 
came upon all men to condemnation," (condemned to suffer the 
penalty of sin, death,))"even so by the righteousness of one, the 
free gift came upon all men unto justification to life. " 
Remember that none now enjoy life; our condition is a dying 
one. "Dying thou shalt die" was the penalty pronounced on 
Adam. 

The condition of perfect life as it was enjoyed before death 
came, is what all men are justified to, by the obedience of "Jesus 
Christ who, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man. " 



"For as in Adam (or by Adam's sin) all die," so "in Christ (or by 
Christ's obedience, etc.) shall all be made alive." As the first 
Adam's bride was a party to the sin, so we see the second 
Adam's bride is made a party with her Lord in the removing of 
the curse. Oh glorious plan, of our all wise and loving Father, 
and the exceeding riches of his grace toward us, in Christ Jesus. 

But says one, I thought that Jesus had nullified, set aside and 
destroyed the law; and that therefore mankind could approach 
God. Oh no, that was a great mistake. Would it not be strange 
indeed if the Father made a law, which we have seen was "just" 
and "holy," and in fact the only one he could give because 
perfect and holy himself, would it seem proper even to think of 
Jesus as setting aside and destroying that "just" and "holy" law 
or in any way making a league with sin or sinners? No, no. He 
came to do the Father's will and the law is the record of that 
will. Jesus kept it himself and taught the true meaning of it to be 
higher than the letter, and that to be "angry with a brother 
without a cause" was to violate the command "Thou shalt not 
kill. " No, says Paul: "Christ magnified the law (made it larger 
and more minute) and made it honorable," showed in fact that, 
that law could not be set aside or broken. He showed too, by 
keeping it perfectly himself, that God's law was just, and not 
beyond a perfect man's ability. 

But we read, "Christ is the end of the law. " What can that mean? 
The trouble is you have not quoted the connections. The text 
reads: "For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to 
every one that believeth." (Rom. 10:4.) To whom is he this? To 
believers. How? Righteously, not by breaking it, but by 
righteously fulfilling its requirements, and we in him are just 
before the law. Because we in Him are reckoned dead to the 
world and alive toward God through Him— our new life, another 
similar text reads: "There is therefore now no condemnation to 
them which are IN Christ Jesus." Why are those in Christ not 
condemned? Because, since coming into Him by faith they have 
received of His spirit, and with Him can say, "I delight to do thy 
will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart." (Ps. 11:8.) 
They are then alive spiritually though yet living in the dead body 
of sinful flesh which they are supposed to, and which by the 
holy spirit given they are enabled to "crucify." These walk not 
after the flesh, but after the spirit, and to all so walking in Christ, 
there is no condemnation from the law. 

And in the glorious millennial age, when all shall know God 
from least to greatest, when, "the knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth; "-"the times of restitution" -there will be 
the same "holy and just" law, and under the "Royal Priesthood" 
after the order of Melchisedec (the order of an endless life) poor 
fallen humanity will be helped back again, to that perfect 
condition from whence Adam fell; a condition in harmony with 
God's law, and therefore in harmony with God. 



But will they receive no punishment for misdeeds of the present 
life? They will 

R412 : page 7 

receive punishment, "stripes" in proportion as they had light and 
lived contrary to it. As our Master explained, "It shall be more 
tolerable for Sodom," in the day of judgment (in the age of trial) 
than for the Jews to whom He spoke, because the Sodomites had 
sinned against less light. (Matt. 11:24.) There will be many or 
few "stripes," in proportion to the amount of light they have had, 
and the use made of it. 

There will be rewards given to some during that age also; "for 
whosoever shall give to one of these little ones (of the little 
flock) a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, shall in 
no wise lose his reward." (Matt. 10:42.) And when the King 
shall sit "on the throne of his glory" (during the Millennial age), 
some will be rewarded for having ministered to the members of 
his body. "Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of the least of these" 
(in the throne) "ye did it unto me." Matt. 25:40. 



R412 : page 7 

WHEN we announce, as a part of God's plan of salvation, now 
due to be understood, that the Sodomites (Ezek. 16:48-63) and 
all men who have never yet come to a knowledge of the truth (1 
Tim. 2:4) are to be saved out of Adamic-death, brought to life 
again by reason of Jesus' ransom; and that they may then be 
made acquainted with the truth and have an opportunity by 
obedience to that knowledge, to reach perfection as men, and 
live forever, it seems as strange to those who hear it, as did the 
announcement of the apostles in the end of the Jewish age, that 
from that time God would call and accept of Gentiles as his 
spiritual sons— Gentiles who but shortly before, had been treated 
as strangers and aliens and children of wrath. 

This shows the importance of our apprehending dispensational 
truths, and ever searching God's Word for the ever increasing 
light on "the path of the just. " 



As in the Jewish age, so it is in the end of this Gospel age of 
which it was a shadow or type. It was not until the ending of the 
Jewish age that God sent light upon the Gospel age and its 
broader work. Thus it is now also; not until the very closing 
hours of the Gospel age does light shine out clear and strong 
upon the now dawning Millennial age and its work for mankind 
in general. 



R412 : page 7 



EVIDENCE OF FRIENDSHIP. 

"Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. 
Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not 
what his Lord doeth, [his plans, etc.] but I have called you 
friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made 
known unto you." John 15:14,15. 

The end of Jesus' earthly ministry was come. During those 
three and a half years he had uttered truths which served to test 
his followers, which proved to some a cause of stumbling— to all 
who were not "Israelites indeed:"— truths which had brought the 
opposition of the nominal Jewish church, and of which, even 
some of his followers, had said: "This is an hard saying; who 
can hear it? and walked no more with him. " But now this work 
of separation was all over; even Judas had gone out, and Jesus 
and the eleven are alone. He has been telling them some things 
regarding their new and high privileges, their new relationship 
toward God about to be purchased by his death, into the 
enjoyment of which they should enter after he should ascend to 
the Father, and His work of redemption be recognized as 
perfect. Then would come the "power from on high"- the Spirit 
which would endue them with ability to understand spiritual, or 
heavenly things. 

It may have escaped the attention of some that at this time the 
disciples were not begotten of the spirit, (John 7:39) though they 
were justified by faith. They were justified human beings, but 
not begotten new creatures, consequently Jesus' teachings 
contain little reference to the highest things, except in parables; 
he explained little concerning the "high calling" of the Bride, but 
said: "I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear 
them now. Howbeit, when he the spirit of truth is come, he will 
guide you into all truth." How this corroborates Paul's statement: 
"The natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of 
God,... neither can he know them because they are spiritually 
discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. Though justified men, they must be 
begotten of the Spirit to comprehend things above the human 
plane. 

After telling them of the future unfolding of truth and of his 
words, he tells them why his revelations are for them, viz.: 
because he will henceforth treat them as friends and reveal all 
things to them. 

There are two important lessons conveyed in these words of the 
Master, as applicable to us as to the eleven Apostles: first, the 
rule by which He judges who are his friends- "Ye are my friends 
if ye do whatsoever I command you." If we submit our wills 
completely to his will, thus becoming dead to the world and 
alive toward God— then he reckons us friends; second, the rule 
by which we may judge whether he reckons us among this class 



of special "friends," viz.: If he reveals his work and plans to us, 
even all things which he has heard of the Father. 

Now apply these rules to yourself. If you can say, "Not my will 
but thine be done;" not my plan of saving the world; not my plan 
relative to the preaching of the Gospel; not my will regarding 
the nominal church; not my will regarding myself and what I 
shall do or be, but "Thy will be done" in all these things, then 
you are a "friend" in this special sense spoken of by Jesus. Now 
try the other rule: Have you evidence that you are a special 
friend? Is the Spirit leading you daily into more and more of an 
understanding of his words and plan-revealing more and more 
of the "mystery" kept hid in former ages, and showing you 
"things to come?" Do you say yes? Very good, then yours is the 
blessed experience of heavenly wisdom, which at the same time 
is a proof that you are a special "friend." Continue your 
consecration, 

R412 : page 8 

continue your sacrifice, and you shall continue to abide in his 
love and to have fresh evidences of his friendship by growth "in 
grace and in knowledge. " 

If the Word and plan of God are not opening before you: If you 
are not being led of the Spirit into all truth— if he is not showing 
you "things to come," (John 16:13.) then it looks indeed as 
though you were not of the special friends, and it should be your 
first work to gain this divine friendship by self-surrender- 
consecration. 

All who believe themselves acceptable servants of our Master 
should look for, and not be satisfied without this witness of the 
Spirit that they are Christ's friends. 



page 8 

LETTER FROM BROTHER SUNDERLIN. 

FORT EDWARD, N.Y. "Greatly beloved" brother Russell: 

Yours of the 18th came to hand Monday evening, 21st inst. I 
accept with gratitude the sympathy and love expressed, and I 
know that you will rejoice with me on account of returning 
health; in the Lord's good time I have been directed to the 
remedy ("Compound Oxygen") that is now working great good 
to me. 

I always feel like chiding myself when I begin to be lavish of 
special praises to God for health, or any of those things that men 
regard as blessings. It is "Our Father," and sick or well, pain or 
ease, his infinite all abounding love is the same, and by each and 
every means, and all his dealing with me, he is "treasuring up 
his bright designs." 



This has sustained me, and though he let me down, down, 
DOWN, to a lone dreary waste of mind and spirit, where I had 
no strength, I was able by his grace always to gasp "Thy will be 
done." Amen! It must be best; proceed O Lord with thy good 
pleasure in me, and burn up all the dross. 

I thank you and appreciate the kindness that prompted you to 
send me the medical formula, and the doctor from whom it came 
also; but it so happened (?) that just before it came I had written 
to doctors in Philadelphia, regarding my case, and though they 
gave me no particular encouragement, but said: "We don't see 
how you live," I had confidence in the OXYGEN, and though I 
felt as though I could not afford the price, I sent for it. Before it 
came, I was much worse, and it found me in a direful condition; 
but it has just raised me right up— no guess-work about it. 

One week ago last Saturday, it came about noon. I was so bad 
that night that it took five or six doses of morphine to quiet me, 
the next night one, and none since. The third night after it came I 
slept sweetly without any anodyne. 

One week ago, Monday, I could not sit up to have my bed made, 
but got to one side to have it stirred and regulated— four days 
after the "Oxygen treatment" came I rode out. At first getting up 
I hobbled about on crutch and cane-I now walk about the yard a 
little thus, and can walk about the house with cane only. Of 
course it is a new strength, a sort of infantile life; but I am 
thankful for it, while my dear Lord understands that I do not 
undervalue my sickness and pain and sorrow and darkness and 
gloom, which though intended for evil by the enemy, is among 
the "all things" working for good. 

I had hoped to finish my last article for "Z.W.T." but shall not 
be able to, in time for next issue. It is yet hard work to think and 
write, but I do not now feel the labor of hanging on to life. 

With much love to yourself and dear sister Russell, and wishing 
to be remembered to all yours and ours, I am as ever, 



Yours in Christ Jesus, 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 

Our readers will be interested in the above. Brother Sunderlin 
has been in the furnace of affliction for several months and 
unable to write for the TOWER. (His articles in this number, 
were written before his illness.) You will all be glad to know of 
his recovery, though since he has caught cold and got a set-back. 

Regarding the remedy he mentions: It is called "Compound 
Oxygen treatment," and is prepared by at least two firms in 
Philadelphia, Pa. Thinking that a remedy which has done our 
brother so much good might be of benefit to others, we wrote to 
see what terms we could make for our readers. 



We have made arrangements by which you can have what are 
termed "Home treatments," for seven dollars and fifty cents, the 
usual price of which is from ten to fifteen dollars. You can either 
address Drs. Feltwell and Fondey, Philadelphia, Pa., saying that 
you are a Watch Tower reader; or you can send your order to us 
and we will attend to it for you. 

This remedy is specially recommended for Consumption and 
Nervous Debility and Spinal Weakness. By enclosing stamp for 
postage, and addressing as above, some printed descriptive 
circulars will be sent you. 

EDITOR. 



R412 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Q. If I understand your teachings, you claim that God intends 
to restore all mankind to the original perfection of manhood in 
which he created Adam. I can see that you have a strong 
argument in the fact that Jesus tasted death for all, and thus paid 
our Adamic debt, which was the cause of death and 
imperfection. Particularly strong is the argument when we 
remember that only a fragment of the race ever heard of the only 
name given under heaven or among men whereby we must be 
saved. I admit, then, that the ideas advanced are consistent with 
both Justice and Love; that the arguments and inferences are 
strong, and the entire plan Godlike, but my question is, Is there 
any positive statement of Scripture to the effect that man will be 
restored to Edenic perfection and bliss and life? 

A. We claim that the teachings on this point are positive, and not 
merely inferential; that only the strong prejudice of early 
training hinders Christians from seeing it to be so. Only this 
prejudice and training leads any one to suppose that God will 
punish willful sin with a life of torment when he positively 
declares, "The wages of sin is death" (cessation of life), and that 
"all the wicked will he destroy." (Psa. 145:20.) 

We inquire how else could Jesus be the true light that lighteth 
every man that cometh into the world? (John 1:9.) How else 
could the news of a Savior be "good tidings of great joy to all 
people? (Luke 2:10.) If only a few have yet heard the "good 
tidings" in any sense, must there not be a restitution to life as 
well as a future proclamation of the only name given? 
Otherwise, God's plan is a failure. But we have the positive 
statement that "God will have all men to be saved, and to come 
unto the knowledge of the truth." (1 Tim. 2:4.) Notice, they are 
to be saved first, saved from the Adamic death through the 
efficacy of the ransom price, and afterward brought to a 



knowledge of the truth under the favoring circumstances of the 
reign of Christ. 

For a pointed text in support of restitution we refer you to Acts 
3:19-21. Here Peter not only tells of the "times (years) of 
restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets," but he points out that this restitution cannot and will 
not take place until Christ our Lord comes. And he comes when 
his church or bride has been selected, to receive her unto 
himself. 

This restitution is mentioned by all the Prophets. Some refer to 
one feature and 

R413 : page 8 

some to another. Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, tell much of the 
restoration of fleshly Israel to favor and to their own land. This, 
which is a part of the general restitution, a slight beginning, is 
already commencing, and, as we have heretofore shown, was 
due to commence in 1878. There, in fact, the favor did begin in 
the decree of the Berlin conference, which placed Palestine 
under English protection and opened the door for the restoration 
now beginning. And before long it will be found that the results 
of the recent Egyptian war will accrue yet more, to Israel's 
favor, and their repossession of Palestine. 

The Prophet Job, in his own experience, is made a type of the 
restitution. He first lost all earthly blessings-human health, 
wealth, friends, etc.; then he had all these restored to him 
exactly as at first, except that the wealth was increased. So 
humanity was degraded to the dunghill, but is to be restored to 
its "former estate," and will have increase of pleasure and wealth 
in the increased blessings of knowledge, invention, etc. 

The Prophet Moses taught restitution in type. In the same way 
(in type) he wrote of Christ as Jesus said: "Moses wrote of me. " 
(John 5:46.) Every fiftieth year was a jubilee year to Israel, in 
which land and all possessions lost, were fully restored. Thus 
this Prophet spoke pointedly of the coming restitution of all 
things, for which, unconsciously and ignorantly, "the whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. " 
(Rom. 8:22.) Read Lev. 25. 

Ezekiel not only speaks of the restitution of living Jews, but tells 
of the restoration of the dead ones to their former estate. Among 
them he mentions the Sodomites, and says they will be restored. 
We remember Jesus' statement, that "it rained down fire and 
brimstone, and destroyed them all." (Luke 17:29.) Hence we 
know that Ezekiel's prophecy is concerning men, dead for nearly 
a thousand years before he prophesied. Nor need we be 
surprised at the restitution when we remember that Christ died 
for their sins as well as for ours, and that in his estimation the 
Sodomites were far less guilty than some of the Jews of his day 



who had greater light. (Matt. 11:23.) The time of their restitution 
will be the time of their trial or judgment; and Jesus says it will 
be more tolerable for the Sodomites than for some of the Jews, 
in the day of judgment -the Millennial or judgment (trial) age of 
the world. [See article-The Day of Judgment-in another 
column.] 

Read very carefully the Lord's words through Ezekiel, on the 
subject of restoring to a former estate (chap. 16:48-63), 
remembering that Jesus by the grace of God tasted death for 
every man, to be testified in DUE time. (1 Tim. 2:6.) It is 
evident that the due time to receive this "glad tidings" never yet 
came to the Sodomites and billions of others, but there can be no 
doubt that it will come "in DUE TIME"-in the times of 
restitution of all things. 

As we saw in the June number of the TOWER, there is a 
meaning in the word RESURRECTION, little appreciated until 
recently by any of us. We there saw, that the Greek word 
anastasis, from which our word resurrection is translated, means 
to raise, or lift up to perfection. We saw that the saints would be 
lifted up to the perfection of their nature-the DIVINE (2 Pet. 
1:4), while all men who then submit themselves to God will be 
lifted up to the perfection of their nature-the HUMAN. We saw 
that Lazarus and others who were raised to a measure of life 
only, as a consequence, did not experience a resurrection, and 
that this is never called a resurrection in Scripture. Jesus was the 
first being, resurrected. (Col. 1:18.) If this, the proper meaning 
of resurrection, were recognized, how much obscurity would be 
removed. "There shall be a resurrection (raising up to 
perfection) both of the just and unjust." (Acts 24:15.) 

Yes, restitution is abundantly and clearly taught in God's Word, 
if we but get ourselves freed from the bondage of prejudice and 
of man-made church creeds, so that we can "see light in His 
light." 

But understand us clearly, we do not teach everlasting salvation 
for all men. Our claim is that Scripture teaches a salvation of all 
men from Adamic-death and its attendant weaknesses, in order 
that each shall have a full opportunity to secure everlasting life 
by obedience. 

Q. You say that you are not a sect— that you claim no name but 
that of Christ, and object not to be called Christians, though not 
of the denomination so called. But are you not as much of a sect 
as any of the others, only without a name and without a limited 
and written creed? 

A. No, the word sect means a division, or a separation. Every 
sect separates itself from all other Christians by a doctrinal fence 
or creed. Any who would be of them must go inside their pen, 
believe what they believe, deny what they deny, and be called 
by their sectarian name. This practice has become so common 



that many suppose it to be God's arrangement; and any one 
found outside all of these numerous pens, is supposed an enemy 
of God and of truth. 

We are opposed to these pens, but love the many children of 
God, whose growth in grace, and knowledge, and love, is 
hindered by these restraints. We are opposed to these sectarian 
pens, because they are not of Jesus, nor of the apostles, but of 
Satan and Anti-Christ. They prevent the Lord's sheep from 
feeding in the green pastures of truth which the true shepherd 
has provided. 

We stand outside of all these fences and recognize the Lord's 
sheep, whether in or out of the nominal churches, as our 
brethren and sisters; and we urge all in the name of our Master 
to come out— jump the fence or break it down, and come out into 
the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not 
entangled with any yoke of bondage. Thus free, we find his yoke 
easy and our burden light. If all denominational lines and fences 
and names were obliterated, all Christians would stand just 
where we stand now, each taught of God through his Word, and 
each one a brother who exhibits the Spirit of the Head. 

All of these sects are condemned to destruction, and the hour of 
their downfall has come. It will cause pain and distress to all 
who are worshiping and serving these systems of men, instead 
of God; but it will be a blessing in disguise, for thus they will be 
liberated and brought to a refreshing knowledge of God. "Come 
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins," and 
that ye receive not of her plagues." Rev. 18:4. 

Thus you see we are not a sect, and that if all Christians would 
do as we do in this matter, all sects (divisions) would disappear, 
and we would be all one in Christ. Soon under the lead of one 
Master and Teacher, Jesus, we should all come to see things 
from his standpoint. 

Q. If men are to be restored to perfection, and the earth is to 
become as the Garden of Eden, I suppose that you teach that 
men will not go to heaven, but that God created the earth for 
man, and man for earthly existence? 

A. Yes, but do not forget that the church changes its nature, 
from animal to spiritual, from human to divine. These are called 
"new creatures"— a new creation. The new creatures when 
perfected will be like and with Jesus-spiritual beings, and in a 
heavenly or spiritual condition— a height of glory 
incomprehensible to the human mind -an exhibition of the 
exceeding riches of God's grace. The earth then blossoming as 
the rose, will be all that could be wished for, by those possessing 
the human nature. See chart in "Food for Thinking Christians," 
page 105. 



R413 : page 8 

"MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN." 

In answer to numerous inquiries we would say that this work is 
progressing, and will issue as soon as possible, though doubtless 
that will not be for some time. We desire that when issued it 
may be not only a book for study, but valuable for reference on 
all Bible topics. We request your patience. 

page 8 

BIBLE STUDENTS' HELPS. 

Realizing the necessity of helps in Bible study, as needful as 
tools to the mechanic, we have for some time past made it our 
business to seek and negotiate for some of the more 
indispensable helps at wholesale rates or less, for the benefit of 
our readers, very many of whom could not afford a large outlay. 

We have heretofore mentioned the superior value of The 
Emphatic Diaglott, a literal translation of the New Testament, 
which furnishes in addition the Greek text, and a word-for-word 
English translation of the same— very valuable to a Greek 
scholar, and doubly so to the student who is not. We still have 
some copies of this work slightly damaged on inside of cover 
(scarcely noticeable) which we can mail you for $1.50 per copy, 
the usual price of which is $4. This we consider superior to all 
other helps. 

Cruden's complete Bible Concordance, well known standard 
work, very useful in finding Scriptural passages, we can mail for 
$1.20 per copy, cloth bound. 

"Young's Bible Concordance" gives each word in order under its 
Hebrew or Greek original, with the literal English meaning of 
each. A very valuable work for careful students. By express, 
$1.75; by mail, 51c. extra for postage. Cloth bound. 

Oxford Teacher's Bibles. -We can supply you with any of these 
at the wholesale price. We have one job lot of these at $1.30 per 
copy. They contain partial concordance, maps, etc. Limp cover, 
gilt edge, small sized type. 

The "Millennial Day Dawn," when ready, will prove, we hope, a 
very valuable helper. 

R413 : page 8 

WATCH TOWER TRACT FUND. 

We have a fund which is spent as fast as it accumulates, in 
printing and distributing tracts, slips, and extra-sized editions of 
the "TOWER," such as this number, free. We state this in order 
that if any have a money talent and think favorably of this 



method, they may have the privilege of sharing with us in these 
methods of preaching the "good tidings of great joy." 

EXTRA SIZED 400,000 EDITION. 

This October number is a little larger than our usual issue. We 
send out this month 400,000 copies, and as it will be read by 
many totally unacquainted with the views presented, we desire 
to give them sufficient mental food to excite an appetite for 
more, which we will be glad to furnish on application. 

Order all you can use of this number for judicious free 
distribution. 

TRACTS FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION. 

"THE TABERNACLE and its teachings," a treatise on the 
meaning of the typical offerings and sacrifices. 

"FOOD FOR TfflNKING CHRISTIANS.- Why evil was 
permitted, etc." 

"THE MINISTER'S DAUGHTER," a leaflet suitable for 
awakening thought on the love of God. This is the best tract for 
general distribution, and for enclosing with a letter to a friend. 

The above can be had FREE on application, for free distribution. 


