Handle God’s Word Aright
1 When witnessing to an official, “Philip opened his mouth and, starting with [a certain] Scripture, he declared to him the good news about Jesus.” (Acts 8:35) Philip was “handling the word of the truth aright.” (2 Tim. 2:15) Today, however, traveling overseers have observed that many publishers rarely use the Bible when witnessing. Do you use the Bible in your ministry?
2 God’s Word is the source of everything we believe and teach. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) It is what draws people to Jehovah and educates them for life. That is why it is important that we use the Bible in our ministry rather than merely converse about topics that interest us. (Heb. 4:12) Because most people know little about the Bible, we need to read from it to show them the practical guidance that it offers and the future that it holds out for mankind.
3 Read Directly From the Bible: You might try going to the door without a book bag. You could put the featured literature that you wish to offer in a slim portfolio and carry the Bible in your hand or pocket. Then, when you engage someone in conversation, you can bring out the Bible without causing the person to feel that you are trying to preach a sermon. Position yourself in such a way that your listener can follow along in your Bible. Perhaps ask him to read a verse aloud. A deeper impression is made when he can see what the Bible says rather than just hear it from you. Of course, to help him understand the point of the text, stress the thought-conveying words.
4 A One-Scripture Presentation: After introducing yourself, you might say: “People look to various sources for direction in their lives. What do you feel is the best source of practical guidance? [Allow for response.] What do you think about this statement? [Read Proverbs 2:6, 7, and allow for response.] Human wisdom has proved woefully deficient, leading many people to despair. God’s wisdom, though, has always proved reliable and beneficial.” Then show the publication you are presenting, and highlight from it one example of God’s practical wisdom.
5 Jesus used the Scriptures to aid honesthearted ones. (Luke 24:32) Paul proved Scripturally the things he taught. (Acts 17:2, 3) Our confidence and joy in the ministry will increase as we become ever more skillful in handling God’s Word aright.

