Part 2​—Blessings From Showing Appreciation for Jehovah’s Love
1 In last month’s part on this subject, we highlighted four ways that our appreciation for Jehovah’s love can be shown in the ministry. (1 John 4:9-11) Here we will add five more ways to do this. When we share fully in helping others spiritually, we are blessed.
2 Informal Witnessing: This is an effective way both to find people hungering and thirsting for righteousness and to place helpful literature with them. It is good to ‘buy out the opportune time’ and witness on all occasions and to whomever we meet. (Eph. 5:16) We may have to muster up courage to witness in this way, but if we appreciate God’s love and people’s needs, we will witness at every opportunity.​—2 Tim. 1:7, 8.
3 A missionary was richly blessed for striking up a conversation with a fellow passenger in a taxicab. The man showed interest. Return visits were made, and a Bible study was started. That man came into the truth and progressed to the point of becoming a congregation elder!
4 Writing Letters: Perhaps we are unable to go from house to house because of some physical infirmity or inclement weather. We could write letters, giving a brief witness by mail to individuals we know, those who have lost loved ones in death, or those who were not at home in the territory. We can enclose one of our timely tracts that has an appealing Bible-based message and encourages the recipient to respond if he has any questions. Use your personal return address or that of the Kingdom Hall; please do not use the branch office address.
5 Telephone Witnessing: This is a fine way to reach people whom we are unable to meet in house-to-house activity. If we do it discreetly, with kindness, tact, and skill, we may get a very good response. The February 2001 Our Kingdom Ministry, pages 5-6, provides practical suggestions on how to get the best results.
6 When a sister was witnessing by telephone, she asked a woman whether she had given much thought to what the future holds for her and her family. The woman said that she had. She revealed that because of her despair, she had isolated herself at home. Moved by the genuine concern of the sister, the woman agreed to meet her at a nearby market. As a result, the woman readily accepted a Bible study!
7 Welcoming Strangers: If we love our neighbors, we will be alert to notice any stranger who visits our meeting place and will make him feel welcome. (Rom. 15:7) Let him see that he is among those who are sincerely interested in his spiritual well-being. Our genuine concern and our offer of a personal Bible study may motivate him to accept our help.
8 Our Good Conduct: By our fine conduct, we adorn the truth. (Titus 2:10) When those in the world say good things about us as Jehovah’s Witnesses, they bring honor to our God. (1 Pet. 2:12) This too can help others get started on the way to life.
9 Why not review these five ways to show our appreciation for Jehovah’s great love for us and put them into action? (1 John 4:16) As you do, you will reap many blessings.

