Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points. Check yourself.
● What does it take for one to be able to carry on “to the preserving alive of the soul”?
Strong faith.—Pp. 16, 17.a
● According to H. G. Wells, of what persons was the early organization of Christians composed?
All were preachers.—P. 18.
● In how many different countries, protectorates, islands of the sea and colonies did Jehovah’s witnesses preach the good news during 1962?
One hundred and eighty-nine.—P. 23.
● How many persons did Jehovah’s witnesses baptize during their 1962 service year in symbol of their dedication to Jehovah God?
69,649.—P. 29.
● What does the hearing of good news invariably bring with it?
A challenging responsibility.—P. 40.
● What chapter of what Bible book gives us a fourfold prophetic picture of Christendom’s idolatries?
Ezekiel, chapter 8.—P. 54.
● What does the third of the Ten Commandments forbid?
The taking of the name of Jehovah itself in a worthless or profane way.—P. 68.
● What provokes the battle of Armageddon?
Satan’s attack upon God’s people.—P. 71.
● Why may not a Christian eat the flesh of an animal that died in a trap or was found killed by another animal?
Because it has not been properly bled.—P. 74.
● What are the Behemoth and Leviathan mentioned in Job, chapters 40 and 41?
The hippopotamus; the crocodile.—Pp. 89, 90.
● How many miracles did Elisha perform? How many did Elijah perform?
Sixteen; eight.—P. 95, 96.
● As pointed out in Micah 6:8, what three things does Jehovah require of those walking with him?
Exercise justice, love kindness and be modest.—Pp. 109-112.
● What leading teaching regarding the Christian congregation has Christendom forgotten or ignored?
That every spirit-begotten Christian is a priest.—P. 137.
● What shows that Jehovah’s witnesses understand that Bible teaching?
In that they work to make every member a public praiser of Jehovah.—P. 148.
● What is the best protection for the mind against the smut that is flooding the world?
Filling one’s mind with Bible truths.—P. 155.
● By what other name was the apostle Bartholomew known?
Nathanael.—P. 158.
● What prophecy stated by Jehovah in Eden gives a striking example of the Bible’s inner harmony?
Genesis 3:15: “And I shall put enmity between you and the woman and between your seed and her seed. He will bruise you in the head and you will bruise him in the heel.”—Pp. 171, 172.
● What are some of the ways that demons assault and harass people today?
By voices, by sensations of being touched, by shaking their beds, chairs, and so forth.—Pp. 185, 186.
● To what aids can one resort to overcome assaults from wicked spirit forces?
Prayer, study of God’s Word, obedience to God’s commands, avoiding anything related to spiritism, seeking Christian association.—Pp. 188-190.
● Which Gospel was written first, that of Mark or of Luke?
It appears that Luke wrote his Gospel first.—Pp. 191, 192.
● What does a time of war reveal as to which loyalty comes first for most members of Christendom’s churches?
That their loyalty to their country comes ahead of their loyalty to their church.—P. 202.
● Because of being what kind of temple is it possible for God’s temple to be scattered worldwide?
A spiritual temple.—P. 203.
● What dead thing comes to life in the resurrection?
The dead soul.—Pp. 241-243.
● What does the very name of Easter as well as its trappings such as hot cross buns, eggs and rabbits show as to its origin?
That it is of pagan origin.—Pp. 244-246.
● Whom did God use to establish the canon of the Christian Greek Scriptures?
Not the councils of the Catholic church, but the Christian congregations throughout the ancient world.—P. 248.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1963.

