Determined to Live by Jehovah’s Moral Standards
THE BIBLE makes it clear that if a man and woman live together without the benefit of legal marriage, they are committing fornication and, in such a condition, will not inherit God’s Kingdom. (1 Corinthians 6:9, 10) An experience from the British West Indies tells of a young woman who learned this truth.
In St. Lucia, two of Jehovah’s Witnesses contacted the young woman, and she showed interest in the Bible. As a result, a Bible study was started with her. As she progressed in her understanding, she saw the need to make certain moral adjustments. Although she was the mother of four children, she was not married but was living consensually with a man. Both she and the man had worked hard to build a small house in which all six of them lived.
Recognizing that her life was out of harmony with God’s righteous standards, the young woman was determined to make changes. Either she would have to marry the man she was living with or she would have to separate from him. She discussed the matter with him, but he had no desire to get married. He was quite content with the consensual relationship. What would her faith move her to do? She had to make a decision if she wanted to please Jehovah, and after prayerful consideration, she decided to separate from the man. But where would she live with her four children?
After talking over the matter with the man, an equitable arrangement was reached​—half a house each! With the loving assistance of the brothers, along with the man she was leaving, the house was divided, one half for her and the other half for him. Her half of the house was transported that very day to another location about five miles (8 km) away. Within a week, it was reconstructed and reshaped into a small two-bedroom home.
Having thus taken the necessary steps to bring her life into harmony with Jehovah’s standards, she immediately began to engage in the field service, accompanied by her four children. She dedicated her life to Jehovah and was baptized soon thereafter. To celebrate the occasion, she enrolled as an auxiliary pioneer. She is now further blessed in that her new home is used as a location for a Congregation Book Study, with an average attendance of 17. Indeed, Jehovah blessed her determination to become a clean worshiper of him.

