From Our Readers
Improving Your Reading
Thank you for the article “You Can Be a Better Reader!” (August 22, 1984) I had the problem of reading a lot and remembering little. Following the suggestions in your article, I feel that I have improved 70 percent in remembering the information I read, especially when applying the suggestions in the box under the heading “Previewing Nonfiction,” on page 11.
J. H., Brazil
Help in School
I am a teacher of mathematics and sciences in the secondary school. My students know that I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. This past December every student had to develop a theme about peace. One day, two students came to my house to inquire if I had any review material on the subject of peace. I was happy to witness to them and offer them your issues on peace. (October 8 and 22, 1985) A few days later, almost every student in the school rushed to my home to get these issues so as to prepare their assigned theme. One of the students received an award.
G. C., Italy
Drinking and Driving
My sincere appreciation for your series of articles on drinking and driving. (March 8, 1986) As a safety director I am asked several times a year to give presentations to church organizations about the misuse of alcohol and its effects. The references from the Bible used throughout the article will be implemented in my program. Again, thank you for publishing this feature in a very educational and religious light.
R. W., Nebraska, U.S.A.
I have just finished reading your articles on drinking and driving. I teach driver education at a senior high school and find that the articles are very well written and give an accurate account of the problem. I covered the topic of drinking and driving with my students during the first semester. Your articles will serve as an excellent review of this vital subject. I would like permission to make photocopies of these articles for distribution to my approximately 515 students in my driver-education classes.
R. D., Pennsylvania, U.S.A.
Permission granted by direct letter.​—ED.
My heart goes out to Shirley Ferrara and her husband Steve. My husband and I lost our son in a car accident in September 1982. He was our only son and just 18 years old. He was a passenger in a car with a very drunk young man driving. Because of a technicality, the Supreme Court of Colorado dropped the charges of vehicular homicide against the young man who was driving, even though his BAC was well above the 0.10 percent that is considered legally drunk. The last I heard he is still drinking heavily and driving drunk. I wish he could be helped before he kills someone else.
J. G., Colorado, U.S.A.
My husband and I lost our 16-year-old daughter to a drunk driver in 1983. She was our only child. Even though the authorities are trying to do all they can to reduce drunk driving, it is up to each individual to do his or her part. But my husband and I know that only through Jehovah’s new system will the problem of drunk driving be eliminated and our loved ones be brought back in the resurrection.
R. E., Indiana, U.S.A.

