Watching the World
Navaho Bible
The first complete Bible to be translated into Navaho has recently been published. Its title, “Diyin God Bizaad,” means “The Holy God, His Word.” The Navaho are original natives of the United States and are the country’s largest Indian tribe. Translating the King James Version into Navaho presented some unusual linguistic problems. For example, was Martha the older or the younger sister of Mary? (Luke 10:38) There is a word for each in Navaho. The translation group decided that she was the older sister because she was doing all the work. “The easiest parts were anything about sheep and lambs,” said Faith Hill, one of the translators. “Navajo people know everything about sheep.” According to The New York Times report, Navaho spokesmen hailed the translation as a boon “to continue to have faith in the Great Spirit” and to keep the language from dying out. Only a few of those who began the project 40 years ago are still living.
One a Minute
Abortions in Italy are occurring at the rate of nearly one every minute, reports The Times of London. Of the more than 400,000 abortions performed each year, about half were done illegally. Government authorities noted with alarm that the largest group having the abortions were married women aged 25 to 34 with two children. “A striking contrast to other European countries where abortion is usually associated with the unmarried,” says The Times.
Caring for Premature Babies
For nine months a baby is nurtured in the warmth and comfort of its mother’s womb where it enjoys security. When a child is born prematurely and is separated from its mother’s body, its growth rate may drop dramatically. To ensure a normal growth pattern for such babies, a children’s hospital in Argentina has developed a novel procedure. As soon as babies can leave incubator care, nurses (and mothers if they are able to) carry them in specially designed aprons. These allow the babies to be snuggled next to the nurses’ stomachs, while permitting the nurses to go about their work. “It’s as close as you can come to putting the baby back in the womb,” says Dr. Marta Airala, a pediatrician who now employs the same technique at Michigan’s Albion Community Hospital. Such kangaroo babies, as they are called, reportedly gain weight immediately and do very well.
Fear Grips Tourists
The continuing threat of terrorist attacks is causing many tourists to think twice about their vacation plans. Americans, the focal point of recent threats, have particularly been wary. “More than a million Americans already had dropped plans to visit Europe in 1986, after last year’s string of hijackings and terrorist attacks,” reports U.S.News & World Report. “Bookings to Mediterranean destinations​—especially Egypt, Italy and Greece—​are off by up to 60 percent.” Even veteran travelers have been caught up in the rising tide of fear and anxiety as incidents​—bombings, shootings, and hijackings—​multiply. Travel agents have been asked to reroute journeys to avoid airports where attacks have taken place or to change itineraries to countries perceived as terrorist free. Although the Mideast is considered a trouble spot, “visitors have not been scared away” from Israel, states U.S.News & World Report. “A record 1.4 million people visited the country in 1985.”
Not Welcome
Visitors desiring entry visas to Saudi Arabia must furnish a medical report confirming that there are no signs of AIDS in their blood. The requirement was put into effect at the beginning of the year, “after the discovery of two cases of AIDS in that nation,” says the American Parade Magazine. “In both, the victims had been transfused with blood from the U.S.”
Demand for Bloodless Surgery
“A ‘bloodless surgery’ program designed for Jehovah’s Witnesses might attract more patients who fear contracting acquired immune deficiency syndrome through blood transfusions,” states The Phoenix Gazette. “While the religious group was the catalyst for the idea, hospital administrators say there is a growing demand among all patients for that kind of surgery.” Blood transfusions have long been refused by Jehovah’s Witnesses because of Bible-based beliefs. However, fear of contracting AIDS is the reason given most by non-Witness patients. Fortunately for such ones, doctors who have respected the Witnesses’ position have developed alternative procedures. “By increasing our consciousness about the loss of blood, it’s made a difference in the way we approach surgery,” said Dr. Richard Wright, medical director of the program. “Our techniques have become better, and we’re just more careful.”
Left Without Shepherds
About 80,000 Roman Catholic priests have left the priesthood since 1965. One quarter of the 200,000 parishes worldwide are now without their own priests and are served by priests from elsewhere, 1,200 are served by laymen, and 1,100 are simply ‘without a shepherd,’ reports Kruispunt (Crossroads), a Dutch Roman Catholic magazine. How do future prospects look? “If one considers that the average age of priests is about 55 at the moment, this situation can take on calamitous proportions in the near future,” says Kruispunt.
The Hearing Mantis
Scientists have discovered that the praying mantis, once thought to be deaf, can actually hear. How? Through a unique single “ear” located on the insect’s abdomen. Normally, hearing insects have two ears, reports Science magazine, giving them the best possible advantage “to obtain directional information” about the source of a particular sound. With one “ear,” the mantis cannot translate the ultrasonic sound it hears into directional information. However, experiments show that the mantis’ “ear” can intercept sound signals emitted by the bat, a predator, causing the mantis to make “an abrupt and dramatic deviation” in its normal pattern of flight. Researchers have labeled the single-ear mantis “an auditory cyclops.”
U.S. Currency Changes
The United States government has decided on two changes to be made in its paper currency​—the first major changes since 1929. One new feature involves what the Treasury Department terms a “security thread” woven into the paper. Made of polyester, it will repeat the legend “USA,” followed by the denomination in words for bills under $20 and in numbers for bills $20 and higher. The legend will be visible when viewed by transmitted light, such as the sun or a lamp, but cannot be read by the reflected light of copying machines. The other change is the addition of the words “United States of America” around the portrait in type too small to be picked up by the copiers. Why the changes? Because of fear that a new generation of copying machines, which can make quality reproductions in color, may tempt anyone to counterfeit currency. Until the old bills are retired, as they wear out, both old and new bills will be legal and exist side by side. Public awareness of the changes, leading to scrutiny of bills, is also expected to reduce the chances of the older currency’s being counterfeited. The new notes should be in circulation in about a year.
Valuable Exercise
Want to live longer? Exercise, researchers say. According to a report published in The New England Journal of Medicine, adults who regularly engage in moderate physical exercise, such as stair climbing, walking, and sports that burn 2,000 or more calories a week, can significantly increase their life expectancy. The long-term study of some 17,000 men, all Harvard alumni, showed that physical activity could even counter an inherited tendency toward early death, as well as some death-dealing effects of high blood pressure and smoking. Each week, it takes a brisk 20-mile (32 km) walk, or the equivalent, to burn the 2,000 calories.
Popular “Garbage”
For 35 years a United States bubble-gum manufacturer produced trading cards featuring portraits of baseball players. Now the cards feature ghastly cartoon creatures called Garbage Pail Kids. Banned in some schools and called repulsive, disgusting, nasty, ugly, and cruel by many adults, they are, nevertheless, in great demand by youngsters. “I like them because they’re gross,” stated one eight-year-old child. “We’re reflecting the times with our products,” said a spokesman for the company that produces the cards. “Take a look at comic books, movies, it’s no different.” It is not simply the pictures​—with names like Schizo Fran, Vile Kyle, Brutal Brad, Dead Fred, Sara Slime, Foul Phil, and Sewer Sue—​that are controversial. The backs feature such citations as “Bully License,” “Rudeness Award,” “Punked out Award,” and “Sneak Award,” for conduct beyond socially accepted norms. “These are just meant to be fun things,” said the spokesman.
Stooping Even Lower
The purse only contained $8 and a couple of credit cards. The 15-year-old office girl, just starting her first job, had forgotten it in a phone booth. When she returned minutes later, it was gone. Two days afterward, reports The West Australian, she received a phone call from a girl who said: “My boyfriend found your purse. He’s taken the $8 and wants another $5 to return the purse.” It was only after paying the additional money at the home of a third party that the purse was returned.

