From Our Readers
Street Gangs  I was moved by the articles on street gangs in the April 22, 1998, issue of Awake! Right now I am in a reformatory school. My mother is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, but a while back I stopped going to meetings. Then I got involved with bad friends and took part in a series of violent thefts. That’s why my mother sent me this Awake! At first I thought, ‘This again!’ But as I looked at it, I got engrossed and read it all. By the time I finished reading it, my thinking had changed. I never realized that Awake! could help me so much. I want to make a new start and attend meetings again. I have come to feel that I never want to repeat my mistakes and that I want to serve Jehovah as long as I live.
M. S., Japan
I am a single parent of an 11-year-old boy and a 9-year-old girl, and we live in an area with many different gangs. I read this magazine and immediately discussed it with my children. With the help of the article, they were able to see that being in a gang is never a substitute for love or a secure family life.
B. S., United States
My heartfelt thanks for the articles. I often feel concerned about my teenage nephews, and the information you provided has proved to be extremely helpful.
I. M. M., Brazil
The articles were just in time because some of my classmates are forming a gang. Some are not sure if they really want to be part of one, since the leader made them write rude words on the wall regarding our principal. Thanks for helping the young in these hard times.
B. C. G., Mexico
Smothered by Friends  I just want to say how much I appreciated the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Avoid Being Smothered by My Friend?” (April 22, 1998) Though I am an adult and married, I always enjoy these articles. This particular one so suited a situation my husband and I are presently experiencing that I read it five times before putting it down. It helped me to learn that even Jesus needed time for himself.
P. A., Trinidad
Because of small misunderstandings, my friend and I sometimes stop talking to each other, and this makes me feel so downhearted that I cannot concentrate. After reading the article several times, I realized that I am smothering my friend and not giving him time to do other things. I feel that this article was written just for me, as it showed me so many ways to improve in my relations with others.
R. S., India
Orthodontics  On a recent visit to my dentist, I left a copy of the April 8, 1998, Awake!, containing the article on orthodontics. The dentist later expressed appreciation, saying that the article was informative and concise and written in a way that was easy to understand. He also said that he had given copies of the article to some patients to help them understand their treatment program.
T. P., England
Grace Marsh’s Life Story  I want to express my gratitude for Grace Marsh’s experience in the Awake! (April 22, 1998) It was upbuilding and encouraging to read about her courage in continuing to preach despite opposition. It made me appreciate still more the freedom we have to preach as a result of the efforts of the brothers in the past.
C. F., United States

