Missionaries Told: “Glorify Your Ministry!”
FIFTY students of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead graduated on September 14, 1980, receiving their assignments to 19 lands. The School’s president, F. W. Franz, addressed them, centering his remarks around the scripture at Romans 11:13, where the apostle Paul wrote: “Forasmuch as I am, in reality, an apostle to the nations, I glorify my ministry.”
Dedicated Christians have a glorious ministry, explained Franz, something that all of them, men and women, can share in. They are ministers of the Word of God. This ministry, then, is not caring for secular things or family matters but is the classified ministry of preaching and teaching the good news of God’s kingdom. And why is this especially glorious today? “Since 1914,” he said, “you graduates of Gilead and all dedicated and baptized Christians​—you are preaching the good news of an established kingdom; that is what makes the difference.”
Franz explained that many English Bible translations, such as the “King James Version” and the “New World Translation,” use the word “minister.” Thus it is a legitimate term for all who are dedicated, baptized followers of Jesus Christ. “You graduates of Gilead,” he declared, “are entitled to call yourselves ministers and to ask for all the exemptions given to the clergymen of Christendom.”
‘We are living in the “time of the end,” concluded the School’s president, ‘and this is the time of all times to be living as a minister of the Most High God Jehovah! So, may you remember what the apostle Paul said with regard to his ministry. He said: “I glorify my ministry.” I want to encourage you to do the same thing​—to glorify your ministry!’
Earlier, L. A. Swingle talked about the satisfaction that there is in accomplishment. But with accomplishment, he said, there are certain pitfalls; one can become puffed up and proud. The graduates were encouraged to be like the apostle Paul, who accomplished much in his ministry, but gave credit to God.​—2 Tim. 4:17.
Discussing Psalm 102:1-6, D. Sydlik showed that the psalmist felt like “the pelican of the wilderness.” A missionary, too, might at times feel homesick and out of his environment. If so, it helps to read the Psalms and to keep always in mind that a missionary assignment is from Jehovah.
Max Larson spoke on “Building with Jehovah.” He pointed out the privilege it is to be “God’s fellow workers” by building up spiritual minds in people by means of the Word of God. (1 Cor. 3:9; Acts 20:32) “Stay on the job,” he stressed in closing; “your Building Partner will.”
Instructor J. Redford said that man was made to work, not loaf. (Gen. 2:15; Rom. 12:11) But ‘do not covet work assignments of someone else in God’s organization,’ he said. ‘Go where he sends you, and may all of you long enjoy the work of your hands.’
The School’s registrar, instructor U. V. Glass, presented a three-point ‘plan for spiritual survival’: (1) Establish and maintain a close personal relationship with Jehovah. (2) Recognize Jehovah’s channel of communication. (3) Stay close to Christian brothers and “have intense love for one another.”​—1 Pet. 4:8.
L. Barry pointed out the fine example that Jesus set in humility. (Phil. 2:7-10) The hardships that missionaries sometimes face help to keep them humble, he explained. Having a sense of humor also helps. Humility brings many rewards.​—Prov. 22:4.
After Chairman K. Klein distributed the diplomas to the students, T. Jaracz announced that a Cultural School for Latin Americans is being established in Mexico. It will be conducted in the Spanish language. Each class will have 25 students and be of two and a half months’ duration. The first class begins November 24, 1980.
In the afternoon, the graduates put on a most delightful student program, with songs, native dances and two fine Bible dramas entitled “Jehovah Rewards His Loyal Ones” and “Beware of Rebellious Talk.” The first dealt with David and events preceding his kingship, that tested his loyalty to Jehovah. The second drama was about Korah, a fomenter of rebellion.
For the 2,059 in attendance, the entire day’s program provided grand encouragement to serve Jehovah humbly and loyally, and for them always to ‘glorify their ministry.’

