From Our Readers
Preemies  I have a daughter, now in her third year of junior high school. I have observed over the years that both her reading ability and her ability to listen are deficient. In trying to encourage her, I have said words that must have sounded cruel to her ears. When I read your article, however, I was made to recall that my daughter too was a preemie. (“Born Early, Born Small,” February 22, 1989) Your article helped me to realize that I should take her background into account when dealing with her.
A. I., Japan
Thank you so much for your sensitive and balanced approach. Your articles moved me to tears. I especially appreciate your acknowledgment that these tiny humans indeed have feelings and that loving care from mother and family can contribute greatly to their well-being.
J. J., United States
Bats  I appreciated your article on bats. (January 22, 1989) I actually put off reading it because the thought of them made my skin crawl. Now after reading the article, I can appreciate them. In the photographs, they seemed to be gentle, innocent animals. I could even find humor in their little faces. Jehovah’s creation is certainly beautiful.
C. S., United States
Lost for 20 Years  The experience of Uncle Jimmy encouraged me immensely. (December 8, 1988) I have leukemia, but I am able to function very well. Every once in a while I get depressed and go through my ‘woe is me’ period. But, now, I can reflect on how Uncle Jimmy’s faith carried him through his difficult and trialsome times. I’ll never forget him.
J. B., United States
My eight-year-old daughter was so moved by Uncle Jimmy’s experience that she had to sit down and write him a letter. (Actually, if she had had her way, we would have got in the car and driven down to the United States to visit him.) She wrote him: “It is really encouraging to read that when people tried to stop you from serving Jehovah, you just kept right on going. I am eight years old, and I hope I can be as strong as you are in the [Christian faith].”
J. R., Canada
Loneliness  A schoolmate of mine said: “The girls in my class are cold, and no one will be friends with me.” The next day I brought her the article “How Do I Make My Loneliness Go Away?” in the August 8, 1987, issue of Awake! I didn’t really expect this girl to read it. But the next day she told me: “I read it as soon as I got home. Do you have any more?” I gave her other “Young People Ask . . ” articles that I thought might interest her. A few days later, she said excitedly: “I’ve made friends just as it was explained in that magazine!” As a result, we are now studying the Bible together.
M. S., Japan
Same-Sex Crushes  I am a 17-year-old girl, and for the longest time I have been asking myself, ‘Is there something wrong with me?’ I was so incredibly relieved when I read your “Young People Ask . . ” article on that very subject. (April 8, 1989) It was also a relief to find that there were others who were experiencing the same feelings as I do, and that one day they will be outgrown. Thank you so much!
M. R., United States

