Announcements
● Literature offer for July: Watchtower subscription for $2.00 with pocket-size book given free to new subscribers. Some may wish to offer subscriptions to the Watchtower and Awake! for $4.00, with two pocket-size books. August: My Book of Bible Stories for $2.00. September: New tract along with two latest magazines and revised brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century for 25c. October: Awake! subscription for $2.50 with pocket-size book given free to new subscribers.
● When publishers move and will be associated with a different congregation, it is a loving kindness to advise the new congregation so that there will be no delay in welcoming them and otherwise rendering assistance as needed. The secretary can be sure to follow through on this as soon as he learns that publishers will be moving. In connection with his report on the congregation, the circuit overseer will continue to inquire about this at the time of his visit.
● Starting in September the circuit overseers will be giving a slide presentation entitled: “The Bible—A Book for This Generation.” District overseers will be speaking on the topic: “Whose Disciple Are You?”
● When the service overseer is selected by the body of elders during the circuit overseer’s visit, the congregation can be informed without first awaiting the return of the form on which new appointments are made. The elders decide who will fill this position just as they decide who will serve as Watchtower conductor and school overseer.
● So that congregations can make suitable arrangements for the Memorial celebration next year, the date will be Monday, March 31, 1980, after sundown.
● New Publications Available:
Good News—to Make You Happy—Serbian
Unseen Spirits—Do They Help Us? Or Do They Harm Us?—Korean
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1977—French
● Available Again in U.S.A.:
Is the Bible Really the Word of God?—Korean
Organization for Kingdom-preaching and Disciple-making—Korean
Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook—Korean

