Part 1—Helping One Another—In the Field
1 In the modern-day history of Jehovah’s people, the preaching of the good news from house to house has obviously had Jehovah’s blessing. It has greatly facilitated the carrying out of the commission given by Jesus to his disciples to “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them . . . teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.”—Matt. 28:19, 20.
2 Jesus set the example in training his disciples. He not only taught them about the Kingdom and other Bible truths, but he also instructed them in the most effective ways of preaching this good news to others. He sent them out by twos. (Mark 6:7; Luke 10:1) This undoubtedly provided companionship and encouragement, but we can be sure that they learned from each other, too, as they responded wholeheartedly to the Master’s invitation to go forth and preach that the kingdom of the heavens was at hand.
3 And what joy they had working together! Luke 10:17 tells us that “the seventy returned with joy, saying: ‘Lord, even the demons are made subject to us by the use of your name.’” But Jesus corrected their thinking by saying: “Do not rejoice over this, that the spirits are made subject to you, but rejoice because your names have been inscribed in the heavens.” (Luke 10:20) Yes, the reason for preaching is not to draw attention to ourselves by spectacular feats but to save lives, our own and those to whom we preach.—1 Tim. 4:16.
4 While the situation in our territory may be somewhat different today, nevertheless, the basic instructions are still applicable as to what we preach as well as the need for searching out deserving ones even in the face of opposition. And today, as in Jesus’ day, new disciples still need loving assistance so as to share effectively in the preaching and disciple-making work.
5 Are you one who has much experience in preaching the good news and who might assist another who desires help? Or would you like an experienced publisher to work with you for a few weeks to share with you practical ways of improving your disciple-making work? We invite you to speak with your study conductor or the service overseer about your willingness to share, either to give or receive assistance. (More details will be given on how these arrangements can be made in book study groups in the August Our Kingdom Service.)
6 As you begin to work with your companion in the service, you might first get together to look over what you might use effectively as a topic for conversation in your territory. Practice sessions are helpful. Typical situations at the door can be simulated. This will give you experience and fix in your mind definite points to talk about. Good preparation does much to reduce doubts about one’s ability to speak and the fear of not knowing what to say. Thus, a strong desire builds up to tell out what you have in your heart, knowing that you are sharing in a life-saving work.
7 Going to the doors together provides opportunity to put right into practice things learned. Experience is gained. Confidence is built up. Joy in Jehovah’s service results. And when interested ones are found, this brings great happiness. Arrangements are made to return and feed these “sheep.” If some are not interested, despite our good efforts, this does not discourage us. Not everyone listened to Jesus, and no one could improve on his methods. (Matt. 13:58) So there is no reason to be disturbed if some turn a deaf ear or even speak harsh words at times. We go along to the next house looking for the “sheep,” not taking anything said in a personal way.
8 Yes, there is a need to HELP ONE ANOTHER in the field. This is the Christian spirit. We all have a gift or potential for lending a helping hand in some way to assist our fellow praisers of Jehovah. Peter said: “In proportion as each one has received a gift, use it in ministering to one another as fine stewards of God’s undeserved kindness expressed in various ways.”—1 Pet. 4:10.

