Presenting the Good News—Using the Special Issue in Disciple-making
1 In presenting the special July 1 issue of The Watchtower, the following suggested presentations may be helpful to you.
2 If circumstances are such that only a brief presentation can be made, after introducing yourself and your service partner, you might say: “We’ve stopped by just briefly to bring you a most interesting special issue of The Watchtower. For one hundred years now this magazine has been published. And one of the articles in this centennial issue shows how it has come to have the respect of millions of truth-seekers around the world, in that it has had the courage to speak the truth on controversial religious teachings. Regardless of your religious background, I’m sure you would be interested in reading this and the other articles. This special issue is yours along with this copy of Awake! for a contribution of just 20c.”
3 If you can give a more extended witness, you may be able to use some or all of the thoughts below based on Psalm 146. You might say: “How good to find you at home at this time because we have volunteered some of our time and effort to share some good news with you. Most of the news we get today is bad news, isn’t it so? [Allow person to answer.] Sad to say, much of the bad news today has to do with the failures of governments to provide basic human needs for those who depend on them. Therefore, when we learn about a government that has God’s backing and that will without fail bring in conditions of peace and prosperity for all mankind, wouldn’t you say that is really good news? [Pause for comment.] Did you ever think of God’s kingdom that we pray for in the Lord’s Prayer as a real government that will soon provide a completely righteous rule for humans living right here on earth? [Pause for possible reply.] You probably will appreciate what the inspired psalmist wrote at Psalm 146:5 and 6. [Read.] Also please note that verses 8 and 9 speak of a physical healing for the people and a promise to care for the needs of disadvantaged ones. [Point out key words in these verses.] And then in verse 10, note that all this will be done by Jehovah as King and that his rulership will last forever. Isn’t that encouraging? And isn’t it truly good news?”
4 At this point introduce the subscription offer: “The Watchtower is the foremost magazine published today that announces Jehovah’s kingdom. And do you know that, beginning with this July 1 issue, The Watchtower is beginning its second century of publication? That’s right, the first issue was published in July of 1879, and we are taking the opportunity this month to offer to our neighbors a year’s subscription to The Watchtower for just $2.00. New subscribers are receiving a copy of this 192-page Bible study aid free. We would like you to be included with those who will be receiving the next 24 issues of The Watchtower through the mail.”
5 You may vary this presentation by referring to the contents of the special issue or by citing a particular statement of interest. Also some of you may wish to combine a subscription to Awake! at the same time (for $4.00), giving the new subscriber two pocket-size books free. If the subscription offer is not accepted, offer the two magazines for 20c.
6 If possible, rehearse your presentations with your companion in service or some other publisher. Be well prepared for the special field work during July.

