Special Issue of “The Watchtower” to Feature 100th Anniversary
1 One hundred years of continuous publication! In view of the great opposition experienced, is that not of itself powerful and convincing evidence of Jehovah’s blessing on the endeavors of his modern witnesses to announce the Kingdom message far and wide? The July 1, 1979, issue marks the beginning of the 101st year of publication of The Watchtower.
2 Only 6,000 copies were printed of that first July 1879 issue of Zion’s Watch Tower, then printed monthly and only in English. From that small beginning, The Watchtower has grown over the years, both in number of copies printed and in spiritual stature. Millions have come to respect its reliability during the century of its publication in providing spiritual “food at the proper time.” (Matt. 24:45) Even through two world wars, despite bans and opposition, it has not missed a single issue. Copies printed of each issue increased to 55,905 by 1929; 185,065 in 1939; 966,280 in 1949; 3,708,647 in 1959 and 6,641,483 in 1969. And in this anniversary year of 1979 no other religious publication comes anywhere near the distribution of The Watchtower, with over 9,200,000 copies on the average being printed of each issue in 82 languages.
3 In reading this July 1 special issue you will have a number of reasons for being enthusiastic in presenting it to the public. Articles in this special issue deal with how the world has changed during the past 100 years and how The Watchtower progressively has met the spiritual needs of those hungering for truth. One tells how The Watchtower is printed and distributed. Other articles show how, right from the beginning, The Watchtower has been a champion in exposing false teachings such as immortality of the human soul, Trinity, hellfire, and so forth, while highlighting Jehovah’s name and kingdom, and bringing comfort and encouragement through such basic truths as the ransom, resurrection of the dead and the second coming of Christ.
4 The two study articles discuss how we can prove we have the truth and how God guides his people today. They encourage us to remain steadfast in our adherence to the truth and loyal to our God Jehovah and his congregation, showing how we can successfully do this.
5 If you have not already done so, why not set out immediately to read this issue from cover to cover. Select interesting points that you would like to use in speaking with others about it, and thus prepare yourself for a full share in field service during the month of July. If you will be attending one of the “Living Hope” District Conventions during July and August, you will have additional opportunities to speak with others about Jehovah’s kingdom, using this special issue.
6 You may have enough copies of the special issue to continue offering it during the entire month of July. If so, you may want to introduce it along with the July 15 issue when it arrives. The July 15 issue features the experience of a sister who was imprisoned in China on and off during 20 years because she resumed preaching the good news of the Kingdom each time she was released. The study articles provide Scriptural encouragement to sustain you in the vital work of searching out deserving ones from house to house.
7 May we show our appreciation for the abundant blessings that Jehovah has given his people during the past 100 years by continued faithful service and by zealously sharing our hope with others.

