We Need to Help One Another!
More Definite Arrangements to Be Made
1 True Christians are noted for the love they show to one another. (John 13:34, 35) They help one another. We know this is essential if we are going to endure successfully the trials and temptations we face in this difficult time of the end and at the same time care for the commission Jehovah has given to us to preach the good news of the Kingdom and gather the remaining sheeplike ones. But we need to intensify our love for one another. We need to improve the help we give to one another. This is evident when we consider current needs within our worldwide association of brothers. Likely you see this need in your own congregation.
2 In Jehovah’s organization there are zealous and effective praisers of Jehovah. Their faith is strong and they continue to endure despite economic, health or other factors. And they serve loyally, even though the end of this system has not come as soon as they may have expected. But in our midst are new ones who have been added in the past few years. In addition, some who have been active in the preaching work in past years have become irregular or inactive in the service. Some of these have also let their appreciation for spiritual food wane to the point of attending only a few meetings or none at all. Often this is due to the influences of this world causing their love for Jehovah to become lukewarm or even cold.
LOVING ARRANGEMENTS TO HELP
3 What is needed? We need to HELP ONE ANOTHER! True, we have been giving some assistance. But doubtless you will agree, more definite arrangements can be made not only to provide the type of help needed but also to make sure this is given long enough to really benefit those who need it. Such assistance is so vital that we should not leave it to chance.
4 In coming months the theme “We Need to Help One Another!” will be stressed on the meetings in various ways. Three particular ways of giving help will be highlighted: (1) By more definite arrangements in the book study groups for experienced publishers to help those who want and need assistance in the disciple-making work. (2) By setting aside the first Sunday of each month for a special effort in the house-to-house work, with encouragement for all in the congregation to participate. (3) By strengthening the shepherding work and improving the quality of teaching in order to build faith and spirituality. Combined with this will be many opportunities for all publishers, brothers and sisters alike, to give encouragement and assistance. All of this is designed to HELP ONE ANOTHER!
COMPANIONS IN SERVICE
5 If you are just starting in the preaching work; if you are finding it a little difficult to speak effectively at the doors; or if you are becoming a little discouraged and are slowing down in your service, we believe you will welcome the assistance of an experienced companion in the service. Paul admonished: “And let us consider one another to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another.” Then pointing to the future, he adds: “And all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.” (Heb. 10:24, 25) That day is very near! We need to be ‘incited to love and fine works’ all the more so now. We believe all of Jehovah’s servants see the need to cooperate in making more definite arrangements for HELPING ONE ANOTHER! (The article on page 3, the first in a series, gives details on how these arrangements can be made.)
FIRST SUNDAY FOR SERVICE
6 By having the first Sunday of each month set aside for a special effort in the house-to-house work, everyone can plan accordingly. (Of course, there will be other days for service as before.) You may be a sister with an unbelieving mate. Would he be willing for you to devote two or more hours at least one Sunday a month in service? All members of the family may be willing to cooperate to make this possible. Other publishers may have different circumstances of a pressing nature that prevent them from going out every Sunday, but advance preparation may make it possible to spend at least one Sunday each month in field service.
BUILDING FAITH AND SPIRITUALITY
7 Jesus said to Peter: “Strengthen your brothers”; “feed my lambs.” Later Peter admonished elders: “Shepherd the flock of God in your care, not under compulsion, but willingly . . . becoming examples to the flock.” (Luke 22:32; John 21:15; 1 Pet. 5:2, 3) Some elders do well in shepherding, but there is a need for more specialized help, more specific application of Jehovah’s Word in building faith and spirituality. This requires discernment and warm consideration. And when elders and ministerial servants receive parts on the meetings, such are excellent times to strengthen faith. Make local application. Be enthusiastic. Be encouraging. And practice what you preach, by being right out there in the field working with the publishers. Example always means more than words.
8 As we get help, it is expected that we will become more experienced and effective ourselves. We will become stronger in faith and determination to serve Jehovah. This will put us in an excellent position to help still others. Let us therefore fully support the arrangements made to HELP ONE ANOTHER that we might continue to serve Jehovah faithfully while helping our brother or sister to do the same. Precious lives are involved!

