Common Sense​—Why So Uncommon?
“WHAT is the matter with him? He should know better,” remarks an observer. Shaking his head in disbelief, another walks away muttering, “If he had a little common sense, he would never have done that.” Have you perhaps heard similar comments? What, though, is “common sense”?
The word “sense” is defined as “accurate appreciation,” “understanding,” and “practical wisdom or judgement.” It implies that a person has the ability to judge and decide with intelligence. Common sense evidently requires that we use thinking ability. Many people would rather let others do their thinking for them. They allow the media, their peers, or popular opinion to make decisions for them.
Common sense seems to be so lacking in today’s world that an observant man once noted, ‘Common sense, in truth, is very uncommon.’ How can we acquire common sense? What are its benefits?
How Acquired?
While it takes time, sustained thought, and consistent effort to develop good sense and fine judgment, common sense is certainly attainable. Consider three factors that can help us to acquire common sense.
Study the Bible, and follow its advice. The Bible, written in the finest language and with clear logic, is an excellent aid in gaining wisdom and good sense. (Ephesians 1:8) For example, the apostle Paul admonishes fellow Christians: “Whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well spoken of, whatever virtue there is and whatever praiseworthy thing there is, continue considering these things.” (Philippians 4:8) If we consistently follow this advice, sound judgment and prudent behavior will result.
Learn from experience. Associating common sense with experience in life, a Swiss poet stated: “Common sense is . . . composed of experience and prevision [foresight].” Indeed, “anyone inexperienced puts faith in every word, but the shrewd one considers his steps.” (Proverbs 14:15) Common sense may be developed through observation, training, and experience. We can learn to do things better over a period of time. Learning from our mistakes, however, calls for humility and meekness. The self-assuming, haughty, and headstrong spirit of people in these last days is not a manifestation of common sense.​—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
Choose associates wisely. In using wisdom and common sense, we are also helped or hindered by our associates. Proverbs 13:20 states: “He that is walking with wise persons will become wise, but he that is having dealings with the stupid ones will fare badly.” We do not have to accept the mentality or ideas of those who disobey God and ignore his Word. Proverbs 17:12 puts the matter this way: “Let there be an encountering by a man of a bear bereaved of its cubs rather than anyone stupid in his foolishness.”
Of What Benefit?
Developing common sense is advantageous. It makes life more interesting and can save us time. Common sense may even reduce the frustration that often comes from doing things thoughtlessly. Those lacking good judgment make life harder for themselves. “The hard work of the stupid ones makes them weary,” states the Bible. (Ecclesiastes 10:15) Such individuals may toil endlessly and tire themselves out; yet, they accomplish virtually nothing truly worthwhile.
The Bible provides a wealth of practical advice on cleanliness, communication, industriousness, coping with poverty, and many other aspects of life. Millions can testify that the difference between success and failure in their lives has depended on the degree to which they have applied Bible principles, helping them to manifest wisdom.
Common sense enables us to do more than simply follow a set of detailed instructions or rules. It helps us to fulfill our responsibilities. However, common sense is not a substitute for taking in knowledge. “A wise person will listen and take in more instruction,” says Proverbs 1:5. We must also learn to analyze the information we gather, drawing proper conclusions from it. This helps us to ‘walk in wisdom.’​—Proverbs 28:26.
Modesty goes hand in hand with common sense. Although we may want to care for many responsibilities, we need to use good judgment and stay within the limits of our strength. True, the apostle Paul tells us to have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Corinthians 15:58) Yet, this admonition must be balanced with the principle recorded at Ecclesiastes 9:4: “A live dog is better off than a dead lion.” Taking proper care of our health as we serve Jehovah may allow us to live longer and to continue to be active. Common sense can help us to find a reasonable balance that permits us to get necessary things accomplished without losing our joy. Yes, common sense brings many benefits.
[Picture on page 14]
A wealth of sound advice is found in the Bible
[Picture on page 15]
Common sense may be acquired through observation, training, and experience

