





He ‘Knew the Way’




GUY HOLLIS PIERCE, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, finished his earthly course on Tuesday, March 18, 2014, at the age of 79. As one of Christ’s brothers, he was resurrected and received his heavenly reward.—Hebrews 2:10-12; 1 Peter 3:18.
Guy Pierce was born in Auburn, California, U.S.A., on November 6, 1934, and was baptized in 1955. He married his beloved wife, Penny, in 1977 and raised a family. He was also like a father to many others. In 1982 he and Penny began pioneering together. Starting in 1986, he served as a circuit overseer in the United States for 11 years.
In 1997, Guy and Penny Pierce began serving as members of the United States Bethel family. Brother Pierce worked in the Service Department, and in 1998 he was appointed as a helper to the Personnel Committee of the Governing Body. On October 2, 1999, at the annual meeting, it was announced that he had been appointed as a member of the Governing Body. In recent years, he served at different times with the Personnel, Writing, Publishing, and Coordinators’ committees.
Brother Pierce had a warm smile and a good sense of humor. People from many different backgrounds and cultures felt comfortable with him. But what really attracted people to him was his love, his humility, his respect for God’s laws and principles, and his complete faith in Jehovah. Guy Pierce often said that it was more likely for the sun not to rise than for Jehovah’s promises not to come true, and he wanted the whole world to know this.
Brother Pierce worked hard for Jehovah, starting early every morning and often continuing late into the night. He traveled all around the world to encourage his Christian brothers and sisters, and he was never too busy to spend time with any who needed his help or asked for advice. Even many years later, fellow believers remember his hospitality, friendship, and Scriptural encouragement.
Our brother and dear friend will be missed by his wife, his six children, his grandchildren and great-grandchildren, and his many spiritual children. Mark Sanderson, a fellow member of the Governing Body, gave the memorial talk for Brother Pierce at Brooklyn Bethel on Saturday, March 22, 2014. He spoke about Brother Pierce’s heavenly hope and read Jesus’ words: “In the house of my Father are many dwelling places. . . . If I go my way and prepare a place for you, I will come again and will receive you home to myself, so that where I am you also may be. And where I am going, you know the way.”—John 14:2-4.
We will miss Brother Pierce very much. But we rejoice that he ‘knew the way’ to his permanent ‘dwelling place.’



