
The Bible’s Viewpoint
Will Diplomacy Bring World Peace?




WOULD you like to see an end to all wars? Surely there must be some diplomatic solution to national and international conflicts. Many feel that if world leaders simply worked together, war could be done away with. Likely, however, you are disappointed with the results of diplomacy. For centuries diplomats have ratified treaties, formulated resolutions, and held summit meetings, but few issues have been permanently resolved.
The Bible has much to say about diplomacy and peace. It answers the following questions: What factors presently prevent diplomacy from producing peace? Should Christians involve themselves in diplomacy? How will true peace finally be attained?



What Is Preventing Peace?

Several Bible accounts illustrate how person-to-person contact can lead to peace. For example, Abigail skillfully convinced David and his army not to avenge themselves on her household. (1 Samuel 25:18-35) Jesus gave an illustration of a king who had no reasonable recourse but to send out ambassadors to sue for peace. (Luke 14:31, 32) Yes, the Bible acknowledges that some forms of diplomacy can resolve conflicts. Why, then, do peace talks often meet with limited success?
The Bible accurately predicted that our times would be troublesome. Because of the wicked influence of Satan the Devil, men would not be “open to any agreement” but would be “fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride.” (2 Timothy 3:3, 4; Revelation 12:12) In addition, Jesus prophesied that the conclusion of the present system of things would be marked by “wars and reports of wars.” (Mark 13:7, 8) Who can deny that these have become increasingly prevalent? That being the case, is it any wonder that attempts at peace between nations often prove futile?
Also, consider this fact: While diplomats may try hard to avoid clashes, each one’s main objective is to advance his own nation’s interests. That is the bottom line of political diplomacy. Should Christians involve themselves in such matters?
Regardless of their motives, world diplomats have neither the ability nor the power to devise permanent solutions




Christians and Diplomacy

The Bible advises: “Do not put your trust in nobles, nor in the son of earthling man, to whom no salvation belongs.” (Psalm 146:3) This implies that regardless of their motives, world diplomats have neither the ability nor the power to devise permanent solutions.
When Jesus was on trial before Pontius Pilate, he stated: “My kingdom is no part of this world. If my kingdom were part of this world, my attendants would have fought that I should not be delivered up to the Jews. But, as it is, my kingdom is not from this source.” (John 18:36) Peace initiatives are often tainted with nationalistic hatred and political selfishness. Hence, true Christians avoid involvement in this world’s conflicts and its attempts at diplomacy.
Does that mean that Christians are apathetic and uninterested in world affairs? Are they insensitive to human suffering? No. On the contrary, the Bible describes God’s true worshipers as individuals who are “sighing and groaning” over the bad things that happen around them. (Ezekiel 9:4) Christians are simply relying on God to bring peace as he has promised. Is the end of war your idea of peace? God’s Kingdom will most certainly accomplish that. (Psalm 46:8, 9) But in addition, it will ensure the complete security and well-being of all earth’s inhabitants. (Micah 4:3, 4; Revelation 21:3, 4) Such a superior peace can never be attained by diplomacy or the efforts of human “peacekeeping” organizations.
Bible prophecy and past experience clearly indicate that trusting in human diplomacy to bring peace can only lead to disappointment. Those who rest their hope for peace on Jesus Christ and support God’s Kingdom will see their desire for true peace realized. What is more, they will enjoy it forever!—Psalm 37:11, 29.



