Congregations Organized for Preaching God’s Kingdom
When on earth, Jesus Christ preached the Kingdom of God, going from village to village and from city to city. He also trained and sent out his disciples to do the same work. Before ascending to heaven, he commanded his followers to make disciples of people of all the nations. From its very inception, the early Christian congregation was organized for preaching the good news. Wherever the disciples went, they would be found preaching the Kingdom of God.—Matthew 4:17, 23; 10:1-16; 28:19, 20; Luke 4:43, 44; 8:1; 10:1-9; Acts 1:8; 4:31; 5:42; 8:12; 19:8; 28:23, 30, 31; Romans 10:9, 10, 14.
In Jesus’ prophecy on the conclusion of the system of things, he stated: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.” This preaching is a primary obligation of the Christian congregation today.—Matthew 24:14; Mark 13:10.
Worldwide, all congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses are organized to cover their local area systematically with the preaching of the good news of God’s Kingdom. So that it will be done in an orderly manner, in each country the branch office of the Watch Tower Society assigns to every congregation an area for witnessing. The congregation divides that territory assignment into smaller portions, which are then assigned to those who will take the responsibility to see that the people are called on.—1 Corinthians 14:33, 40.
The Witnesses usually contact people by going from house to house. At their congregation meetings, Jehovah’s Witnesses have been trained to make short presentations of the Kingdom message at the doors, using their Bibles. The Witnesses carry Bible literature to leave with the householders who wish to gain greater knowledge of God’s Word.
In order to give everyone in the territory an opportunity to hear the important Kingdom message, the Witnesses keep a detailed record as they go from house to house, indicating where people were not at home or where for some other reason it was not possible to give a thorough witness. A call will be made at another time. Where interest is shown, that is noted, and the Witnesses return to provide additional Scriptural information. If desired, a regular Bible study will be conducted. All of this is done free of charge.
Jehovah’s Witnesses also offer magazines to passersby on the streets. In this way they are able to contact many people they might not find at home. A real effort is made to reach out to everyone who will hear.—Acts 17:17; Revelation 14:6, 7; 22:17.
Why do the Witnesses keep calling when the majority do not show any interest? It has been found that the situation of individuals often changes and they respond positively on another visit, or some other person of the household may be met who will show interest.
Jesus said to his disciples: “Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness.” The preaching of God’s Kingdom plays a vital part in our seeking first the Kingdom, and Jehovah’s Witnesses make this a very important objective in their lives.—Matthew 6:33; 2 Timothy 4:2.
• What work of Jesus and the early Christians was foretold to be done also in our day?
• How is the preaching activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses organized?
• Why do the Witnesses keep calling on people when the majority show no interest?
[Pictures on page 16, 17]
Jehovah’s Witnesses preaching God’s Kingdom in various countries
Thailand
Mexico
Netherlands
Korea
Curaçao
Ghana
Britain
Australia

