Meetings for Inciting to Love and Fine Works
The early Christians met together, usually in private homes, to receive instruction and enjoy upbuilding fellowship. Today, congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses meet three times a week. You are invited to attend any of these meetings. Their meetings are not ritualistic, but they focus on divine education. Congregation meetings are opened and closed with song and prayer. Attendance is free, and no collections are taken.—Acts 4:23-31; 14:22; 15:32, 35; Romans 16:5; Colossians 4:15.
Perhaps the first meeting that you attend will be the 45-minute public talk, dealing with Bible teachings, prophecy, or counsel on Christian living. Following this talk, there is a study of the Bible, using an article in The Watchtower that is especially designed for congregation study. The study follows this format: A paragraph from The Watchtower is read, and the conductor propounds questions on the material that those in the audience may volunteer to answer by raising their hand. Usually several comments are given on each paragraph. The meeting lasts one hour.
Later on in the week, two other 45-minute meetings are held. One is the Theocratic Ministry School. It provides training on how to gather material on Bible subjects and to teach it effectively. Following 21 minutes of special instruction, students who are assigned in advance give short presentations. After each presentation, the school instructor gives counsel showing how the student may improve. Several textbooks have been prepared for use in this school. Those who regularly attend meetings may enroll, provided they are living in a way that accords with Christian principles.
The meeting that follows is called the Service Meeting. It consists of three or four parts that deal with presenting the good news from house to house as well as other features of the ministry. These parts are presented as talks, discussions, or demonstrations, with some audience participation. Much of the program is based on material found in Our Kingdom Ministry, a four-page instruction sheet published monthly by the Watch Tower Society.
Another meeting is a weekly study held in smaller groups, usually in private homes throughout the congregation’s territory. The study is based on the Bible and a recent book published by the Society. Since the group is smaller, there is a better opportunity for all to share in the discussion, and there is a fine opportunity for those in attendance to get better acquainted with one another.
Most congregations hold their meetings in a Kingdom Hall built by Jehovah’s Witnesses. The costs are covered by voluntary contributions from the Witnesses themselves, and in most cases the work is done without charge by volunteer workers. Contribution boxes are available at all meetings for the use of those who wish to contribute.
Congregation meetings help Jehovah’s Witnesses to follow the counsel at Hebrews 10:24, 25: “Let us consider one another to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as [we] behold the day drawing near.”
• What features of early Christian meetings can be seen in meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
• Outline what is presented at the five meetings held regularly by the Witnesses.
• How have meeting halls been obtained?
[Pictures on page 14]
Elder conducting Watchtower Study, United States
Scene from Theocratic Ministry School, Faeroe Islands
Group study in private home, Yap
Kingdom Hall, New Braunfels, Texas, U.S.A., built in two days by Jehovah’s Witnesses
[Pictures on page 15]
Kingdom Halls in various countries
Japan
Australia
Austria
Spain

