Producing Bible Literature to Praise God
Jehovah’s Witnesses are well known for their preaching of God’s Kingdom by means of the printed page. Since 1920 the Watch Tower Society has used volunteer workers from among the Witnesses to produce magazines and books for distribution. This has been to ensure a dependable production of literature at the lowest possible cost.
For some 60 years, the Society has developed and expanded its production of Bible literature, first in Brooklyn and then in other countries. All the work has been done by an increasing staff of volunteers.
By the late 1970’s the traditional methods of processing and printing text were being phased out in favor of computer processing, phototypesetting, and offset printing. The problem here was that available commercial equipment could process only a limited number of languages. However, the Society was already producing literature in about 160 languages, and there was a need for more.
So, volunteers were called in to develop a multilanguage electronic phototypesetting system. The results were gratifying. The necessary technical breakthroughs were made, and a text-entry, composition, and phototypesetting system, called MEPS, was developed. This can process nearly 200 languages. More can be added.
Today MEPS text entry and graphics units, produced by Jehovah’s Witnesses, are in use in 25 countries, and more are planned for. Volunteer workers from these countries have been trained to operate and maintain this equipment. The Society is now producing magazines in more than 100 languages in 36 countries, and in 5 of these countries bound books and Bibles are also being produced.
To do this work requires people—writers, translators, proofreaders, printers, bookbinders, and shipping workers. Others must handle correspondence with the congregations. Some produce food, prepare meals, do cleaning, laundry, and so forth. All of this is handled by volunteer workers who make themselves available in the various countries. Around the world during 1985, there were 8,438 volunteer workers serving at the various offices, factories, homes, and farms.
Who are these people? They are men and women, single and married, young and old, all dedicated Jehovah’s Witnesses. Some have been in this work 40, 50, and even 60 years. They spend an average of at least 44 hours a week at their work assignments, with extra time as needed. Evenings and weekends are devoted to preaching the good news from house to house, and to other congregation activities.
Around the world these workers are provided with modest rooming and meals at one of the Society’s housing institutions, called Bethel Homes. In addition they receive a modest reimbursement for travel expenses in their ministry and for personal needs.
Since 1920, these volunteer workers have produced over nine billion Bibles, books, magazines, and pamphlets in about 200 languages for worldwide distribution. They are doing their part so that the everlasting good news can be declared as glad tidings to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.—Revelation 14:6, 7.
• What printing operations does the Watch Tower Society have, and why?
• Who do all this work, and how do they live?
[Pictures on page 24]
Volunteers performing tasks related to production of Bible literature at factory, home, office, and farm, in Brooklyn and Wallkill, New York, U.S.A.
[Pictures on page 25]
Volunteers performing various tasks directly or indirectly involved in production of Bibles and Bible literature
Spain
Germany
Finland
Canada
Denmark
Sweden
South Africa
Brazil
Netherlands
Australia

