Shepherding God’s Flock in Unity
Some ask: ‘How is the worldwide congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses governed?’ We answer: The governing arrangement follows the pattern of the Christian congregation of the first century.
In the 1870’s Charles T. Russell and his associates took the initiative in spreading the results of their Bible study by means of talks and printed matter. Around the country, those who chose to associate with this work looked to Russell and his close associates as the body of men most experienced in doing the Lord’s work and from whom they could seek counsel pertaining to their activities.
In 1884 Zion’s Watch Tower Tract Society was incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Russell and his responsible associates were closely involved with directing this Society as well as the activities of the Bible Students. In 1909 they moved their headquarters to Brooklyn, New York. Through the years the directors of the Watch Tower Society and other closely associated, spiritually qualified, anointed men have been serving as a governing body for Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The Governing Body consists of a group of anointed Christian men (13 in 1986), including 7 serving on the board of directors of the Watch Tower Society. These preside over the worldwide activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses. They are not inspired by God and hence are not infallible, but they rely on God’s infallible Word as the highest authority on earth, and have a lifetime of experience in submitting to God’s will. Each has a record of more than 40 years in the full-time ministry with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The Governing Body supervises what the Society publishes. What is written is based on observing the spiritual needs of the flock and is the result of prayerful and thorough study and research into God’s Word. As these men continue to study the Bible and observe the progressive outworking of God’s purposes, the fulfillment of prophecy in world events, and the situation of God’s people in the world, they may at times find it necessary to make enlightened adjustments in the understanding of some teachings. In this way, knowledge of truth becomes ever more abundant.—Psalm 97:11; Proverbs 4:18; Daniel 12:4.
The Governing Body has appointed a Branch Committee of three or more spiritually qualified men in each of the more than 90 branches earth wide to supervise activities in more than 200 lands and island groups. The branches communicate with the congregations under their supervision. There is regular communication between the Governing Body and the Branch Committees, and members of the Governing Body personally visit many branches each year so as to keep in touch with conditions.
These men are not masters over the faith of others but are ministers who work hard so that many others can learn about God’s Word. They do not serve for financial gain, but they have their material needs provided the same as do all other members of Bethel families. Proof that they are serving faithfully is seen in the zeal, unity, high moral standards, and loyalty to Bible teachings displayed by Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide.—1 Corinthians 3:5-9; 4:1, 2; 2 Corinthians 1:24; 3:1-3; 1 Peter 5:2, 3.
• What governing arrangement developed?
• Who serve on the Governing Body today, and what are their responsibilities?
• How is the work supervised in other lands?
[Map on page 26]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Areas Where Jehovah’s Witnesses Are Doing God’s Will
[Pictures on page 26]
Past presidents of the Watch Tower Society
C. T. Russell, 1884-1916
J. F. Rutherford, 1916-1942
N. H. Knorr, 1942-1977
F. W. Franz, 1977-1992
[Pictures on page 27]
A few of more than 90 branch offices through which Jehovah’s Witnesses’ worldwide activities are supervised
Canada
Zambia
Germany
Japan
Australia
Brazil

