Announcements
● Literature offer for March: Any two of the following books for a contribution of $1.00: Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution, Holy Spirit, This Life and World Government. April and May: The Watchtower, one-year subscription for a contribution of $3.50. Six-month subscriptions are $2.00. June and July: “Let Your Kingdom Come,” for a contribution of 75c.
● Books designated for use in the March offer may be obtained by congregation publishers for 50c each and at the regular rate by pioneers. Congregations may request 25c credit for each of these books placed over the counter for use by congregation publishers during March. Please request credit for books obtained by pioneers in the normal way. However, credit for books obtained by publishers should be requested separately, using a line under “Other Items” on the same Remittance and Credit Request form.
● Presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit congregation’s accounts on March 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● The Memorial celebration will be held Sunday, April 15, 1984. Although the talk may start earlier, please remember that the passing of the Memorial bread and wine should not begin until after sundown. You may need to inquire as to when sundown will occur on April 15 in your area. Since no other meetings are to be conducted on that date, appropriate adjustments should be made according to local circumstances. Circuit overseers will also adjust their schedule accordingly for that week so that only the Memorial celebration will be scheduled for April 15.
● New Publications Available:
“Let Your Kingdom Come”​—Croatian, Swahili
My Book of Bible Stories​—Malagasy
Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry​—German, Korean, Portuguese
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Danish, Dutch, German, Norwegian, Portuguese, Swedish
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1981​—Portuguese
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—Ga, New Guinea Pidgin, Serbian, Twi
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Ateso, Croatian, Kalenjin, Kimeru, Luhya-Bunyore, Malagasy
School and Jehovah’s Witnesses​—German
The Time for True Submission to God​—Turkish
Kingdom News No. 32​—Portuguese
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Deuteronomy (Set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—English
To the Hebrews, The Letter of James (single cassette)​—German
The First of Peter through The Letter of Jude (single cassette)​—German
A Revelation to John (single cassette)​—German
Album with complete Greek Scriptures (Set of 18 cassettes; congregation and public: $30.00; pioneers: $20.00)​—German
My Book of Bible Stories (Set of four cassettes in album; congregation and public: $8.00; pioneers: $6.00)​—Dutch
Beware of Losing Faith by Drawing Away From Jehovah​—Drama (single cassette)—​German, Swedish
● District convention badge cards for 1984 will be consigned and included with April literature shipments. It will not be necessary to order these. Consignments in lots of 25 will be made based on the size of each congregation, and the literature account will be billed at the rate of one cent per card. This new uniform arrangement will represent a considerable saving of work, time and expense for the Society. It should be more convenient for the congregations and ensure the availability of convention badge cards for all the publishers.

