Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 26
Song 25
12 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Briefly review articles in March 8 Awake! Direct attention to paragraph under “Feature Articles” on page 2. Have prepared publisher make the following model presentation, featuring March 8 Awake! After appropriate introduction, publisher asks householder: “Are you familiar with the expression ‘History repeats itself’?” Allow reply from householder; then publisher continues by saying: “Notice here on page 2 of Awake! what it says about this matter.” Publisher shows page 2 to householder and reads or discusses paragraph under heading “Feature Articles.” Publisher concludes by saying: “I am sure that you will find these articles most interesting. These issues of Awake! and The Watchtower are yours for a contribution of 30 cents.” Encourage brothers to make brief presentations of the magazines.
15 min: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry. Talk and discussion of material from page 92, paragraph 2, through page 100, paragraph 1.
18 min: “Schedule Time for Field Service.” Question-and-answer coverage preferably by service overseer. Refer to information on pages 116-118 of Our Ministry book. Use final 8 minutes to suggest several talking points that may be used in making two-book offer during March. Focus attention on books that are in good supply locally. Have one or two well-prepared brief demonstrations showing how to tie in two-book offer with current Topic for Conversation. Encourage all to share in field service first Sunday of month.
Song 103 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 4
Song 74
 8 min: Local announcements. Comment briefly on sharing in two-book offer. Also, get comments from publishers who have used model magazine presentation as demonstrated last week. Have them comment briefly on advantages of short presentations and use of paragraph about “Feature Articles” in Awake! Encourage all to share in magazine work second Saturday of month.
25 min: “Magazines Point the Way to Life.” Question-and-answer coverage from beginning up to subheading, “What You Can Do.” Read key paragraphs as time allows. Call for brief comments, expressing why we can be enthusiastic in presenting Watchtower subscription. Also call attention to superior grade paper being used in printing The Watchtower, beginning with January 1984. These magazines have an improved appearance and will be more durable for those wishing to save personal study copies for future reference.
12 min: School and Jehovah’s Witnesses. Talk on pagan origin of Easter, Valentine’s Day, May Day and Mother’s Day. See pages 19-21 of brochure. Include paragraph 2 on page 21, and help all to appreciate the need for faithfulness and reasonableness. Encourage parents to prepare their children for these matters.
Song 18 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 11
Song 32
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly review articles in March 15 Watchtower and March 22 Awake! that can be used effectively in field service. Those who wish to highlight Awake! in their presentation may want to use the comments on page 2 under the heading “Feature Articles.” For those who wish to highlight The Watchtower, the following presentation is suggested: After introducing yourself, you could say, “Do you think the day will ever come when people of all races, nationalities and languages will live together in peace?” Allow for reply and then state, “The idea of people everywhere living in unity, with no more hatred, violence or wars, certainly must seem like a dream to many people. And yet, isn’t it something that we would all like to see? Notice on page 3 of this issue of The Watchtower.” Open to page 3 and show article, reading title. Then say, “I would be very happy to leave this magazine with you along with Awake! for a contribution of 30 cents.” Introduce following part about magazine insert.
20 min: “Magazines Point the Way to Life.” Question-and-answer coverage of magazine insert from subheading “What You Can Do” to end of article. Read key paragraphs as time allows.
15 min: “Will You Serve as an Auxiliary Pioneer in April?” Talk and discussion of material with congregation. Read scriptures as time allows and conclude by reading paragraph 6.
Song 38 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 18
Song 6
 8 min: Local announcements, accounts report and encourage all to share in magazine activity fourth Saturday of month.
12 min: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry. Talk, preferably by secretary, from page 100, paragraph 2, to end of chapter, page 110.
25 min: “Presenting the Good News​—To People Who Speak Another Language.” Question-and-answer coverage. Read paragraphs. Look up scriptures as time permits.
Song 64 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 25
Song 41
10 min: Local announcements and “Are You Making Good Use of Tracts?” Make local application. Also remind brothers there is still time to apply for auxiliary pioneer service in April. Announce new literature offer and encourage all to support field service on first Sunday in April.
20 min: “Prepare for the Memorial Celebration.” Question-and-answer consideration. Read paragraphs and look up scriptures.
15 min: Use time for local needs, or interview those who are auxiliary pioneering and those who plan to do so during April. How many have shared in this activity before? Who is doing it for the first time? What motivated them? What personal benefits have been derived from this increased activity? How are personal affairs and responsibilities organized to accomplish it? How do various members of the family cooperate? Highlight joy of those who share in this activity and encourage all to be supportive.
Song 86 and concluding prayer.

