Prepare for the Memorial Celebration
1 On Sunday, April 15, after sundown, Jehovah’s people will gather for a most sacred occasion. This will be to memorialize the death of Jesus Christ, our Lord and Master. This joyous celebration, known as the Lord’s Evening Meal, serves as a reminder to each of us of the liberating effect of Christ’s sacrifice. We rejoice in the great love that Jehovah has shown in giving his own Son to provide the redemption price for us. (Rom. 5:6-8) How happy we can be to have availed ourselves of his ransom sacrifice! Once again we can show our appreciation by being supportive of the arrangements for celebrating the Memorial this year.
2 The first essential is to make definite plans to be in attendance ourselves. Also, at an early date, we will want to begin inviting Bible students, relatives and other interested persons. Can definite arrangements be made to provide transportation for those who may need help in getting to the meeting? With the Memorial on a Sunday this year, it should be possible for most persons to adjust their affairs to attend, provided they are invited several weeks in advance and then reminded again closer to the actual date.
3 Elders have many advance preparations to make for the Memorial celebration. These include arrangements for the speaker, distribution of the printed invitations, preparing the proper emblems (see w76 2/1 74, 75), organizing the attendants and servers, cleaning and arranging the Kingdom Hall, and so forth. If all things are diligently cared for in advance, the celebration will be a complete success.
BENEFITS TO THOSE WHO ATTEND
4 On this sacred occasion the anointed partake of the emblems, thus acknowledging that they have been taken into the new covenant and that they expect to share with Christ in his heavenly Kingdom. (Rom. 8:16, 17, 23) Their obediently partaking shows that they greatly esteem Christ’s sacrifice by which they are sanctified as parties to the new covenant.
5 Millions of others with an earthly hope attend but do not partake of the emblems. Still, they receive many benefits as a result of Jesus’ sacrifice, including God’s forgiveness of their sins through Christ’s blood. They observe the occasion with great happiness, being keenly interested in matters that concern those with the heavenly hope. They realize that they too owe their salvation to God and to the Lamb. (Rev. 7:9, 10) So this great crowd find delight in assembling with the spiritual remnant on that night to memorialize the death of the Lamb of God.
6 All who attend can benefit greatly. It is an occasion to recount the love that Jehovah God displayed in giving his Son as a ransom. All are reminded of the depth of Jesus’ own love in laying down his life for us, as well as the fine example he set for his followers. (John 15:12, 13; 1 Cor. 15:3; 1 Pet. 2:21) All of us will benefit greatly by preparing now and being present on April 15 for the celebration of the Memorial of Christ’s death.

