Presenting the Good News​—To People Who Speak Another Language
1 Today, it is not uncommon to find various language groups intermingled in metropolitan or urban areas. To some extent this may be true in certain rural areas as well. People who speak other languages must also be reached with the message of the Kingdom. (Rev. 14:6) In view of the various situations and problems that arise in accomplishing our ministry with those who speak other languages, the following suggestions are made.
MAKE DISCIPLES
2 It is good to keep foremost in mind that as we preach, our purpose is to make disciples​—to teach the truth. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Teaching should be done in the language people understand best. (1 Cor. 14:9) However, this is not always possible. In many areas there is but one congregation exclusively working the territory, yet people who are not conversant in the local language live there. What can be done to help these people learn the truth?
3 If you call on someone who speaks a language other than your own, make good use of the booklet Good News for All Nations. In that way at least a basic witness can be given to determine if the individual has some interest in the truth. If he shows interest and you have literature in his language, offer it to him. Thereafter, inquire of the elders and perhaps the circuit overseer as to whether there is a group or congregation within a reasonable distance that holds meetings in the language of the householder. Someone from the group or congregation may be able to provide assistance. If this is not practical, then perhaps a local publisher who speaks the language could be found to follow up on the interest. Sign language calls should be given the same consideration.
4 However, it may be that there are no Witnesses in the general area who speak the language of the interested person. What can be done in this instance? Some publishers have partially overcome the language barrier by using the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! If it is published in the language of the individual, so much the better. By using the illustrations and having the person read the Scriptures cited in the Bible, he will get some basic Bible understanding. In some cases there may be members of the interested person’s family who know enough of the local language to serve as interpreters.
5 In areas where there are no meetings held in a language the householder understands, encourage him to attend the meetings of the local congregation. The Christian association itself can be very upbuilding; and in order for him to make further spiritual progress he can start to learn the local language. (Matt. 18:20) Keep in mind that our purpose is to make disciples.
WORKING MULTILINGUAL TERRITORY
6 In some areas there are two, three or more congregations that have the same geographical territory assignment but are of different languages. Where this is the case, the publishers of each congregation should concentrate their efforts on their own particular language group. Obviously, there will be some overlapping of efforts at times. However, bodies of elders and congregations in such areas have been able to cooperate closely in serving the needs of the people, reaching them with the good news in the language they best understand. One way this is done is by passing along to the appropriate congregation the addresses of persons who speak another language. (Phil. 2:4) Also, the publishers in each congregation should be aware of the fact that the territory assignments in such areas are according to language. Hence, all should be conscientious about the way in which the territory is worked. Homes of individuals who understand best the language of one of the congregations holding the territory should be left for the publishers of that congregation to visit. By following this suggestion, those placing literature will be able to follow through and direct the interest to the appropriate congregation.
7 In some places it has proved to be practical for congregations to maintain a list of addresses and apartment numbers of those who prefer to speak a particular language. Other congregations in the same area may list the homes or apartments that their publishers should not work. This helps to avoid unnecessary calls by publishers from different congregations. In other places congregations work out a system among themselves to work the territory thoroughly and to direct interested ones to the appropriate congregation. This too is agreeable with the Society since there is no rigid rule on how this must be done.​—1 Cor. 14:33, 40.
8 Much can be accomplished in preaching the good news to people who speak another language when everyone cooperates, displaying reasonableness and unselfish interest in the Lord’s sheep. (John 13:34, 35; Phil. 2:14; Jas. 3:17, 18) By keeping foremost in mind the spiritual well-being of the sheeplike ones in the territory and our purpose of making disciples, we may yet help many more people of all nations and languages to join with us in worshiping Jehovah.​—Isa. 2:2, 3.

