Will You Serve as an Auxiliary Pioneer in April?
1 To worship God means to serve him. For the Israelites, worshiping Jehovah required obedience to his commands, doing his will as a people exclusively devoted to him. (Ex. 19:5; Josh. 24:14, 15) As Christians our worship of Jehovah includes preaching the good news of the Kingdom and teaching others the truths we have learned. (Matt. 28:19, 20) By our obedience to Jesus’ command we are in effect serving and worshiping Jehovah.
INCREASE YOUR SERVICE DURING APRIL
2 Many publishers select certain opportune times during the year to have a greater share in preaching the good news that is vital to the salvation of others. (Rom. 10:10-15) Many are serving as auxiliary pioneers this month. Can you increase your sacrifices of praise to Jehovah as an auxiliary pioneer next month? (Heb. 13:15) Have you seriously thought about making up a schedule that will allow you to auxiliary pioneer for one month or more? The requirements are set forth in the book Our Ministry, pages 113 and 114. Why not discuss the matter with your mate, your parents or another publisher in the congregation? Close cooperation in this endeavor can bring success.​—Prov. 15:22.
BENEFITS FROM AUXILIARY PIONEER SERVICE
3 Increased field service activity brings personal benefits. Being occupied daily with preaching the good news causes one’s heart and mind to focus on Scriptural thoughts. This can enhance our spirituality, and this will be reflected in our attitude, outlook and conduct. Our happiness increases because we know we are doing the work God approves. Also, we improve in our own ability to express the good news clearly and understandably. Special joy results when we are able to start a home Bible study. Additionally, the fruitage of the spirit usually becomes more evident in our lives. In fact, some publishers have said that their relationship with others in the congregation and in their own family improves when they are more active in the field service. Others state that by organizing their affairs to be an auxiliary pioneer for a month they usually accomplish more at home as well as in the field. There is general agreement that our relationship with Jehovah is enriched by means of the increased activity.
4 The congregation benefits too. Some who may be hesitant to enter auxiliary pioneer service alone will do so if encouraged by another. Others who may not be able to auxiliary pioneer would still like to increase their service activity and they can do this by working with those who are auxiliary pioneers. The pioneer spirit, having a right mental attitude about full-time service, can permeate the congregation when brothers and sisters happily support this special activity. It has been said that the spiritual well-being of a congregation is closely related to its activity in the field ministry. Hence, when elders take the lead both by encouraging auxiliary pioneer service and by sharing in it when they can, the entire congregation benefits.
5 People to whom we preach benefit from our increased service. On the initial call or on return visits pioneers are able to start more home Bible studies that can put some on the road to life. More literature is usually distributed in the territory, and that means a greater opportunity for sheeplike ones to learn the truth. Genuine effort is made to seek out those who are sighing and groaning over world conditions. People are being duly warned about God’s impending judgment, and our responsibility to carry out this work is more fully accomplished. (Ezek. 9:4; 33:7-9) The name of Jehovah and the message about the Kingdom are kept more fully before the people so that they will know ‘that a prophet himself has proved to be in the midst of them.’​—Ezek. 33:33.
PLAN NOW TO AUXILIARY PIONEER IN APRIL!
6 For those who can make room for it, the auxiliary pioneer activity is a fine way to have a greater share in the field ministry in April. Besides holidays during the month of April, which will leave many with time off from school and secular work, there are five Sundays. Perhaps even some in full-time secular work can auxiliary pioneer by making good use of evenings, Saturdays and the five Sundays. Make your plans now for increased service during April!

