Announcements
“FROM DAY TO DAY TELL THE GOOD NEWS”
There is real good news to be told in this time of world distress and perplexity. Those whose hearts fail at seeing the gathering clouds of uncertainty and woe must have their attention called to the silver lining. That silver lining is the fact that the very things that cast such an ominous shadow over the world are evidence that we are living in the very last days of this wicked system of things and soon—within this generation—the kingdom of God by Christ Jesus will alone rule the earth. What grand news to have and to tell! In keeping with Jehovah’s direction, at Psalm 96:2, during December Jehovah’s witnesses will daily tell the good news of salvation to others by engaging in house-to-house ministry. A Bible-study aid book and booklet carrying the message of salvation will be offered on a contribution of 50c. All acquainted with the good news are privileged to tell it to others. If you wish to join in this happy service, contact the nearest Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses.
OBTAIN YOUR 1958 YEARBOOK
The 1957 service year of Jehovah’s witnesses has proved to be one of the most productive in the history of the Kingdom ministry. The report of this world-wide activity, published by the president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society in this year’s annual Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses, will thrill all of those who had a share in making it a part of the permanent record of Christian preaching. It will astonish those of good will and provide concrete encouragement to them. It will stimulate all to share in this modern fulfillment of Jesus’ commission to go into the highways and the byways of the world to seek his sheep. The ready response of those thirsting for truth, the stand they have taken for Jehovah’s new-world government—often under trying conditions—the strength of integrity they have displayed even in their Christian youth, all add up to the most inspiring report yet published in the Yearbook. Order your copy for 50c. The stimulating and colorful 1958 calendar is also now available for 25c each. If you are associated with a congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses, order through the congregation servant.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
December 15: The Congregator on Works Vain and Worthwhile, ¶1-19. Page 688.
December 22: The Congregator on Works Vain and Worthwhile, ¶20-25, and Worthwhile Works of the Congregated Ones. Page 695.

