VOL. XXX FEBRUARY 15 NO. 4 
A.D. 1909-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

"Able Ministers of the New Covenant" 51 

Not of the Letter, but of the Spirit 52 

"Except Someone Shall Guide Me" 52 

Respecting the Great Mediator 54 

"The Hidden Mystery" 54 

"Full of Good Works and Alms Deeds" 55 

A Beautiful Christian Woman 56 

The Jacksonville (Florida) Convention 57 

Lesson Review 57 

Quarterly Temperance Lesson 58 

"Preserve the Unity of the Spirit" 59 

Some Interesting Letters 60 

"Who Gave Himself a Ransom" 61 

"Mediator Between God and Men" 62 

Questions Re the Covenants 63 

page 50 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 
PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are 
unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if they send a Postal Card 
each MAY stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are not only 
willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually and in touch with the 
Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



POSTAGE STAMPS OF LARGE DENOMINATIONS 

If necessary to make small remittances in stamps kindly 
send 5, 10 or 15-cent values, when possible. We cannot use 
foreign stamps; we must return them for redemption. 

R4332 : page 50 

VOLUME SIX IN OTHER LANGUAGES 

The sixth volume in Swedish, WATCH TOWER style, is now 
ready; in cloth binding, at $1.50 per copy. 

Volume six, German, is temporarily out of stock. Will 
have a new supply upon our arrival at Brooklyn. 

page 50 

MOTTO ORDERS NOT YET ALL FILLED 

Orders for the Calendar Mottoes have so far exceeded our 
expectations that our second large consignment has been found 
insufficient to fill orders. We are therefore arranging that all 
remaining orders be filled direct from the printers in England. 

R4332 : page 50 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S THANKS AND APOLOGIES 

Brother Russell desires to thank the dear friends for their 
many, many kind expressions (by cards, letters and telegrams), 
congratulating him on his entering his fifty-eighth year, and 
wishing him showers of divine blessings. These were from 
individuals and from classes or churches— one signed by 122 
of the Philadelphia ecclesia. Brother Russell would gladly 
respond to all letters; but as this would hinder other features 
of the harvest work he asks that you accept the WATCH TOWER 
articles as personal letters. 



R4331 : page 51 

"ABLE MINISTERS OF THE NEW COVENANT" 

-2 COR. 3:6.- 

ST. PAUL says, "Our sufficiency is of God: who also 
hath made us able ministers (servants) of the new 
testament (New Covenant); not of the letter, but 
of the spirit; for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life." 
-2 Cor. 3:5,6. 

How could St. Paul and the other apostles be servants 
of a New Covenant, if no such New Covenant is yet in existence? 
A similar question might be raised respecting our 
Lord's statement that his memorial cup represented the blood 



of the New Testament, the New Covenant. The answer to 
these queries is: (1) There will be no blood of or from the 
New Covenant after it has been completed. The blood of the 
New Covenant is the blood prepared in advance of the Covenant, 
wherewith to seal it and make it obligatory— make it 
a Covenant. Our Lord's words respecting the cup were 
uttered before he died. The cup was symbolical and pointed 
forward to his own death. It was offered only to his followers, 
and not to the world. It was shed for them, and was 
the basis for their reconciliation to the Father; but it was to 
be in due time the blood of the New Covenant— the blood 
with which the New Covenant would be sprinkled, sealed, 
made efficacious. It was offered to the Church more than 
eighteen centuries before the time for the sealing of the New 
Covenant, to grant the Church, the overcomers, the privileges 
of participation with Christ in his sacrifice, not only in the 
sense of justification, but also in the sense of sanctification, 
or death with him. 

This St. Paul most distinctly asserts in 1 Cor. 10:16, 
saying, "The cup of blessing, is it not the communion of the 
blood of Christ?" The drinking of that cup symbolizes our 
fellowship in the sufferings of Christ, our common union in 

R4332:page51 

all of the afflictions that came upon him— our death with 
him. By the time all of the members of the Body of Christ 
shall have taken part in this cup, the time will have come 
for the application of the merit of that communion cup, that 
united sacrifice of the Body, with and under the Head sealing 
the New (Law) Covenant with Israel, and, through Israel, 
for the benefit of mankind. When the disciples asked if they 
might not sit in his throne, the one on the right hand and 
the other on his left, he asked, "Are ye able to drink of the 
cup that I drink of?" (Mark 10:38.) All who would sit 
in the throne must drink of the cup. All who will faithfully 
drink of the cup shall sit in the throne as members of the 
Body of Christ— "the Bride, the Lamb's Wife." 

Take an illustration: Suppose the Declaration of Independence 
or some important document were about to be 
signed and sealed. The document itself might be printed 
and while in the process of being signed might be spoken of 
as the covenant, agreement or declaration, although it would 
not be such a document, even after being printed, until duly 
signed and sealed. Similarly the ink might by law be specified 
to be of a certain kind, and the person having charge of 
it might speak of it as the ink used, in the sense that it was 
the ink designed to be used in the signing of that Covenant, 
when the proper time should come. Similarly the person 
designated to be the mediator of that covenant might be so 
spoken of in advance of the signing. Similarly those of his 
suite, who would accompany him as assistants and who 
would need certain preparation before they would engage in 
this service, might be spoken of as the ministers or servants 
of that Covenant, even though it had not yet been signed and 
really made a covenant. 



Thus the Apostle speaks of himself and others as able 
servants of the New Covenant. He does not mean that the 
New Covenant is in effect, in operation, but that in view of 
this New Covenant which God has promised shall ultimately 
be signed and sealed and made effective, he and others, the 
entire Royal Priesthood, are servants of that Covenant, ministering 
or serving its interests and fully qualified of the 
Lord to do so. Of ourselves we have no righteousness, no 
merit, that could be made effective for the sealing of that 
New Covenant with Israel. But, being justified by faith in 
the blood of Christ, we are made able or competent to serve 
the interests of the New Covenant. We serve it by laying 
down our lives as Joint-Heirs with our Redeemer for its sealing, 
and subsequently putting it into operation. 

Our position is that of ambassadors for God, explaining 
to men his mercy and his provision of the New Covenant, 
through which all may be blessed and recovered if they will. 
So many as receive our message with joy and turn from sin 
to follow our Lord may be invited to become members of the 
Body of Christ, the Body of Messiah, the Body of the Mediator, 
the Body of the great Prophet, the Body of the great 
Priest, the Body of the great King of the Millennial Age. So, 
then, we are ministers of the New Covenant in that we are 
laying down our lives in its service, in its interest, although 
it is not yet a Covenant, but merely a promise. We are not 
only laying down our lives, but seeking out fellow-members 

R4332 : page 52 

of the Body of the Anointed One and assisting them in the 
laying down of their lives, under the assurance that these 
better sacrifices will soon be finished and their application 
be made by our glorious Head, and we with him in glory. 

NOT OF THE LETTER, BUT OF THE SPIRIT 

Even with our dealing with the world we can serve them 
to some extent, as servants of the New Covenant, for we can 
make known to them something of its terms, which some of 
them may grasp by faith and others may not. We can explain 
to them that this New Covenant which will go into 
effect evidences Divine mercy and sympathy for mankind. 
We cannot minister to them the letter of the New Covenant, 
because it has not been sealed. We can merely tell them of 
its spirit and endeavor to show to them the import, as respects 
the future, that justice and mercy will be tempered together 
for all. If the New Covenant were sealed now, the conditions 
are not such as would make it a blessing, for Satan is still 
the Prince of this world, sin abounds, and the Kingdom which 
is to bring deliverance has not yet been set up. The New 
Covenant is a Covenant of Law and of Works made possible 
—the same exactly as the Law Covenant, except with a better 
Mediator. If, therefore, the letter of the New (Law) Covenant 
could be enforced now, it would be a great disadvantage 
to all coming under it, and, as the Apostle suggests, it would 
be unto death. Hence it is much better for the world that it 



is not sealed and operative and that we who are connected 
with it as prospective members of its Mediator merely explain 
to the opposing world the spirit of that Covenant, which can 
profit and enlighten and encourage only those who are feeling 
after God, and who have no heart rebellion against him. 

Thus a believer in the Lord Jesus, justified by faith in 
his blood, would have the right to look forward to the Millennial 
Age and the blessed privileges of the New Covenant 
then to be inaugurated. And to the extent that he would 
live in accord with the conditions of that New Covenant, he 
would be the better prepared for the blessed privileges which 
will then be brought to the world. But he could not come 
under the letter of the New Covenant if he chose, for it has 
not yet been sealed. He could merely by faith come under 
its spirit. 

But the special work of these ministers or servants of 
the New (Law) Covenant is to make known to such as are 
interested in a looking forward to the New Covenant and its 
blessing by faith, that God has some better thing for us— 
for the called and chosen and faithful, namely, that by consecration 
unto death, by drinking of his "cup," we may be 
counted in as members of the Body of the Mediator, under 
the higher, the Abrahamic Covenant. "And if ye be Christ's, 
then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the 
promise."— Gal. 3:29. 



R4332 : page 52 

"EXCEPT SOME ONE SHALL GUIDE ME" 

-ACTS 8:26-40.-MARCH 1 .- 

Golden Text:— "Search the Scriptures; for in them 
ye think ye have eternal life; and they are they which 
testify of me."— John 5:39. 

THE pith of this lesson is the Divine supervision of 
the Gospel work and use of consecrated talents 
in the unfolding of the Divine Purposes. Deacon 
Philip, whose ministries of the Truth were so abundantly 
blessed of the Lord in Samaria, evidently continued 
humble, so that the Lord could use him further as his 
agent and mouthpiece. The message of the Gospel was 
to be sent into Africa. An Ethiopian eunuch in high 
station under Candace, the Ethiopian Queen, was a 
suitable person to bear the message. For a considerable 
time he had knowledge of the true religion of the 
Jews. Because a eunuch he could not become a Jew 
(Deut. 23:1), except as "a proselyte of the gate"— one 
who adopted the Jewish worship. He had come to 
Jerusalem to worship on one of the holy festivals. 
Under the Lord's providence, the hope of Israel, Messiah, 
was prominent before his mind. He was returning 
to his home in Ethiopia and, after the custom of the 



time, was reading aloud from a scroll. It was Isaiah's 
prophecy, which he had probably purchased at Jerusalem 
at considerable cost. He was puzzled by what he 
read, which seemed to relate to Messiah. Some statements 
implied his great glory, honor, dignity, power, 

R4333 : page 52 

while others seemed to mention him as despised and 
rejected of men— led as a lamb to the slaughter. Many 
other men had read the same passages for centuries 
with similar perplexity. Why? Because the right time 
had not come for them to be understood and God had 
not sent servants or messengers to interpret them. 

"THE SPIRIT SAID UNTO PHILIP, GO!" 

Meantime the Lord, as able as willing to make "all 
things work together for good," directed Deacon Philip 
on a journey which, at the right time, brought him in 
contact with the eunuch's company, for it is entirely 
probable that so notable a man would travel with considerable 
escort besides the driver of his chariot. Philip 
did not expostulate with the messenger sending him. 
He did not urge that he had business matters which required 
his attention, for it was his first business to 
serve the interests of the Kingdom. If the Lord ever 
sends us on a mission and makes it possible for us to 
fulfil it, that should be considered the chief business of 
life for the time, and everything else secondary, inferior. 

Arriving at the appointed place, Philip was on the 
lookout for service. How we wish that all of the Lord's 
people might more and more attain to this attitude of 
heart and mind— a readiness, waiting, looking, to note 
the Divine providences in their affairs and to use them 
wisely, as did Philip ! 

Evidently the chariot had passed Philip and he had 
heard the reading. He knew that this meant that the 
eunuch was a man interested in the Word of God and 
that his mind was centered upon it. He may even have 
surmised that the Lord had directed the eunuch's attention 
to this very part of the Scripture at this very 
moment, so as to make Philip's mission opportune. 
The Spirit of the Lord told Philip to run after the chariot 
and get into communication with the reader. In what 
way the Lord's Spirit thus prompted him we are not informed. 
We may consider, however, that the holy Spirit 
dwelt richly in Philip, quickened his perceptive powers 
to a realization of the opportunities of the moment and 
suggested to him that this was a way in which his 
knowledge of the Lord and his consecrated powers 
might be used in proclaiming the good tidings. So 
each of us should be so full of zeal for the message, so 
full of the desire to assist others into the grace of God, 
that the Spirit of the Lord in us would prompt us to 
speak a word in season. 



Paraphrasing the account we may suppose that 
Philip, running near to the reader in the chariot, called 
out, "Friend, do you understand that which you are 

R4333 : page 53 

reading?" So much depends upon a word in season, 

and the right word! Not only our words, but our tone 

of voice should be considered, when we attempt to represent 

the great King as his ambassadors. Kindness 

and brotherly love should be indicated in our faces and 

by our words, and made a part of the message we deliver. 

The honesty of the eunuch, his readiness for the 
Truth, his humility of mind, are all indicated by his 
reply, "How can I understand, except some one shall 
guide me?" The arrogance which would have given 
Philip a haughty stare would have meant a heart unready 
for the Gospel— unworthy of it. The pride which 
would have said, "I suppose that I understand it as 
well as you do, sir," would have indicated a heart not 
meek enough for the Truth, and to be its servant in 
Africa. A superstitious reverence which would have 
said, "None but the Doctors of the Law are supposed 
to understand these writings," would have meant a 
bounden condition of heart, unready for the message. 
The eunuch's answer was the proper one for a heart in 
the right condition towards God and the Truth. It 
admitted his ignorance of the Prophet's meaning, and 
it admitted the Divine power which would explain the 
seeming contradiction in due time, and it admitted 
that the Lord would probably in his own time and 
way send the interpretation through human instrumentality. 
His invitation to Philip to ride with him 
in his chariot was a further indication of his meekness 
and that he realized that in Philip he had found 
one who, like himself, was deeply interested in the 
Word of the Lord and his promises to Israel. He would 
give Philip a lift on his journey and would, doubtless, 
the while enjoy fellowship with him in holy things. 

Many in our day are hindered from receiving a 
proper knowledge of the Divine Word and Plan through 
a lack of meekness, humbleness of mind, teachableness. 
Some of these have concluded that because the 
Scriptures declare "They shall all be taught of God," 
therefore they should expect angels or angel voices to 
guide them individually in the understanding of the 
Scriptures. Under this error many have been led clairaudiently 
of the evil spirits into various fanaticisms. 
Rather we should give heed to the Lord's Word on this 
subject, and not how all of his true people will be taught 
of him. The Apostle explains how, saying, "And he 
gave some apostles, some prophets and teachers for the 
work of the ministry, for the edifying of the Body of 
Christ." (Eph. 4:11,12.) He who rejects the Lord's 
way evidences the fact that he is not in the right condition 
of heart and hence is not taught of God. 



"SO HE OPENED NOT HIS MOUTH" 

The portion of the prophecy which the eunuch was 
reading referred to Messiah as meekly enduring the 
opposition of sinners against himself, saying all manner 
of evil against him possible, and declaring that in 
this respect he was like a lamb dumb before his 
shearers. And what was true of the Master should be 
increasingly true of all those who are seeking to walk 
in his steps, in proportion as they make progress in the 
good way and become copies of God's dear Son. 

The eunuch further manifested his humility of mind 
by asking Philip's interpretation of this prophecy. Did 
it relate to Isaiah himself or to some one else? We read 
that this opened Philip's mouth to preach unto him 
Jesus as the antitypical Lamb of God, as the one who 
suffered severe humiliations, even unto death, even the 
death of the cross. We can imagine his explanation of 
the prophecy, "His generation, who shall declare? for 
his life is taken from the earth." Philip doubtless explained 
that although our Lord had ceased to be of the 
earth, earthy, and had been resurrected to the spirit 
plane of being and the Divine nature, nevertheless he 
would have a generation, or a posterity. His posterity, 
his children, will be on the earthly plane and will be 
Adam's children, whom he has adopted as his own. In 
due time, under the Millennial Kingdom, he will become 
their Life-Giver or Father, their Regenerator or Deliverer, 
freeing them from the power of the tomb and 
then restoring to full human perfection as his children 
all who will receive and profit by the blessed knowledge 
and opportunities of that time. Thus he will become 
in due time "The everlasting Father" of the redeemed 
and restored race of Adam. We can imagine that his 
preaching of Jesus went still further than this and 
showed the eunuch that before that glorious day of the 
world's regeneration another feature of the Divine Program 
will be called out, namely, the selection of a 
Church to be the members of the glorious Body, under 
the Headship of Jesus— the Body otherwise styled, "The 
Bride, the Lamb's Wife." He doubtless explained to 
the eunuch that this is the message of the present time, 
the message or invitation to become heirs of God and 
Joint-Heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord, and members 
of the great antitypical Messiah, the antitypical Prophet, 
Priest, King and Judge of the world. He doubtless explained 
the two steps necessary as an entrance into this 
grace, this privilege, namely, (1) the abandonment of 
sin and the acceptance of Christ as Redeemer; (2) a 
full consecration of the justified humanity to the service 
of the Lord and of his brethren and of his Truth. 

The eunuch's meek, teachable, honest attitude made 
it easy for him to receive this glorious message in its 
simplicity and beauty. He was already a believer, to 
the extent that he knew. He was already justified by 



his faith in the Redeemer promised. Now that justification 

became actually his, as his mind and heart 

grasped the thought that the Crucified One was the Son 

of God who bought us with his own precious blood. 

He was already devoted to the Lord, so far as he knew 

his will. So now, with clear knowledge directly sent to 

him through Philip, his consecration was revived, renewed, 

enlarged, practically applied. Evidently Philip 

explained to him the New Baptism, not only in the 

sense in which we are baptized into Christ's death, 

but also the appropriateness of symbolizing this by 

water immersion. Note the promptness of the eunuch 

to confess his full submission to the Lord and to symbolize 

this in water immersion. Had he not been in 

ready condition of heart, this, too, would have been put 

off with some excuse. How evident that God had chosen 

in him a suitable vessel to bear his message to the 

Ethiopians— to be a foreign missionary! 

Ancient manuscripts omit verse 37. It evidently 
was added later as a marginal note, as an answer to the 
question of verse 36. Quite probably such words, or 
many more, were used by Philip. Evidently the account 
does not pretend to be a report of all that was said, but 
merely of the leading features of the conversation. The 
eunuch commanded the driver of his chariot to stop. 
Philip and he alighted and he was baptized— immersed. 
And when they were come up out of the water, the 
Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch 
saw him no more. But the latter went on his way rejoicing 
in the glorious message he had received, which 
"satisfied his longings as nothing else could do." 
Doubtless he talked with his charioteer or others of his 
company and ran by-times of his homeward journey. 
Tradition has it that amongst his converts in Ethiopia 
was a Queen herself. 

R4334 : page 54 

As to how the spirit caught Philip away we may not 
certainly know. But that was the day of miracles and 
doubtless his miraculous transportation would not only 
serve as an encouragement to himself and assurance 
that his service was under the Lord's supervision, but 
his vanishing would give the eunuch additional faith in 
what he had taught him, for it would testify that God 
was with him, and that he was being used as the angels 
had been used previously. 

The general lesson to us is, (1) readiness, alertness, 
to serve the Lord in season and out of season, when 
convenient to ourselves, and when not convenient- 
glad of any opportunity and at any cost to be the ambassadors 
of the King; (2) the necessity for humility 
and promptness of obedience, if we would make progress, 
and either maintain, or attain to usefulness in 
the Lord's service. 



THE GOLDEN TEXT 

As our Golden Text points out, the Lord is revealed 
in the holy Scriptures, and those who would know him 
should seek their information from that quarter. Under 
Divine providence, apostles, prophets and teachers are 
necessary, indispensable. But no words of man are to 
be taken as instead of the Word of God. On the contrary, 
their presentations are to find acceptance only in 
proportion as they are found to be in harmony with the 
Scriptures, and to discern this harmony, the holy Spirit 
is necessary. The Scriptures must be searched, but 
only by coming into a condition of heart harmony and 
teachableness, and then by a full consecration receiving 
the holy Spirit, can we hope to understand the Divine 
message and to obtain therewith the eternal life which 
it promises to those guided and taught of the Lord. 



R4334 : page 54 

RESPECTING THE GREAT MEDIATOR 

IT seems strange how long it requires for an idea to really 
work itself into some of our minds. A brother of apparently 
discerning mind has recently published a little 
pamphlet in which he sets forth that Brother Russell evidently 
believes and teaches that The Christ is composed of many 
members— Jesus the Head and the various overcomers, members 
of his Body; and that through this great Christ God proposes 
to seal the New Covenant and through it to bring blessings 
to Israel and to all the families of the earth. The brother 
states this as something new and wonderful which he has just 
discovered, although he has been a reader of our publications 
for ten years. We are glad that finally the thought has 
broken into his mind. Our belief is, however, that he got this 
thought long ago from our writings, and was in full sympathy 
therewith until his heart got soured. Then spiritual indigestion 
set in, and finally blindness of "the eyes of his understanding" 
has resulted, so that the things which he once saw 
as reasonable and beautiful are no longer so to him. In other 
words, after having come into the light of Present Truth, he 
apparently has gone out of it into the "outer darkness," in 
which he previously was, and in which mankind in general 
still are. Why did the Lord expel him? We cannot surely 
know. We can and do note the fact. And our Lord's words 
indicate what is the probable difficulty. Our Lord assures 
us that "If any man will do his (the Father's) will, he shall 
know of the doctrine." (John 7:17.) The intimation is that 
wrong-heartedness is intimately associated with wrong-headedness, 
as respects doctrine. 

But we cannot judge each other's hearts. We are incapable; 
and, besides, are forbidden. In any event we should 
prefer to think well, rather than ill, of each other's sentiments 
and motives. Our only judgment must be as respects outward 



conduct— whether the thorny disposition or the wolfish 
spirit; or whether, on the other hand, the fruits and graces 
of the true grape Vine are in evidence. Again, ability to see, 
to discern spiritual things, is another evidence the Lord has 
given of those who are in proper relationship to himself. If 
obedience to the Lord and to the Truth brought us into the 
light, disobedience or loss of the Spirit of the Lord undoubtedly 
will lead out of the light into the darkness prevalent all 
about us— not necessarily on every subject, for amongst those 
outside the light of Present Truth, truth and error prevail in 
a mixed and confusing manner. Only to the consecrated is it 
given to "know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God." To 
all outsiders these things are more or less parabolic and dark 
sayings. 

"THE HIDDEN MYSTERY" 

For forty years we have been endeavoring to show to 
those who have the spiritual eyes and the ears of understanding 
that the "hidden mystery" is "Christ in you, the hope of 
glory."-Col. 1:27. 

The Spirit of Christ in you leads now to self-sacrifice, 
self-denial, cross-bearing, etc.— "filling up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ." This is a mystery to the 
Jews, Gentiles and nominal Christians who understand not 
why we should be called to fellowship in Christ's sufferings 
and who make light of our rejoicing that soon we shall be 
made sharers of Christ's glory in the First Resurrection. This 
mystery, hidden from past ages and dispensations, is now 
made known to the saints and none others; and if the saintliness 
be lost, the understanding of the mystery undoubtedly 
goes with it. 

The Apostle explains that the mystery class (Jesus the 
Head, and the Church his Body) are the antitypical Isaac, 
the heirs of the Abrahamic Covenant— the offspring of the 
Sarah Covenant. (Gal. 3:16-29.) The Jews know this not, 
but are still trusting to their Law Covenant, made at Sinai. 
The majority of Christians know not of it, but still think of 
themselves as having once been under the Law Covenant as 
Jews, until, as they think, at our Lord's first advent, he 
sealed the New Covenant with Spiritual Israel. How often 
we sang, "Free from the Law, oh happy condition," and 
"Cursed by the Law and bruised by the fall, Christ hath 
redeemed us, once for all." 

There is an admixture of both truth and error in these 
statements, and we were unable to differentiate until the 
"mystery" began to dissolve. The Truth on the subject is a 
"mystery" to the nominal Christian, even though it be plainly 
stated in the inspired Word, namely, that natural Israel and 
their Covenant have been cast off from Divine favor; that 
Christ Jesus won the prize of the Law Covenant and is the 
Head of the Church, The Christ, the Isaac Seed of the Abrahamic 
Covenant. The members of Christ's "Body" are being 
called and chosen and found faithful during this Gospel Age 
and will be complete with its termination. The sacrifice of 
this antitypical Isaac (Head and Body) yields the blood of 



the New Covenant, which will shortly seal or ratify it and 
make it operative to Israel as a New (Law) Covenant, as instead 
of their Old Law Covenant. It will have an antitypical 
Mediator, instead of Moses, and everlasting blessings, 
instead of temporal ones, and living works of faith and obedience 
as instead of dead ones. We are glad to have assistance 

R4334 : page 55 

from any quarter in setting these things before the 
"household of faith." 

A few points, however, the brother, doubtless unintentionally, 
misrepresents. Our writings clipped from here and 
there, may be made to appear contradictory, just as contradictions 
of the Scriptures are claimed and pointed out by 
those who do not understand them, and are in opposition to 
them. If our presentations be read in their proper connections, 
they will be found to be harmoniously progressive, 
as the Scriptures intimate should be expected, saying, "The 
path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and 
more unto the perfect day."— Prov. 4:18. 

The Reformation movement was in the right direction- 
each successive reform attempting to get nearer to the true 
light. The close of the 2300 days of sanctuary cleansing 
(Vol. III., Chap. X) found us free from traditions of Babylon 
and reestablished upon the testimony of Jesus, the apostles 
and the prophets, and following on to know the Lord. But 
freedom from falsities did not mean that all the precious 
things of Divine Truth were properly located and fixed in 
our understandings. Thus, for instance, the New Covenant, 
its sealing and its work are precious facts, not at all erroneous; 
but we had misplaced these facts, following the traditions 
of Babylon. We still have the New Covenant and still 
appreciate its every feature just the same, but perceive that 
it was misplaced; that it is the New (Law) Covenant which 
will be sealed or made effective with the blood of Christ, by 
the merit of Christ's death, at the close of this Gospel Age, 
instead of at its beginning. We now see clearly that the 
Scriptures everywhere teach that the New Covenant is to be 
made "with the House of Israel and the House of Judah," 
and not with Spiritual Israel. We now see that we are under 
the Faith or Grace Covenant, the original or Abrahamic 
Covenant, and not at all under a Covenant of Law and Works, 
such as the Old Law Covenant was, and such as the New 
(Law) Covenant will be. We now see the full force of the 
Apostle's statement, "Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the 
children of promise"— the children of the Abrahamic Covenant. 
-Gal. 4:28. 

Jesus was the Head of that Isaac, and the Church the 
members of the Isaac Body. The entire antitypical Isaac, 
"the Seed of Abraham," was represented by the typical Isaac 
and in his sacrifice. It is the blood (sacrifice— death) of 
the entire antitypical Isaac which will seal the New Covenant 

R4335 : page 55 



with Israel, "After those days." (Jer. 31:31.) The fact that 
the antitypical Isaac was to be not only Jesus, but also the 
Church, is the Mystery which the Jews could not comprehend, 
and which Babylon cannot comprehend, and which only "The 
wise shall understand."— Dan. 12:10. 

Our critic is in error in supposing that we claim that 
the Church is any part of the "Passover" sacrifice. We hold, 
on the contrary, that the Passover Lamb found its antitype 
in our Lord alone. This is in harmony with the words, "Christ 
our Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the 
feast." (1 Cor. 5:7,8.) The passover Lamb was prepared 
whole, not a bone being broken. It thus represented our 
Lord alone, and not his "members," the Church. On the contrary, 
in one of the atonement day sacrifices, the ram of the 
burnt-offering was cut into pieces, and the parts washed, and 
then laid with the head on the altar, thus representing Christ 
and his members separately, yet unitedly, offered up to God— 
the members under the merit of the Head. 

The passover was not for all the people, but only for 
the first-born. This symbolized, therefore, the work of Christ 
for the Church of this Gospel Age, which is elsewhere designated 
the "Church of the First-Born." Evidently the Church 
has no share in her own deliverance, which is entirely a work 
of grace and love Divine. As the passing over of the first-born 
of Israel led to the making of the Law Covenant with 
Israel at Mt. Sinai, so the passing over of the Church of the 
First-Born during this Gospel Age leads to the inauguration 
of the New Covenant for the blessing of natural Israel and 
the world, Moses, representing The Christ, Head and Body 
(which God is selecting from amongst mankind during this 
Gospel Age) became the Mediator of the Law Covenant. And 
he took the blood of a bullock and a goat and sprinkled the 
book of the Law, representing God or Divine Justice, and 
subsequently sprinkled the people, thus binding God and 
the people by that Covenant. The blood of the antitypical 
bullock (Jesus) and of the antitypical goat, the Church, will 
both together seal the New (Law) Covenant. The antitype 
will soon be here. The raising up of the antitypical Moses, 
the antitypical Mediator, will soon be accomplished. 

As Moses ascended Mt. Sinai and received the Law and 
brought it down to Israel and sealed the Covenant thereupon, 
so the antitypical Moses ere long will have gone into the 
Mount of God, the Kingdom, and soon thereafter will appear 
but under a vail, invisible to mankind, to seal the New Covenant, 
and to put all of its beneficent mercies into operation. 



R4335 : page 55 

"FULL OF GOOD WORKS AND ALMS DEEDS" 

-ACTS 9:31-43.-MARCH 14.- 

Golden Text:— "And Peter said unto him, Aeneas, Jesus 
Christ maketh thee whole; arise and make thy bed. 



And he arose immediately."— Acts 9:34. 

THE opening verse of our lesson informs us that 

after the persecution which scattered the Church 

(following Stephen's death) there came a lull and 

rest time. "So the Church throughout all Judea and 

Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified; and, 

walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the 

holy Spirit, was multiplied." How much is here recorded 

in a few words! And how will the principles 

here set forth apply to the Lord's dealing with his 

people today? The Scriptures give us the illustration 

of the Lord's dealings with his people in the words, "As 

an eagle stirreth up her nest." (Deut. 32:1 1.) Thus 

does the Lord at times permit trials, persecutions, etc., 

which outwardly seem to imply the wrecking of most 

precious interests, and sometimes cause surprise to his 

people by the roughness and jarring conditions. Nevertheless, 

under Divine supervision, the stirring up of the 

nest and the throwing of responsibility upon his people 

can be made advantageous to them, strengthening, 

helping them. Then comes a time of rest and opportunity 

for spiritual edification, comfort, growth in grace 

and knowledge. Happy are those who, in the time of 

the stirring up of the nest, are rightly exercised by the 

Lord's providences and taught of him and made more 

and more active in his service— the service of righteousness, 

truth and love. It brings them preparation for 

the period of rest and development. 

But to others who are not rightly exercised by the 
siftings, the shakings, the stirrings up of the nest, the 
experience is different. They are sifted out, alienated, 

R4335 : page 56 

and develop a hard spirit, foreign to the Lord, and out 
of accord with his Word. The one class goes on from 
grace to grace and from strength to strength; the other 
goes back into the outer darkness of the world. Thus, 
as the Apostle says, our message is a "savor of life unto 
life to some, but of death unto death to others."— 
2 Cor. 2:16. 

"THE SAINTS WHICH DWELT AT LYDDA" 

This lesson gives a little insight to the condition of 
things in the early Church. The Truth was sufficiently 
unpopular to keep out the majority of those who love 
this present life and the praise of men more than the 
future life and the Divine approval. The edification, 
the comfort of the holy Spirit, and the walking in the 
fear or reverence of the Lord already mentioned (v. 31), 
is illustrated by the statement of verse 32, that St. Peter 
in his travels came to Lydda, to the saints who dwelt 
there. At that time, under those conditions, to be a 
Christian was to be a saint, a holy person, a sanctified 



or set apart person. And so it should be still. But, 

alas! popularity has brought under the name Christian 

not only wolves in sheep's clothing, but goats and ring-streaked 

and speckled and black sheep, as well as saintly 

ones. We are to remember, however, the declaration, 

"The Lord knoweth them that are his." Therefore, "Let 

every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from 

iniquity"— depart from inequity (injustice) and from 

everything that is unrighteous (2 Tim. 2:19); in other 

words, let them all be saints, "For this is the will of 

God (concerning you), even your sanctification."— 

IThess. 4:3. 

We can, without pride or boastfulness, record that 
the number of saints for whom the light of Present 
Truth has an attraction are saintly, and also that it is 
leading the honest-hearted who receive it into a condition 
of consecration or saintship. The multiplying evidences 
to this effect, borne in upon us day by day and 
year by year, are comforting, strengthening assurances 
of Divine favor accompanying the Divine Word, just as 
we should expect. And more than this: The saintliness 
of heart seems to be increasing in lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of Christian character. Incidentally, 
we remark, that nothing that has been presented 
in these columns for many years seems to have 
been more helpful to the saintly and those seeking 
saintliness than "the VOW." We doubt if the same 
number of people, able and willing to take that Vow, 
could be found in all the denominations of Christendom. 
We believe that as saintliness progresses amongst our 
readers, our lists of those who have taken this solemn 
Vow, this solemn promise to the Lord in the name and 
strength of Jesus, will continue to increase, and that it 
will mean an increase of spiritual power and Christian 
grace and strength of character to them all. 

At Lydda St. Peter found a palsied man bed-ridden 
for eight years. He was not one of the saints, for miracles 
of healing were rarely, if ever, performed by the 
Lord and the apostles upon believers. If sickness 
comes to those who are of the "household of faith," it is 
to be considered as of Divine permission, with a view 
to correction or to opportunities for growth in grace- 
as amongst the "all things" which shall work together 
for good to those rightly exercised thereby. The instantaneous 
healing of Aeneas was used of the Lord to 
advertise the Truth, after a manner not necessary at 
the present time. We read, "All that dwelt at Lydda 
and Sharon saw and turned to the Lord." The work at 
that time was of setting up the Church, bringing it into 
notice, establishing it, and gathering to it all "Israelites 
indeed" worthy of the Truth, worthy of being saved out 
of their own nation and the blindness and the trouble 
coming upon the same. The work of the present time 
is different. It is a gathering out of the wheat from the 
tares. We walk by faith, not by sight and by miracles. 



"SHE WAS SICK AND DIED" 

St. Peter stopped at Joppa, near to Lydda. There 
one of the saints took sick, but was not healed and died. 
Similarly Jesus healed many of the sick; but he allowed 
his special friend, Lazarus, to be sick and to die, without 
relieving the distress. As subsequently Lazarus 
was awakened from the sleep of death as an evidence 
of divine power and an evidence of Restitution times 
(Acts 3:19-21), so with Tabitha (Greek, Dorcas), she 
died, but, through St. Peter, the Lord awakened her 
from the sleep of death as a miracle and demonstration 
of the Divine power accomplishing the work of the 
Gospel message and making it forceful to the people. 

A BEAUTIFUL CHRISTIAN WOMAN 

Tabitha, in the Syrian language, then and there prevalent, 
signifies beautiful, and its Greek equivalent, which 
carries the same thought of beauty, signifies gazelle; 
the gentleness, the timidity and the bright, sparkling 
eye of the gazelle are the characteristics indicated 

R4336 : page 56 

by the name. We know not if the saintly woman revived 
from death was beautiful of face, but the account justifies 
us in acknowledging her to have been beautiful of 
heart, of character. The statement, "This woman was 
full of good works and alms deeds which she did," tells 
us that she was beautiful in the Lord's sight and in the 
sight of all his saints— provided, of course, that her 
good deeds were prompted by love of heart. For we 
should always remember the Apostle's words, "If I 
should give my body to be burned as a martyr, or if I 
should give all my goods to the poor, yet have not love, 
it would profit me nothing"— it would be without esteem 
in the mind of him who searcheth the heart and to whom 
motives in those of this age are everything. 

We read that "All the widows stood by weeping 
and showing the coats and garments which Dorcas 
made while she was with them." These words remind 
us of our Lord's expression respecting another woman, 
"She has done what she could." Such mourners at the 
death-bed give eloquent testimony to saintship. It is 
not recorded that all of the widows were saints, and 
quite probably some of them were not, for St. Peter put 
them all forth while he prayed. We are to have in mind 
that while the saints are God's peculiar care and should, 
therefore, be likewise the peculiar care of one another, 
nevertheless we have in a broad, general sense, a relationship 
to the entire world of mankind and whensoever 
we will may do them good. The Apostle urges us 
to "Do good unto all men, especially unto them who are 
of the household of faith."— Eph. 6:10. 

The widows of olden times had a peculiarly hard 



lot for various reasons; hence the frequent reference to 
them in the Scriptures as objects of charity. Under 
the civilized arrangements of our time, induced and 
fostered by the spirit of Christianity, good provision is 
made for widows and orphans and thus in some measure 
our opportunities for charity are diminished. Nor is it 
either Scriptural or wise to always pass by the provisions 
of civilization for the care of the poor, the afflicted 
widows and orphans, and to institute private benefactions, 
more expensive, and, in some cases, more 
troublesome, and, in some instances, less advantageous. 
The "saints" should seek upon this, as upon every subject, 
the spirit of a sound mind, which cometh from 
above. There are still, however, opportunities for the 
exercise of benevolence in matters temporal— and especially 
along spiritual lines. Few know of the heavenly 
manna of the Gospel. Few are able to prepare and 
to give to others the Bread that came down from heaven. 
Few are able to help sinners to wash and be clean, and 
to point them to the robe of Christ's righteousness and 
to assist them in putting it on, and to show them how 
it is to be kept "without spot or wrinkle" or any such 
thing. 

Few are ready to counsel others on how to get rid 
of the spots and wrinkles if they do get these upon their 
robes— that the blood of Jesus Christ our Lord cleanseth 
us from all of our errors and misdeeds of ignorance. 
These are the real saints, and they should all be so diligent, 
so zealous, that when their "change" shall come, 
there may be many able and willing to praise God on 
their behalf, many living epistles, to be known and read 
of all men, and changed from knowledge to knowledge 
and from glory to glory, through their active assistance 
as brethren, as saints, as ambassadors for God! 



R4336 : page 57 

THE JACKSONVILLE (FLORIDA) CONVENTION 

VERY enjoyable and profitable to all who were present 

—about one hundred— was the first Convention 

of the year. The attendance from outside 

points was not very large. Florida was specially represented; 

Georgia next. There was a fair sprinkling 

from a number of the Northern States, including Indiana, 

Pennsylvania, New York, Massachusetts and Ohio. 

Commencing February 12th and closing the 16th the time 

was well occupied. Pilgrim Brothers Hall, Wise, Sullivan, 

Bundy, and Brother Moffatt and Brother Russell 

delivered public addresses, besides which a number of 

brethren took part in the symposium on Love on the 

last day. We have not a memoranda of all the names; 

hence think it preferable not to give any of them. The 

number who embraced the opportunity for symbolizing 



their consecration by water baptism was quite large 
for the attendance— twenty-one brethren and seventeen 
sisters. 

The Sunday afternoon meeting in the Opera House, 
of course, was the most largely attended, so far as the 
public were concerned, the house being crowded and 
some standing. The attendance was estimated at 
twelve hundred. 

All seemed agreed that while there is a certain 
amount of enthusiasm engendered at such Conventions 
as that of Put-in-Bay last summer, nevertheless the 
smaller Conventions in other respects have their advantages. 
We heard numerous expressions to the effect 
that this was the very best of all the Conventions; that 
none had ever been more enjoyable, etc. 

On the closing day of the Convention Brother Russell 
was ushered to the platform on a pretext and then 
informed that the Convention, aware of the fact that 
the day was the anniversary of his birth, desired to 
express their love in some substantial manner and, 
concluding that Brother Russell would most enjoy a 
birthday token which he could enjoy with the Bible 
House family, they had shipped to him at Allegheny a 
box of grape fruit, a crate of pineapples and two boxes 
of sweet Florida oranges. He was handed the receipted 
bill and express receipt, accompanied by some very 
comforting words by the Chairman of the meeting in 
the name of the entire Convention. He spoke with a 
great deal of feeling, in which the moist eyes of quite 
a number of the audience showed deep sympathy. 
Brother Russell replied in a few words, thanking the 
dear friends and assuring them of his appreciation of 
their gift, but telling them that, most of all, he appreciated 
the love that prompted it and wished them to 
know that next to the Lord's love and esteem he prized 
the love of the brethren. 

The love feast in the evening was a very inspiring 
occasion. Quite a number of the dear friends were 
moved to tears in connection with the adieus that were 
then given and received amidst expressions of love and 
sympathy and hopes of a future meeting, if not on this 
side of the veil, then in the Kingdom. This closed the 
Convention proper, although a Colporteur meeting was 
arranged for the evening of the 16th, which, no doubt, 
proved both interesting and profitable. 



R4336 : page 57 

LESSON REVIEW 

-MARCH 21.-- 

Golden Text:— "Therefore, they that were scattered abroad 
went everywhere preaching the Word."— Acts 8:4. 



THE lesson for the quarter covered the first ten years 
of the Church's history, dating from our Lord's 
ascension. It is interesting to note the simplicity 
of the Divine arrangement. We find no mention of 
popes, cardinals, archbishops, doctors of divinity or 
reverends. On the contrary even the apostles are recorded 
as "ignorant and unlearned." Indeed, the terms 
evangelist, pastor, teacher, elder, deacon, apostle are 
the only titles recognized in the Church, according to 
the New Testament records. And these terms all signify, 
directly or indirectly, service rather than authority 
or dignity. Notice again that in that period of Divinely 
guided progress of the infant Church, no mention is 
made of fairs, festivals, suppers or shows to raise 
money for salaries or for Church erection; indeed, none 
of these subjects is ever mentioned in the New Testament 
—subjects which today seem to constitute the 
principal feature of "church work." The Church work 
then was "preaching the Word." Does it not appear 
evident that the great change in these particulars has 
not been favorable to spiritual development? 

We congratulate our readers that as associates in 
faith and service we find ourselves peculiarly different 
from the majority of Christian people of today, and 
peculiarly like the early Church in the particulars specified. 
Like them we have no formulated creed aside 
from the Bible. Like them, we have no Church "officers" 
or "rulers." Like them, we give little attention to 
Church edifices, but are content to meet in private 
houses, or in public buildings otherwise used on week 
days, or in synagogues already built and dedicated, if 
they are placed at our disposal, or in "upper rooms." 
Like them our chief business is "preaching the Word" 
—not preaching ourselves, nor human theories and 
traditions, nor Theosophy, nor philosophy, nor Evolution, 
nor "Science falsely so-called," nor even social 
reforms, good as some of them may be. Like them our 
preaching is sometimes in the street-car chariots, to 
Ethiopians or Whites, to rich or poor, to Pharisees and 
Doctors of the Law, and to the poor of every nation and 
tongue and sect and party. Like them we know the 
Truth and the Truth has made us free, and it is our 
pleasure to assist others into the same freedom, from 
ignorance, superstition and the wiles of the Adversary. 

R4337 : page 57 

Like them the hope before us is the Kingdom of 
God's dear Son, and the prospect of a share in that 
Kingdom at the second coming of our Lord. Like them 
we have heard the good tidings of great joy which shall 
be unto all people, and we are glad to sacrifice time, 
energy, strength, money, influence, all, for the privilege 
of being co-workers together with God in the calling of 
the Bride class; in the preparation for the Kingdom of 



God's dear Son. Like them we need no inducements 
of name, fame, salary, honor of men. Like them we 
delight to meet one with the other, and so much the 
more as we see the day drawing near. We need no 
operas, we need no salaried singers, we need no pulpit 
vaudeville to attract us. Like them we were hungering 
and thirsting for the Truth, and, having tasted of the 
good Word of God and been made partakers of the holy 
Spirit, we find that with the strength derived our appetite 
continues to increase, and we desire more and more 
of the Bread which came down from heaven, and of the 
Water of Life. 

True, there are changes, adaptations to our time 
and present conditions. We do not wear turbans nor 
flowing robes nor sandals. We do not journey on 
camels, nor so much afoot, nor in sailing vessels. We 
use the printing press, the mail, the various means of 
rapid transit, etc. We do most of our evangelizing 
through the printed page, the public prints, the Volunteer 
matter, the Colporteur work, etc. Yet these are 
not differences, but adaptations of the same principles 
to our time. 

The work done in Judea during the thirty-seven 
years following our Lord's crucifixion and closing with 
the destruction of Jerusalem, A.D. 70, was a harvesting 
work to that nation. During that time we may be 
sure every grain of "wheat" was separated from the 
chaff and gathered into the garner— the higher or Gospel 
dispensation— into the spirit-begotten condition. That 
Harvest extended beyond Palestine, but even then it 
always applied "to the Jew first," until A.D. 70. 

A similar work, the Harvesting of this age, we 

R4337 : page 58 

understand has been in progress since 1878, and will 
terminate in 1914, with the beginning of a great time of 
trouble upon Christendom, corresponding to and antityping 
the trouble which destroyed the Jewish nation. 
The harvest work there had a radius of but a few 
hundred miles. The harvest of today extends all over 
the civilized world, a circuit of about ten thousand 
miles. Since the reapers are few, how necessary it is 
that the Lord should provide the extraordinary agencies 
which are now at our disposal for the circulation of the 
harvest message— for the gathering of the wheat. May 
we not well say that the Lord times the inventions of 
our day so as to provide for the necessity of this harvest 
work, that every grain of wheat the whole world around 
may be found and gathered into the garner of the high 
dispensation, the heavenly? We believe that the principle 
noted in our Golden Text is still applicable— that 
the Lord does not wish his consecrated people, when 
they come into the light of Present Truth, to congregate 
specially in special cities, States, etc., but rather wills 
that they be scattered abroad, so that everywhere the 



Truth shall be preached and that they shall have the 
inestimable privilege of proclaiming it, serving it, and 
thus being blessed and upbuilt themselves and prepared 
for a share in the glory of the Kingdom. 

Dear brethren, he who was with and guided the 
early Church is with us with equal power. He who 
guided in that harvest time is guiding now, and will 
continue to guide his work to the end. We may have 
experience with similar characters to that of Judas, 
Alexander the coppersmith, Jannes and Jambres. But 
the Lord is able to make all these things work together 
for good to us and through them all to fulfil his gracious 
promises. He may permit persecutions, imprisonments 
or things corresponding on a different plane, but let 
us never doubt the presence and power of our Lord. 

The glorious results will more than compensate the 
trials and difficulties. 

"Faith can firmly trust him, come what may." 



R4337 : page 58 

QUARTERLY TEMPERANCE LESSON 

--PROVERBS 23:29-35.-MARCH 28.- 

Golden Text:— "At last it biteth like a serpent, 
and stingeth like an adder."— Prov. 23:32. 

A VERY encouraging sign of progress in many 

parts of Christendom, our own land being considerably 

in the lead, is the wave of sentiment 

in favor of total abstinence from intoxicating liquors 

and the refusal of the masses to countenance the liquor 

traffic. The one message which the Lord gave to his 

people when he instructed them to preach the Word did 

not include total abstinence, and hence the Lord's consecrated 

people, faithful as priests, may not turn aside 

from their more important message, the calling of the 

Bride class, to urge upon the worldly this excellent but 

temporary and partial reformation. The message to 

the Church, to those called to be of the "elect," is the 

attainment of the spirit of a sound mind, which certainly 

would not permit them to take anything into their 

system which would befuddle their reason. Temperance, 

moderation, sobriety, is the inculcation of the 

Word of God and its spirit upon all who have named 

the name of Christ and proclaimed themselves followers 

of the Lamb. 

The Apostle's words intimate that the consecrated 
are to do good unto all men as they have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith; and this exhortation 
seems to justify us in occasionally saying just a 
word on the temperance question. It is right that our 



sympathies for temperance and every reformatory 
measure should be distinctly known to friends and foes 
in order that our good may not be evil spoken of by 
those zealous friends who, not understanding the Divine 
program and its "hidden mystery," think it strange that 
we run not with them into larger activities along the 
lines of social uplift and reforms. Having but small 
personal experience along these lines, we think it best 
to present chiefly the words of others on this subject, 
as below: 

The Rev. Dr. Smith's book, Industrial Conflict, says: 

"In England, in three years of plenty in the seventies, 
wages were increased annually $200,000,000. That 
made $600,000,000 for the three years, but $600,000,000 
was just the amount of gold in circulation in Great 
Britain at that time. Did the workingmen by a common 
impulse, fired by a great ambition, save this $200,000,000 
a year? Did they change the savings into gold? Did 
they control the banks and dictate terms to financiers? 

"If these things had been done, the past thirty years 
would have seen a new England, and the whole world 
would have been filled with the songs of the great 
achievements that had at last been wrought by the 
working classes. They would have superannuated the 
aristocracy; they would have swept out age-worn traditions 
and institutions; they would have come into their 
own empire. The working people of England earned 
$200,000,000 extra per annum, and the sad companion 
fact is that the drink bill of England during each of 
those three years increased just $200,000,000. All the 
increase of that bill did not come from the working 
classes, but enough of it came from those classes to 
leave the argument still sound that what is wanted is 
not so much better opportunity as the capacity to make 
wiser use of such opportunities as men have. 

"In the United States we spend about $1,200,000,000 
a year in drink. Would it not be worth while for the 
workingmen of America to take from that drink bill, 
say, $250,000,000 a year, and put it in an industrial fund 
for the development of industrial enterprises owned by 
workingmen, managed by workingmen, and the profits 
of which should be received by workingmen?" 

From Orison Swett Marden, Editor of Success, New 
York City:- 

"My observation of cigarette smokers has confirmed 
my belief that no man or boy who is a victim of the 
cigarette habit can keep himself up to a high mental or 
physical standard. Cigarette smoking leads boys into 
bad company and a demoralizing environment. A New 
York City magistrate says that ninety-nine out of a 
hundred of all the lads charged with crime, from misdemeanors 
to burglary, have had their moral sense 
weakened by the poison of cigarettes.... In fact, the 
moral depravity which follows the cigarette habit is 
appalling. Lying, cheating, impurity, loss of moral 
courage and manhood, a complete dropping of life's 



standards along the line, are its general results." 

The Honorable Ben B. Lindsey, Judge of the Juvenile 
Court, Denver, Colorado, says:— 

"Our lives depend a great deal upon our habits. 
Habits make or unmake men. The boy who starts with 
bad habits is almost sure to be a worthless man. If he 
starts with good habits, he is just as sure to be a good 
man; therefore boyhood is the most important part of 
life. One of the worst habits in boyhood is the cigarette 
habit. Persisted in, it dulls and deadens all the 
finer moral sentiments; it makes a physical and moral 
wreck of any boy. It is sure to lead the victim to other 

R4338 : page 59 

habits just as dangerous and disgusting. Years in the 
Juvenile Court of Denver convince me that it is one of 
the chief evils met in boyhood, and responsible for much 
weakness, misery and crime." 

The Pittsburg Railways Company served this notice 
to its employees:— 

"For the betterment of the service and the safety of 
the public, it will from this date be the policy of this 
company to NOT retain in its employ men who use intoxicating 
liquors or cigarettes or are in the habit of 
gambling. While it is the privilege of each individual 
to eat, drink, and smoke what he pleases, it becomes 
the duty of this management to have in its service only 
men of sober and temperate habits, PHYSICALLY and 
MENTALLY able to perform the duties to which they may 
be assigned." 

The superintendent gave his reasons for issuing 
the order as follows:— 

"It is my aim and intention to pursue this policy 
without abatement, since I have by it proved beyond all 
doubt that it has raised the standard of our men. I have 
been criticised for the stringency of the order, especially 
the prohibition of the use of cigarettes; but on the 
other hand I have the assurance of our division superintendents 
(of which we have twelve), aided by my own 
observations, that persons addicted to the use of cigarettes, 
especially young men, are the most careless in 
their duties and less able to perform them than men 
using liquor in moderation. I may also mention that 
in seventeen years' experience as manager of public 
utility corporations I have had occasion to promote 
many of our men from the rank of conductors and 
motormen to officers, and in no case has a man using 
whiskey come up to the requirements." 



Our chief objections to many of the utterances of 
social reformers is that in their zeal they make of their 
reformation movement an antagonistic Gospel, proclaiming 
that by the methods they are advocating the 



Millennial blessings might all be introduced, regardless 

of Emmanuel and the Kingdom which he is to 

establish, and which the Scriptures declare to be the 

only power under heaven or amongst men authorized 

and capable of bringing in everlasting joy and blessing 

and Paradise restored. Reforms are merely palliative 

at very most; nothing but a change of heart can 

bring the desired condition, and nothing but the establishment 

of Messiah's Kingdom, the overthrow of 

Satan's empire, and the deliverance of the slaves of sin 

and death from ignorance and superstition, etc., can 

bring the permanent blessings needed. 



R4338 : page 59 

"PRESERVE THE UNITY OF THE SPIRIT" 

ST. PAUL'S exhortation that we preserve the 
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, was 
never more necessary to the Church than now. 
We have already adverted to the fact that a peculiar 
bitterness of spirit and word seems to attach to those 
who oppose the Vow, and we wish to caution those who 
have taken the Vow against any participation in the 
spirit of strife, anger, bitterness. We cannot help what 
others may do or say to us, but we can see to it, each 
for himself, "that no man render evil for evil or railing 
for railing, but contrariwise blessing." 

Some time ago our attention was especially called 
in a variety of ways to the fact that the fallen angels 
are coming into a greater degree of liberty than they 
have had since the flood and their condemnation to 
chains of darkness. All that we said respecting the 
probable materializations, counterfeiting both the dead 
and the living, we still believe, and advise all to be on 
guard against; but we think it not improbable that 
while we were thus looking out for and exposing some 
of the Adversary's wiles, he was getting in his work 
along other lines— stirring up evil surmising, evil 
speaking, insinuations, malice, envy, hatred, strife— 
lovelessness. It is our present thought that the greatest 
danger to the Household of Faith lies along these subtle 
lines. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is 
none of his." Hence, to whatever extent the Adversary 
may be able to inject into us an evil spirit, and to drive 
out the holy Spirit, to that extent he will be separating, 
alienating us from the Lord. Nor can we wonder that 
our Master would permit such trials to come upon us 
as a people. We have had much advantage every way 
above others— in knowledge, in appreciation of the deep 
things of God, in an opportunity for the development 
of the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit. Having 
preached to others, have we applied to ourselves these 
precious truths and graces, or shall we eventually be 



castaways, because of being merely preachers of the 
Word and not doers of it?— because while preaching 
love for God and for the brethren, this love was not 
allowed to permeate and sanctify all the avenues of our 
hearts, our words, our thoughts, our deeds. We cannot 
complain that the Lord should test us along these lines. 

For years we have been teaching respecting the peculiar 
trials of this hour, and calling attention to the 
statement of the Word that "A thousand shall fall at 
our side." Have we profited by the knowledge, or does 
the fact that some are now falling cause us surprise? 
The question is for each one of us. It is time for drawing 
near to the Captain of our Salvation, and time for 
complete separation from everything that would not 
have his and our Father's hearty approval. We believe 
that the Lord especially brought forward the Vow for 
this very time, and that it is doing a wonderful work 
of purifying in the hearts of God's children, as is 
abundantly evidenced by the letters which we are daily 
receiving and which tell of the showers of blessings 
enjoyed, and nearness to the Lord, as a result of this 
fresh statement of the original consecration. 

We promised to announce from time to time the 
growth of our list of those taking the Vow, and we are 
pleased to mention now that the six thousand mark has 
been reached. In this connection we offer the suggestion 
that everywhere, so far as possible, the Vow be read 
daily, by everyone who has taken it, either publicly at 
the breakfast table for instance; or individually and 
privately. We are assured that there is a blessing in it, 
not only for the Bible House family, but for all. How 
wonderful it seems that without our so thinking of it, 
or intending it, the Lord has used this Vow so that it 
should call into existence a prayer-circle of six thousand 
of his consecrated ones who remember each other daily 
at the throne of grace. 

With the Vow freshly before the mind each morning, 
reminding us of our resolution to guard, if possible, 
every word and every thought still more carefully than 
in the past, is it any wonder if more progress is being 
made in self-control and in the development of the fruits 
and graces of the holy Spirit? Such results are what 
we should expect. And those who have not taken the 
Vow and who realize frequently their shortcomings in 
word and thought and act, and lament over these— is it 
not worth their while to consider the help they would 
gain by this fresh resolution to the Lord, and the increased 
carefulness that it would bring to them? 

We suggest that those who have taken the Vow remember 

R4338 : page 60 

also the dear ones who have not yet taken it, 
soliciting for them the Lord's blessing and guidance, 
and that they be careful in every sense of the word to 
exemplify the Gospel of peace and love and good will 



implied by their Vow, to more carefully than ever, if 
possible, scrutinize their words and thoughts. Let this 
greater carefulness be manifest to those who have not 
taken the Vow, that they may see your better self-control 
and be glad to glorify our Father in heaven. 

While we deprecate anything looking toward a 
division or schism in the Body of Christ, and while we 
believe that there is no ground for a division in connection 
with the Vow, and that no one who has taken 
the Vow has a right to make it a test of fellowship with 
his brethren; nevertheless, we are free to admit that 
with those who oppose the Vow the case is different. 
In opposing it they seem to forfeit a measure of their 
confidence. They are either less wise or less good 
than we thought them to be; for we cannot see how 
either a wise or a good heart could place hindrances 
and opposition in the way of those who by this Vow are 
seeking to bind their sacrifice to the altar. 

As before stated, the test of the Scripturalness or 
unscripturalness of the Vow is a very simple one. Take 
its statements one by one and see whether any Scripture 
can be found in opposition to any of them; then see how 
many Scriptures can be found favoring these very propositions 
either in the word or in spirit. Thus we determine 
that the Vow is Scriptural to the very last degree, 
and unscriptural in no degree. Does someone suggest 
that the taking of the Vow is not demanded in the 
Scriptures? We reply that the taking of the WATCH 
TOWER, the Cincinnati Enquirer, the Dispatch or the 
World is not stipulated in the Scriptures; neither is 
the publication of our tracts and SCRIPTURE-STUDIES 
directly commanded. Is it unscriptural to wear shoes, 
or trousers, or hats, because these are not mentioned 
in the Scriptures? Are they not all thoroughly Scriptural 
if they do not conflict with any of the holy provisions 
and regulations; just as any matter is thoroughly 
legal which does not conflict with any law? We are 
surprised at the weakness of the arguments by which 

R4339 : page 60 

some of the dear friends have confused themselves and 
hindered their reception of a great blessing through the 
taking of the Vow or Resolution to the Lord, that theirs 
shall hereafter be a still closer walk with God. 



R4339 : page 60 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We desire to express our appreciation and love to 
you and the dear friends at the Bible House, for your 
devotion to the work so dear to us all. Your sacrificing 



spirit and zeal and devotion to the flock over which the 

Lord has placed you, and your capacity for hard work, 

have been an inspiration to us. Beyond any doubt the 

present Lord has been and is your helper; otherwise 

your poor body would surely sink beneath the heavy 

cross you have to bear. We thank you and express our 

admiration for your courage and boldness in not compromising 

in any matter the Truth, but have always 

given to the household of faith "things both new and 

old." 

In regard to "the Vow," we have been very much 
helped and blessed since we advised you that we have 
subscribed to it; and we have also been very much 
helped since we have seen the Truth in its fuller light, as 
explained by you in the TOWERS, and by some of the 
Pilgrims, in regard to the Covenants and our relation 
thereto. As stated by one brother, Psa. 50:5 and other 
Scriptures intimate that when Jesus sacrificed himself 
he made a covenant with Jehovah, "a covenant by sacrifice." 
Jehovah, on the other hand, had made his part 
of the Covenant with Abraham and not with Jesus, but 
Jesus, by giving his flesh for the life of the world, came 
under the conditions of the Covenant made with Abraham 
2,000 years before. All persons since justified by 
faith in Jesus' work of sacrifice, and having presented 
their justified bodies a living sacrifice, these, together, 
Jesus the Head and the Church his Body, constitute 
that Seed class which shall do the work through whom 
all the families of the earth will be blessed. This Abrahamic 
Covenant, therefore, needs no Mediator, because 
it includes only those who are actually or reckonedly 
perfect. Our dear Lord did not need a Mediator on 
account of being absolutely perfect, and since we have 
been accepted in the Beloved, we do not require a Mediator, 
because we become members of his Body as New 
Creatures— the Seed of Abraham. (Gal. 3:27,29.) God 
deals with the Body during their trial day through Jesus 
the Head, the Advocate. (I John 2:1.) But the poor 
world during their trial day will require a Mediator, 
otherwise Justice would require their execution. This 
office of Mediator is surely one of the hopes set before 
us in the Gospel. 

We feel very humble and thankful to our Master 
that we are permitted to see these grand truths, while 
some others, blessed with larger opportunities, having 
for so many years been associated so closely with yourself 
and received the light and Truth through your 
ministry, are now asking you to accept their resignations 
on account of not being able to see eye to eye with 
you on the Covenants and Vow. I have been given a 
copy of the letter Brother Hennings sent you under 
date of November 22, 1908. The knowledge of these 
facts, dear Brother, has inspired this letter in the hope 
that it may help to comfort you in the assurance of your 
being in the heavenly Father's favor, and we can only 
say, as you have so often said to us through the TOWERS, 



"Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid"; 
"No weapon formed against thee shall prosper, and 
every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, 
thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants 
of the Lord and their righteousness is of me, saith 
the Lord." 

We pray for you and the Bible House family every 
day many times. And we ask you to remember us in 
your prayers. With much love, 

Yours in the One Hope, J. P. HEMPHILL. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

On January first we began the New Testament reading, 
a chapter every evening. It is now looked forward 
to with much eagerness. The doing of this regularly 
is proving a great blessing. Also the reading of twelve 
pages of DAWN daily in the morning. 

After you suggested the twelve pages daily to me at 
Halifax, I went back to Montreal and tried so hard to 
keep it up, but it seemed almost impossible, and I occasionally 
had as many as thirty-six pages for one day. 
Since making the resolution to the Lord to do this it 
has been possible every day thus far. This further 
proves to me the help of resolutions or vows made to 
the Lord. 

I feel that it is as it was with Jesus when he took a 
positive stand and said, "Get thee hence, Satan.... 
Then the devil leaveth him, and behold, angels came and 
ministered unto him."— Matt. 4:10,11. 

Is it not the same with us when we take a positive 
stand on any question— that we then have the special 
help from the Lord along those lines? I have felt it 
so in my own case. 

Endeavoring not to murmur nor complain about 
any condition or experience has been very helpful. It 
many times keeps me from mentioning little things 
which I otherwise might. 

I want to thank you also for the joint-letter in regard 
to our vows. It is a great encouragement and help 
in remembering daily why these vows are made— "to 
promote our spiritual interests and to assist in the 
mortifying of the mortal bodies." 

I thank our Father daily and oftener for the continued 
help received through his dear Servant. 

Your sister through his merit, ETHEL WHITE. 

R4339 : page 61 

BELOVED PASTOR AND BROTHER:- 

My dear husband is so earnest, so eager to do the 
Lord's will whatever the cost may be. Since the taking 
of "Our Precious Vow," as he calls it, the change has 
been something wonderful— a change that must be felt; 
it cannot be described. What that Vow has been and 



is to me I can never tell. I incorporated each section 
so as to make a prayer of the whole, and twice every 
day, if no oftener, I offer that up with my other petitions, 
and the dear Father is hearing me. How could it be 
otherwise? He has promised, and "He is faithful that 
promised." My Consecration Vow seems so infinitely 
more comprehensive since taking this later one emphasizing 
the first, and this bringing it before the Father 
in words makes everything so much clearer and more 
real. I can approach the heavenly Father in a manner 
I never understood before, and realize that he hears and 
will answer. I thank the Lord for the Vow, and you, 
dear brother, as his servant, in bringing it to his people 
—"in due time." 

We sometimes talk of how easy and blessed it would 
be to die; but to live in these evil days how hard it is! 
The closer we come to our heavenly Father, the greater 
the anxiety to be with him. "How can we keep the 
longing back and how suppress the groan?" 

Yet we realize that each passing hour shall, if we 
are faithful, prepare us more for the Kingdom, and we 
are content. But how blessed it will be to have passed 
through the trials, the testings, and to have been found 
"faithful!" Oh it is so hard to live, so hard really to live 
and develop as the Lord would have us grow as New 
Creatures. Will we all who are so far faithful, be able 
to say at the end, "I have finished the work which thou 
gavest me to do"? Pray for us, dear brother, for my 
husband and self, even as we pray for you, that we may 
be always able to say from the heart, "I do always those 
things which please him." 

With much Christian love, your sister in our blessed 
Lord, I. P. W. 

AN OPEN LETTER TO THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 



Love, truth and honesty, and sorrow for sin, constrain 
me to confess my shameful course during my 
opposition to the Vow, and which I now see to be but a 
reiteration of my consecration Vow, more clearly outlined 
in some essential details because of the present 
evil day. 

That expert, Satan, whispered some apparently 
very plausible suggestions against the Vow, and which, 
yielded to, soon led me to look at it from a very prejudiced 
and improper standpoint. Thus I quickly took 
the bait that the suggestion of the Vow was purely of 
and by man to ensnare the simple minded, and was not 
in harmony with the spirit of true Bible teaching. This 
view soon roused my zeal to not touch, taste nor handle 
anything that did not have a direct, pointed "Thus saith 
the Lord" attached to it. Very soon I seemed to lose 
all the spirit of a sound mind and of love, and began to 
back-bite Brother Russell, not only orally, but also by 



writing back-biting letters. In fact, I became a first-rate 
back-biter. I compared Brother Russell to Moses, 
when he said to Israel, "Must I bring water for you?" 
and to David in his prohibited work of numbering the 
Israelites. I likened the presentation of the Vow to the 
claimed inspiration of the Mormon Prophet Smith, 
and the Vow itself to the harmonious sound of a plague 
of frogs. 

Now, Brother Russell, it needs no argument to show 
such thoughts to be the product of a very unsound mind; 

R4340 : page 61 

yes, I must say, the product of a Satanic mind or a mind 
dominated by demons. 

I am sorry for such conduct and want you to publish 
my expression of my sorrow for my sin. I can assure 
you it found me out. Make a heartfelt prayer for 
me that I may be kept from the sin of presumption. 

I take the Vow today (January 25th), my 66th birthday, 
and remain, 

Your penitent brother, ELIAS M. GIBBS. 



R4340 : page 61 

"WHO GAVE HIMSELF A RANSOM" 

"There is one God, and one Mediator between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom 
for all, to be testified in due time."— 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

OUR LORD JESUS gave himself a Ransom (corresponding 
price for all mankind) at the beginning of his 
ministry, at the moment of his consecration. He 
continued that giving throughout his public ministry for 
three and one-half years. He finished the sacrifice of himself, 
the "man Christ Jesus," at Calvary. When the Father 
raised him from the dead, he was the possessor, so to speak, 
of the value of his previous sacrifice, which he was at liberty 
to offer as he pleased. The making of the sacrifice was one 
thing and the applying of its merits was another thing. As, 
for instance: Mr. A is in trouble, requiring $5000 for his relief. 
Mr. B has a property which he can sell for $5000— 
enough to pay A's debt. When he sells the property A's 
debt is not paid, but merely B now has the amount, the 
price, which he can give for A's relief, if he will; and it is 
for him to elect how and when and where it shall be applied. 
Christ gave all that he had in order to purchase the 
world and the treasure which he saw therein— Adam and 
his family, sold under sin and death. When our Lord ascended 
up on high he did something with the merit of his 
sacrifice which brought a blessing to a certain class (the 
household of faith). That he made reconciliation for their 
sins is the Apostolic statement, and the giving of the holy 



Spirit at Pentecost was in demonstration of the fact. But 
it is equally clear that our Lord did not make an application 
of his blood to all mankind, because the holy Spirit did 
not come upon all mankind, nor did any message come to 
them declaring the forgiveness of their sins. 

On the contrary, the subsequent Apostolic declaration 
was that "the whole world lieth in the wicked one," and 
that only the Church, the household of faith, has "escaped 
the condemnation that is upon the world." Furthermore, 
the Apostle's declaration is not that our Lord appeared in 
the presence of God as our Mediator, nor as the world's 
Mediator, but that he appeared in the presence of God as 
OUR Advocate— but not as the world's Advocate. All this is 
very plain, if our minds and hearts are in condition to receive 
it; but of course it will not be clear, and is not to be 
understood nor to be clear under any other circumstances. 

Just what Jesus did when he ascended up on high we 
are not more particularly informed by the Apostle; but he 
pointed us to the types, the Law. Looking there we note 
the various details of the typical atonement day of Israel, 
which foreshadowed: 

(1) The forgiveness of sins for the HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH, 
under the Abrahamic Covenant with believers. 

(2) The subsequent forgiveness of the sins of all the 
remainder of the world by preparing for the sealing of the 
New (Law) Covenant with the blood of Christ. 

This division separating the Gospel Church from the 
world was very distinct in the picture, and also distinct in 
the teachings of our Lord and the apostles. Our Lord said, 

R4340 : page 62 

"They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world." 
(John 17:16.) He ordained them to go and bring forth fruit 
—permanent fruit, everlasting fruitage. The Apostle declares 
of our Lord, "He is a propitiation (satisfaction) for 
our sins (the Church's) and not for ours only, but also for 
the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2.) Here again a 
sharp line of distinction is drawn between the "elect" 
Church and its blessing, and the non-elect world and the 
blessing that will come to it in due time. 

Looking into the type again (Leviticus 16) we see that 
there are two separate and distinct sacrifices, and that they 
were not offered to God upon the mercy-seat both at the 
same time:— 

(1) The blood of the bullock was first shed and first 
offered. 

(2) The blood of the goat was subsequently offered. 
Our Lord did not die twice and the two animals did 

not represent him— except as Head and Body. Not only so, 
but the type distinctly tells us that the two offerings of the 
blood upon the mercy-seat were applicable to different 
classes, the first, applied to the tribe of Levi, included the 
priests. The second applied to all the remainder of the 
people of Israel. Will anyone claim that our Lord Jesus 
died twice, first for the antitypical Levites, and second for 



the remainder of mankind? Christ certainly died once for 
all. What, then, is the meaning of these two sacrifices and 
distinctly separate applications and separate acceptances 
and separate blessings? 

We have already answered this question in great detail 
in the little booklet entitled, "Tabernacle Shadows of Better 
Sacrifices," a fresh reading of which we commend to 
you all as an elaboration of the "hidden mystery" of the 
fellowship of the Church, the Royal Priesthood, with Jesus, 
the great High Priest, in the sufferings, the sacrificings of 
this present time, and in the glorious work and blessings of 
the future. Remember, too, that this treatise was first published 
in 1880. We therein show that no man can redeem his 
brother, and that it is because all are sinners, all under death 
sentence. We show also that our Lord's death, represented 
by that of the bullock, applied on behalf of the household 
of faith, justifies them freely from all sin and permits them 
to become "holy and acceptable sacrifices." (Rom. 12:1.) 
We show that the sacrificing was all done by the Lord, that 
our part ends in our presentation of ourselves living sacrifices, 
and that if we maintain this condition of self-denial 
our Lord counts us as New Creatures, members of his Body, 
and our flesh his flesh, and its sufferings and death his sufferings 
and death. 

Thus the sacrifice of Christ, Head and Body, has progressed 
for over eighteen centuries. We believe that the consummation 
is near at hand. When the High Priest shall have 
accepted the last member of his Body, and shall have finished 
the sacrificing, he will apply, beyond the vail, the blood, 
his own blood— the blood of his members— on the mercy-seat, 
on behalf of all the people. Then will be due that 
which the Lord promised through the Prophet Joel— that he 
would pour out his "Spirit upon all flesh," just as at the completion 
and offering of the first sacrifice he poured out his 
"Spirit upon his servants and handmaidens" at Pentecost. 
Who that has spiritual eyesight cannot see this? And if we 
once saw it and it is now becoming dim to any of us, what 
is the remedy? All such should go immediately to the 
great Physician for eyesalve. They should haste in fear lest 
complete blindness and outer darkness overtake them. Fasting, 
prayer and heart-searching and a hearty acceptance of 
the Vow we earnestly recommend. 

Note that it is not our Lord in some pre-human condition 
who gave himself a ransom for all, but the MAN Christ 
Jesus. His is a Ransom for all, in that through his sacrifice 
alone all mankind shall be rescued from the sentence of sin 
and death and given an opportunity to hear and accept the 
good tidings of eternal life. The Ransom is none the less 
for all mankind, because it was first applied to the Church 
and then made applicable to mankind through the Church. 
The water we drink is none the less from the sky because it 
comes to us through pipes and faucets. 

"MEDIATOR BETWEEN GOD AND MEN" 

As already noted, we believe that whenever the word 



mediator is used in the Scriptures it relates to a covenant 
between parties who are alienated. God and the world are 
at enmity. God has condemned the world, because of sin. 
That condemnation still rests upon the world (except that 
small portion of it which has been justified by faith.) The 
"world still lies in the Wicked One"— is still under condemnation. 
A Mediator was necessary— someone to go between 
and reconcile these alienated parties. Our Lord Jesus came 
into the world to be the Saviour of the world as well as the 
Saviour of the Church. The work which Jesus did, his sacrifice, 
was in the Divine program with a view to his becoming 
the Mediator between God and mankind in general— the 
world, sinners. That purpose will be carried out, though it 
has not yet been done. It is proper to speak of our Lord 
Jesus as Mediator and to speak of the New (Law) Covenant 
as though it were already mediated, because the matter is 
fully intimated, foretold, promised, by the Lord, who cannot 
lie, and is in process of accomplishment. God will make 
such a Covenant with the House of Judah and the House of 
Israel after these Gospel days. (Heb. 8:8-10.) He will provide 
a Mediator, who will then, during the Millennium, 
mediate between God and man. It is a part of the Divine 

R4341 : page 62 

program that our Lord Jesus will be that Mediator. It is, 
therefore, proper to speak of him as such now— to speak 
of the things which are not yet as though they were. This 
in no degree contradicts the thought that this Mediator is 
growing day by day— adding members. 

Why should there be any delay? If the man Christ 
Jesus was the Mediator and the plan for a New Covenant 
was unalterably fixed in advance, why should it not be ratified 
at once? We answer again that this was one feature of 
the "Hidden Mystery"— "Christ in you, the hope of glory." 
(Col. 1:26,27.) It is a part of the Divine purpose that Jesus, 
the Mediator of the New Covenant (he whose merit furnishes 
the price and who shortly will apply that price for the sealing 
of the New (Law) Covenant) be the Head of the Church, 
which is his Body— "members in particular of the Body of 
Christ." (1 Cor. 12:27.) In the Divine purpose the antitypical 
Isaac is to include the Church. "Now we, brethren, as Isaac 
was, are the children of the promise"— the children of the 
Faith Covenant. (Gal. 4:28.) Jesus the Mediator, by Divine 
arrangement, accepts members, who must be his joint-sacrificers, 
and by and by be his joint-heirs. 

This Church class is not included in the "men" of our 
text— not included in the world, "Ye are not of the world, 
even as I am not of the world." (John 17:16.) "The world," 
"men," need the great Mediator to reconcile them to God. 
And the New Covenant and the Kingdom which it will inaugurate 
are Divine provisions which shall bring blessings for the 
world, for men, to chasten them, to break their hearts, to cause 
every knee to bow and every tongue to confess to God's glory. 
The Church, as the Bride, not only shares in the sufferings of 
this present time, but also in that glorious work of reconciling 



"men," "the world," to God by the power and forces and influences 
of the Millennial Kingdom. 

The class now accepted by the Lord as separate from 
the world needs not the drastic measures of the Millennium 
to cause them to bow and to confess. They are a special 
class, who, in the midst of sin, love righteousness and hate 
iniquity. They are like their Lord and Redeemer, of whom 
it is written, "Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity; 
therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with 

R4341 : page 63 

the oil of gladness (holy Spirit) above (Head-over) thy fellows." 
-Heb. 1:9. 

WORKS ENEMIES--NOT HEART ENEMIES 

But some one may inquire, Does not the Apostle speak 
of some of the "household of faith" as having once been aliens, 
strangers, foreigners, from the commonwealth of Israel? Yes; 
so was Cornelius all of that as a Gentile, yet he reverenced 
God and gave much alms to the people. But as a Gentile 
he was naturally an alien from Israel's privileges and blessings 
until, so far as the Gentiles were concerned, Christ made 
an end to the Law Covenant, nailed it to his cross, and admitted 
Gentiles to his favor and to the still greater blessings 
of the original Covenant. 

But does not the Apostle say that some who had become 
saints had been liars and abominable persons, "alienated, 
and enemies in their mind by wicked works," and could the 
world be worse than this description? (Col. 1:21.) We answer, 
So far as works are concerned, and the divine standards, Yes, 
"that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may 
become guilty before God," both Jews and Gentiles. (Rom. 3:19.) 
But such as at heart were not opposed to the light and 
Truth, had a different standing in the Divine estimation. 
Through ignorance and weaknesses they were like the whole 
world, yet in other respects they were very different and 
differently estimated by the Lord. These, because of their 
right-heartedness, were blessed in being drawn to Christ by 
the Father, that they might be justified by faith in the 
precious blood, and that they might be sanctified by a 
knowledge of the Truth, and that thus they might become 
associates in the sufferings of Christ and in his coming glory 
and work. During this age only such are drawn, and only 
such received: "No man can come unto me, except the Father 
which sent me, draw him." (John 6:44.) Of such "elect" St. 
Paul says, "If God be for us who can be against us." "He who 
began a good work in us is able to complete it." These 
needed the blood and could not be justified without the 
Redeemer's sacrifice, but they do not need that he should 
mediate the New (Law) Covenant for them, since they are 
acceptable under the better, the Faith Covenant, made with 
Abraham. 

We see the difference in the present time: Some, under 
the influence of error, are terrified with fear of eternal torment, 



and may live outwardly according to high standards, 

loving sin, but fearing to practice it. When the Truth reaches 

such and their fears are dispelled, they have no special inclination 

toward piety. Others, on the contrary, hearing of 

the Lord's grace and wonderful providences, are drawn, constrained, 

to become followers of Jesus, even at a cost of sacrifice 

and temporal interests. This latter class need no 

mediator to whip them into harmony with the Divine Laws. 

To the extent of their ability they delight to do God's will. 

This faith and its spirit of obedience God counts to them for 

righteousness. These, after justification by faith in his blood, 

are invited to become members of The Christ. A sufficient 

number of these will be found to complete the membership 

of his Body, and to fill up the sufferings of Christ, and to 

constitute the very "elect" members of the Mediator for the 

world— men. 

Let us remember that Moses was the mediator of the 
Law Covenant, which failed, not because of being a poor Law, 
but merely because its mediator was incapable of doing for 
the people all that they needed. God purposes to give to that 
nation, and other nations through them, The Christ, the better 
Mediator under a New Covenant or Agreement, to be sealed 
with his blood— the merit of his sacrifice applied indirectly 
through the Church. Remember how St. Peter, after telling 
about the times of Restitution to be inaugurated at the 
Second Coming of Jesus, says, "For verily Moses said unto the 
fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto 
you from amongst your brethren like unto me." (Acts 3:22.) 
The Prophet like unto Moses began to be raised up in the 
person of our Lord Jesus, the Head. The raising up process 
has continued throughout this age, and shortly will be completed. 
That antitypical Moses, Christ and the Church, Head 
and Body, is to mediate the New Covenant so long promised 
between God and Israel. That the Apostle is not speaking 
of anything yet accomplished is evident from the context, 
"It shall come to pass that the soul that will not obey that 
Prophet shall be utterly destroyed from amongst the people." 
(Acts 3:23.) All who do not obey Jesus during this Gospel 
Age are not destroyed; but, under the great Mediator between 
God and men, the antitypical Moses, who shall rule the world 
during the Millennium, the Scriptures will be fulfilled— all 
that will refuse divine favor under that New Covenant will 
be utterly destroyed. 



R4341 : page 63 

QUESTIONS RE THE COVENANTS 

What is the Abrahamic Covenant? 

(1) Is it for the selection of the Seed? 

Its promise is THE SEED: (1) Jesus; (2) The Christ; (3) 
The earthly seed through them. 

(2) Or is it the blessing of all the families of the earth? 



Ultimately, yes. The result will bless all the nations. 
(3) When did it begin— with Abraham, Isaac or Abel? 
With Jesus Christ: but its provisions extend backward 
and forward to all who have exercised "the faith of Abraham." 

What is the Sarah Covenant? 

(1) Is it proper to say that the Sarah and Abrahamic 
Covenants are one and the same thing? 

The Abrahamic Covenant primarily is the Sarah Covenant 
—the Faith or Promise Covenant. 

(2) Under what Covenant were the Ancient Worthies 
developed, Abrahamic or Sarah? 

The Abrahamic or Faith Covenant, typified by Sarah. 
All justified by faith are of this Covenant. The others are 
covenants of works. 

(3) Are the Ancient Worthies the fleshly seed, or are the 
Jews who come under the New Covenant in the Millennial 
Age the fleshly seed? 

The Ancient Worthies primarily, but all who ever come 
to the Faith and Works relationship under the New Covenant 
will, as children of "the Anointed," be grandchildren of 
Abraham, who typified God— the Father. 

(4) Is the Sarah Covenant as comprehensive as the 
Abrahamic Covenant? 

No! It relates only to the "Seed of Promise." 

(5) Does the Sarah Covenant come to an end at the 
close of the Gospel Age? 

Yes. 

(6) Does the Sarah Covenant end when the last member 
of the spiritual Seed is born, or does it end after the 
Ancient Worthies come forth? 

After both: the two being shown in Joseph and Benjamin. 

(7) If the Sarah Covenant brings forth the spiritual 

Seed, how can we say that both seeds are brought forth under 
the Abrahamic Covenant? 
The dual feature is shown in Rachel. 

R4342 : page 63 

(8) If both the seeds are brought forth under the Sarah 
Covenant then how about Gal. 3:16, where it speaks of THE 
Seed which is Christ? 

The Christ is the Seed, but the "promise" is "sure to 
both. "-Rom. 4:16. 

(9) Are those now called to membership in The Christ 
justified by the sacrifice of the man Christ Jesus? 

Most assuredly, "By faith in his blood." Faith in the 
New Covenant justifies nobody. Those blessed under the 
New Covenant will be justified by works.— Rev. 20:13. 



page 64 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

WATERBURY, CONN., FEBRUARY 28 

All sessions in Buckingham Music Hall, corner Grand and 
Bank streets. Morning session for Praise and Testimony at 
11:00 o'clock. Afternoon meeting for the Public at 3 o'clock: 
subject, "Where are the Dead?" Evening meeting for the interested 
at 6:30 o'clock. 

Arrangements for cheap, clean lodgings have been made 
at a temperance hotel, for any finding it necessary to remain 
over night. Visiting friends cordially welcomed. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 7 

Discourse on Baptism, import and symbol, at 1 1 a.m. Discourse 
by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting for 
the interested at 7:30 o'clock. This will be a Question Meeting. 
Visiting friends cordially welcomed. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

SCRANTON, PA., MARCH 14 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., MARCH 21 



page 66 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 
THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 
PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 
WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c (IS l/2d). India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth 25c. (IS. l/2d.). India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.). 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible; 384 pages, in embossed cloth 
25c (IS. l/2d.). India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.). 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9; 660 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-1/2.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an 
all-important subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages 
in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.). 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week, 
Genesis 1 and 2, and with the Church, God's New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth 30c. (IS. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.). 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage 60c (IS) 

MILLENNIAL DAWN is published in foreign languages as follows: 
in German, five vols., in Swedish, Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Italian, one vol.; in 
Greek, two vols.; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices 
the same. 

The volumes in English are bound in two styles, MILLENNIAL DAWN 
in green cloth binding and SCRIPTURE STUDIES in maroon cloth. Specify 
which you desire. 



page 65 



SEMI-MONTHLY 