From Our Readers
Children  As soon as I received the series “Children—What They Need From Parents,” I devoured it. (December 22, 2003) As a mother of five, my heart was deeply touched by those articles. I wish that all the world’s mothers could read them.
C. M., France
The articles you publish seem to come just in time for me. When my husband and I found out that we were going to have a baby, you published information for pregnant women. (January 8, 2003) Now that we are the happy parents of a three-month-old son, you have printed wonderful tips on raising infants. For a young mother, these articles are very helpful.
D. K., Poland
Life Story  I thank you for all the articles, but I especially enjoy the life stories. The story of Eileen Brumbaugh, “Dress and Grooming Was My Stumbling Block,” stirred my heart. (December 22, 2003) What an earnest desire she had to find the true religion!
L. M., Russia
I was particularly interested in Eileen Brumbaugh’s story because here in our area there is a very large population of Amish and Mennonite families. In the past I thought it pointless to talk to them about the Bible because they seem so convinced of their faith. From her experience I can see that by showing personal attention and sincere interest, we can help all types of people to come to an accurate knowledge of God.
M. H., United States
I too struggled with the idea that makeup and jewelry were strictly “worldly.” It was the unhypocritical love among Jehovah’s Witnesses, as well as their respect for the Holy Scriptures, that helped me to see past outward appearances.
A. C., United States
Herbal Remedies  I enjoyed reading the article “Herbal Remedies—Can They Help You?” (December 22, 2003) I am a registered nurse, and I use a variety of natural remedies for my joints. I have found them to be very beneficial in my case. However, you did not mention that some herbs can lead to excessive bleeding in surgery. That some herbs must be discontinued prior to surgery is a major consideration for Jehovah’s Witnesses.
J. H., United States
“Awake!” responds: We appreciate this important reminder. Before surgery, it is essential that a patient inform his or her doctor of all medications being taken—including herbs. This is particularly important for those who heed the Bible’s command to ‘abstain from blood.’—Acts 15:29.
Public Speaking  I really enjoyed reading the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Succeed as a Public Speaker?” (December 22, 2003) I’ve worked in the field of journalism for ten years, but I still get a little nervous when making a presentation before a large group of people. Even with all the institutional and corporate training that I’ve had, nothing compares to the outstanding instruction I have received as a student in the Theocratic Ministry School, held at Kingdom Halls of Jehovah’s Witnesses. This training has not only helped me to improve in my door-to-door ministry but also to succeed in my secular work.
L. B., United States

