Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Perhaps by this time you have noted on page two of The Watchtower and Awake! that there have been some decreases in the number of magazines printed. One reason for the decrease in magazine placements has been the fact that more and more emphasis has been put on witnessing to people, engaging the householders in Bible discussions, rather than merely placing literature with them. Another cause has been the drop in the number of new subscriptions that the brothers have been getting. This has necessitated a cutting back in the production of the magazines. However, with all the fine information contained in the magazines, we are sure all of you will continue giving attention to using the magazines to good advantage in your Kingdom-preaching activity.
You will be interested in the results of the Kingdom Ministry School training given to elders all across this country in the months of November and December. Qualified instructors were used to pass along the information to all the elders in attendance, using the specially prepared textbook entitled “Pay Attention to Yourselves and to All the Flock.” Among the subjects considered were these: “Imitate Jehovah, Our Loving Overseer,” “Be Whole-souled in the Evangelizing Work” and “Overseers ‘Ruling for Justice Itself.’”
What were the results of the schooling? Perhaps the best way to judge the benefits is to let you know what some of the elders have written to the Society concerning their brief schooling. From New York State came this comment: “Expressions from many of the brothers reflected gratitude for the dignity and relaxed atmosphere, which was conducive to learning.” From Indiana this request came: “We hope it can be repeated in the future, perhaps periodically.” One brother in Washington State wrote: “It was a joyful occasion for a man of 93 years to go to school; never too old to learn. We thank the Lord for this provision.” From California the elders in one school wrote: “May we take this opportunity to send along a special thank you for the provision of the Kingdom Ministry School Course.”
May all of us, the elders and all in the congregation, reap the benefits of the training given so that we can, on “fine soil,” bear good fruit, some a hundredfold, some sixty or thirty.​—Matt. 13:23.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

