Presenting the Good News​—To Total Strangers
For many of us it is very difficult to approach the home of a total stranger to converse about the Bible and God’s kingdom. To talk to a friend, neighbor or relative, someone with whom we are acquainted, does not present nearly the problem that talking to a stranger does. To assist us in preparing ourselves for this work of evangelizing among strangers, the following questions and answers may prove helpful.
1. What is the first thing to have in mind? Prayer to Jehovah for his help and blessing to go with us as we seek to do his will.
2. How do you approach the door? We need the right frame of mind. This means we do not want to prejudge the householder. We may subconsciously do so by thinking that the neighborhood in which he lives, the predominant religion of the area, the general view of the people, automatically mean this stranger at the door is not going to be interested in what we have to say. Rather, we want to view each person as a potential friend, interested in the good news that we are bringing, leaving the outcome and the judgment in Jehovah’s hands. With this view we should feel more at ease.
3. What do we first say to the householder? Something that should be encouraging to the stranger you face. For example, a warm greeting, a word about the weather or the person’s home if it is neat and well kept, something that will show we are interested in the person to whom we speak. Then in a kind way bring to his attention the purpose of our call. The Topic for Conversation this month suggests using an approach based on Psalm 119:105. A comment to the householder that may be appropriate is that as humans all of us look to someone or something as a guide. We might ask: “Have you ever thought about the guide the Almighty God has given us to help us in meeting the problems of life?”
4. What next? At this point, if at all possible, draw the stranger into the conversation. Ask his opinion. If he is willing, let him express himself. Don’t worry that you will have to do all the talking. Be a good listener. Even if his views are contrary to yours, that need not be a problem. You are not there to argue but to offer to show him what God’s Word says.
5. What if a question is asked that you do not know the answer to? You need not fear if this should happen. Straightforwardly say that you do not know the answer, but you will find out and return to pass along what you have learned for the person’s benefit. This may open the way for a fine return visit. When we do not know something, there is every reason to admit it. Oftentimes our honesty impresses the householder and may lead to his listening more intently when we return.
6. What if the householder is rude, definitely not interested? We can offer no better advice than that found in God’s Word. “An answer, when mild, turns away rage.” (Prov. 15:1) “Let your reasonableness become known to all men.” (Phil. 4:5) Being reasonable, we will not take their rejection as a personal affront, realizing that it may well be because they do not understand the value of what we bring. We can leave graciously, with some kind expression and this may have a beneficial effect on the person.​—Compare Colossians 4:6.
7. What is our objective in our evangelizing work? Our objective is to preach the good news of the Kingdom, to make disciples of people of all the nations, teaching them. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) Our success is not dependent on what we distribute in the way of literature, though, of course, we know such would indeed be a blessing to those who are receptive. Living the truth as we spread the Word of truth among strangers is what brings great praise to Jehovah.

