The Bible​—A Practical Guide from Jehovah
1 One of God’s marvelous gifts to mankind has been his Word of truth, the Bible. It is truly a practical guide by which one comes to know God and to be guided by him as one follows the teachings of that Word. But how many of mankind know this and appreciate the value of God’s Word in their lives? Really, very few. Yet the psalmist said of God’s Word that it is a ‘lamp to one’s foot and a light to one’s roadway.’​—Ps. 119:105.
2 In the spirit of neighbor love, what can we do to help others benefit from the wisdom of God as found in the Bible? For one thing, we need to be aware of some of the questions that might be raised by those not knowing about God’s Word or who doubt the value of such Word in their lives.
HOW PRACTICAL FOR MANKIND?
3 Some who are unacquainted with the value of the Word of God may say: “How would applying its counsel and advice help me now, in the present time? Would it make me rich, if I were poor; well, if I were ill? Would it make my life problem-free? What can it do for me?”
4 As Christians we know that the Bible does not make the claim that such things as riches, better health and no problems in life will be the lot of those who heed its advice. We know that the Bible is not a book that takes one into a dreamworld and away from reality. It is not meant to be a book with a philosophical approach to life that refuses to face facts. What the Bible does do is face life as it is. Then, it goes a step beyond that and sets forth guidelines that will assist one in handling the problems of life. This, in many cases, results in much improvement in one’s lot in life, bringing a large measure of happiness now, but, more importantly, the promise of life under the very conditions for which mankind everywhere yearns​—a time of peace, genuine love and concern for one’s fellowman under the Kingdom rule of this earth by Christ Jesus, God’s Son.
5 The Bible does not claim to make our lives problem-free. Nevertheless, in living by its guidelines a person can find his life improved because of his own change in his manner of living. For example, many have succeeded in breaking the money-wasting habits of tobacco and drug abuse, also overindulgence in eating and drinking.
6 Additionally, following the practical advice of the Bible helps one mentally. This may in turn lead to better health and a more balanced outlook on life. It has been estimated that as many as 50 to 70 percent of the patients going to a family doctor suffer from illnesses of an emotional rather than a physical nature. The Bible directs people away from those things that can damage the emotions and sour the attitudes of individuals. (Eph. 4:31, 32) Replacing negative views with a positive outlook, the Bible and its practical counsel can certainly be a contributing factor in one’s gaining the blessing of Jehovah, which makes rich.​—Prov. 10:22.
WHAT CAN WE DO?
7 Why not encourage someone you know, a friend, relative or neighbor, to get better acquainted with the Bible? By regularly having a share in talking to people in your congregation territory about this practical book, you will bring joy to many and satisfaction to yourself.​—Acts 20:35.
8 During February the offer, on a contribution of 60 cents, will be two 384- or 416-page bound books from the stock that you have in your congregation, along with one of the following pocket-size books: Is the Bible Really the Word of God?, God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good and Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? May our course of neighbor love bring many good results as we tell others about the Bible​—the practical guide from Jehovah.

