Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 29
20 min: Song 18. Local announcements and consideration of article “The Bible​—A Practical Guide from Jehovah” by questions and answers. Mention to brothers the names of the 384- and 416-page and the pocket-size books your congregation will be using in February at the special contribution of 60 cents.
10 min: A talk with highlights from publications to be used in field service in February. Talk may include the following points: (1) We have been blessed with knowledge of the truth and works of Jehovah through the printed page. Over the years received much insight into meaning of Sacred Scriptures (Prov. 4:18); (2) Want to share with others this knowledge that means life, so they appreciate the depth of the riches and knowledge of Jehovah (Rom. 11:33); (3) Using whatever publications you have in your congregation stock that will be placed in the field, highlight a point or two that can be used in the evangelizing work.
10 min: Consider “Meeting Schedule Adjustments” and Theocratic News.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—To Total Strangers.” Discussion with the congregation on each of the seven points in the article. Give encouraging and upbuilding comments that will reach the brothers’ hearts causing them to want to respond and share more fully in the evangelizing work. Song 22 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 5
Theme: Communication​—Key to a Strong, Spiritual Family.
30 min: Song 14. Local announcements. Elders concerned with appearance of all in flock including young ones. (Prov. 27:23) Following part designed to give further help to young folks to make the truth their own​—a way of life. Brother handling part should have good rapport with youths in congregation. Advisable sometime ahead of part to get views of young people on questions that follow. but no need to rehearse parts. Should be a frank, realistic approach eliciting straightforward observations from youths.
Interview cross section of young people in congregation. Emphasize: (1) While we were their age once, we appreciate times are changing and the problems faced by youth are changing too. Great need for them to tell us what is going on, and when we find it hard to understand, we want them to keep on telling us​—we want to know; (2) We sympathize with their needs, we stand behind them. What can we do to help them? Chairman should put young people at ease. May want to have them in front rows to facilitate interviewing. Begin by asking young ones (ages 4-18) what their respective ages are, as well as their comments on the following:
What grade are you in at school?
Do you like school? Why or why not?
What do you think it means to be moral?
Do you think cheating at school is moral or immoral? Why?
Do you think taking drugs is moral or immoral? Why?
Do you find it easy to communicate with people your own age or the age of your parents? Why?
Do you think it is important for young people and their parents to be able to talk freely?
What could make this difficult at times?
How do you like to be treated?
(To parents) Why would it be in harmony with Jesus’ teachings to show love and respect for our children? (Matt. 22:39)
(To young ones again) How do you earn such respect as a youth?
(Read Ephesians 6:4.) Do you think it is possible for parents to irritate their children? How?
Chairman should thank youths for their honest observations. We appreciate their association very much and want to develop and maintain good communication with them as their parents and friends.
12 min: Talk. Base comments on response of youths and parents in previous part. Invite audience to read scriptures and comment on them. Select and apply most appropriate of following Scriptural thoughts. One handling part needs to be discerning and kind. Explain that points in previous part not intended to embarrass or be offensive. Nonetheless, can learn from frank and realistic approach.
(1) If some young people do not see the need to get training and education in school, could use 1 Timothy 4:13 and Joshua 1:8 (regarding need to learn to read well); Proverbs 13:20 (regarding diligence in study being a protection); Titus 2:6, 7, 10 (regarding the desirability of young Christians’ setting a fine example for schoolmates and teachers).
(2) If there is need for parents to get closer to children, show more concern for them, do more together, use Deuteronomy 6:6, 7 and Ephesians 6:4.
(3) If young people need help to correct wrong views on experimenting with drugs, tobacco, conduct with the opposite sex, and so forth, use 2 Corinthians 7:1; Matthew 22:39; 1 Corinthians 6:18; also 1Co 6:9, 10; Galatians 6:7; Proverbs 10:1.
(4) If parents have been screaming at children or perhaps short-tempered with them, use Ephesians 4:31, 32; Galatians 5:22; 1 Corinthians 13:4-7.
(5) If children need to show more respect for parents, use Colossians 3:20; Proverbs 30:17; 3:1, 2.
18 min: Studying with Your Children. Questions and answers. Include appropriate experiences of points made as time permits. One thing to have a fairly close-knit, well-adjusted family. Some worldly families accomplish this. Another thing to have a spiritually-minded family who stick to each other and Jehovah, reflecting spiritual training of good quality. While having a regular family study can help, much more needed if young folks are to make truth their own. The following may be helpful and practical.
QUESTION: Must subject material in a family study follow rigid routine week after week?
ANSWER: No, flexibility keeps the discussion practical and stimulating. Not limited to study of The Watchtower or book; may include reading and discussing portion of Bible together, certain articles in magazines, and so forth.
QUESTION: How should subject material be chosen?
ANSWER: According to needs of family. For some it may be learning how to relate to and love Jehovah as a person or properly to value the power of prayer. For others, advisable to think ahead to problems youths face such as dating, involvement in school programs, extracurricular activities, sports, fads, immoral tendencies, and so forth. Discuss whatever the family needs, doing so a number of times well in advance of the problem or temptation that might arise.
QUESTION: When should a family study be held and for how long?
ANSWER: Family heads can determine according to family needs. May want to have abbreviated discussion several times weekly if children are young. Good to take into consideration attention span so that most good will be accomplished.
QUESTION: How can we be sure that we are reaching hearts of our children during these discussions?
ANSWER: Make sure answers given in own words. Ask supplementary questions designed to determine how child really feels about matter discussed. Take time to let each one express himself so there is no misunderstanding or lack of appreciation for point being made.
QUESTION: What are some things to be avoided?
ANSWER: Course of wisdom not to make discussion period too regimented. All should look forward to it with anticipation. Wise parents will not use these periods to scold their children using Bible or publications as weapon. Will wisely inculcate Bible truths deeply into hearts of children with patience, skill, kindness and discernment according to individual needs of each child. Concluding remarks. Song 67 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 12
20 min: Song 100. Announcements. “Reading the Bible with Your Family”​—Why and How? (w77 11/1) Discuss with audience.
(1) Why your family should read the Bible together:
Essential part of true worship
Most direct way to absorb God’s laws and principles
Draws one closer to Jehovah
Draws the family together
Enhances reading skills
Enjoyable experience that requires little or no preparation
(2) How you can make your family Bible reading more lively and meaningful:
Create relaxed atmosphere for family
Pick appropriate sections to read; may select portions of scripture pertinent to present family needs
Read as if you mean it! Relive the occasion!
Where considerable dialogue allows for it, might assign characters to different family members
Research answers to questions that arise from Bible reading
Allow yourselves time​—Bible reading becomes more enjoyable with practice
20 min: “To Care Is to Share.” Question-and-answer discussion of article on page one.
20 min: Local experiences demonstrating that caring means sharing. Ask publishers what was shared when them with they started learning the truth, and how they felt about it. Also what opportunities they have had to share with their students and the results. Song 37 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 19
10 min: Song 32. Local announcements.
50 min: “Pioneer Service​—Is It for You?” Consideration of pioneer insert. To be handled in an enthusiastic and lively manner by capable brother(s). Have brothers or sisters ask the boldface-type questions, and have capable brother read the paragraphs suggested below for each section. After reading the paragraphs suggested for each question, briefly discuss with the audience the corresponding highlight outlined below.
Ques. 1. Read paragraphs 2, 3.
Your circumstances and Scriptural obligations will help you determine if pioneering is for you or not.
Ques. 2. Read paragraphs 4, 5, 10.
Be practical, consider your circumstances, your opportunities and have faith that if you keep on seeking first the Kingdom, Jehovah will continue to provide for your needs.
Ques. 3. Read paragraphs 12-16.
Try auxiliary pioneering. It may help you determine what to do with the rest of your life.
Ques. 4. Read paragraphs 17-20.
Consideration will be given to those with serious health or personal problems who find they cannot make up lost time.
Ques. 5. Read paragraphs 23-28.
A sense of accomplishment comes from sharing as fully as possible in the preaching work, with or without apparent results.​—Eccl. 11:6.
Ques. 6. Read paragraphs 29-36.
Only you can decide if pioneering is for you. It must be done with the right motive stemming from a keen desire to help people and to glorify God.​—2 Cor. 9:7.
Song 35 and prayer

