Hippies​—Who Are They?
YOU have seen them​—if not in person, then in the news media. They are usually young men and women. They wear their hair long, and the men frequently have beards. Their clothing often includes beads, bell-bottom trousers, unusual jackets and headgear. They may wear sandals or go barefoot.
These are the “hippies.” Most people shrug their shoulders and shake their heads when encountering them. Some dismiss their behavior as just the antics of headstrong youth. Others view their behavior as sheer nonsense and would deal with them very harshly.
Who are these hippies? What do they hope to gain by their unusual behavior? Why have they chosen this way of life? Does the movement have any real meaning for our time?
In order to answer such questions, it would be well to understand that hippies cannot all be lumped together into one category. For example, when you hear of violence triggered by young persons dressed like hippies, do these represent the majority? No, they are the minority​—political activists who feel that violence is justified as a means to an end.
However, most hippies do not believe in violence or killing as a means to an end; they are peaceful. Others are “drug” hippies. These may start by smoking marijuana (“pot”), but often move on to stronger drugs such as the stimulant methedrine (“speed”), peyote, LSD or heroin. Then there are “spiritual” hippies. They seek guidance through various forms of religion, particularly through Eastern religions such as Zen Buddhism, the gurus (Hindu “holy men”) and astrology.
Also, there are the “plastic” or weekend hippies. These dress, act and talk like hippies but are not wholly dedicated to the movement. They still rely on society (the “Establishment”) for employment and conform to it in varying degrees.
Of course, any hippie may be a combination of these types. For instance, he may be for peace, practice astrology, and also be a drug addict. Indeed, a large proportion of hippies do use drugs.
Is there a ‘common denominator’ among hippies? Yes. It is their rejection of the standards and authority of the older generation. In small or large measure they reject the guidance of governments, parents and orthodox religions. Also, they have contempt for the economic systems.
Where do hippies come from? It would be easy to dismiss them all by assuming they are simply foolish or ignorant young people intent on mischief. And no doubt there are plenty of that kind among the hippies, just as there are among other social groups.
However, most of the earlier hippies came from “good” middle-class homes. Some came from wealthy families. Many were well-educated and informed; indeed, often more than those who were their critics. One study revealed that 68 percent had a college education, 44 percent had a college father and 46 percent a college mother.
True, some hippies are emotionally disturbed youths. As one investigator said: “Some of those vacant stares you see on youthful faces belong not to the drug-crazed but to the psychotic.” However, these do not make up the majority​—no more than mentally unbalanced persons make up the majority of any social group.
Most hippies, then, are as Life magazine of November 7, 1969, noted, a “counter culture” from “middle-class white youth.” But why have families who have more money, better homes and educations produced a crop of young people who completely reject the values of the older generation?

