From Our Readers
Better Health  As a doctor of chiropractic and a registered physical therapist, I have been in the health field for 21 years, providing assistance to thousands of patients. I am extremely concerned that many reading the cover series “Better Health—What Choices Are There?” (October 22, 2000) may hesitate to seek chiropractic care for fear of the potential dangers implied.
A. K., United States
You mention that a chiropractic adjustment to the neck might cause a patient to suffer a stroke. I have been a chiropractor for over 50 years, and I have never seen or heard of this reaction.
B.D.B., United States
It was not our intention to discourage readers from seeking chiropractic treatment if this is what they desire. “Awake!” reported: “Significantly, there is a low incidence of side effects with chiropractic manipulation by a skilled practitioner.” At the same time, the “Archives of Internal Medicine,” Volume 158, November 9, 1998, noted regarding such manipulation that “the rate of serious complications is still debatable” and that “estimates vary from 1 in 400,000 to between 3 and 6 per 10 million.” We should have clarified that complications from chiropractic adjustments, which were said to include stroke, evidently are extremely rare.—ED.
Many thanks for this series. I am not against conventional medicine, but I have life-threatening reactions to antibiotics. At times, the conventional doctors cannot diagnose my ailments, so I have to choose alternative medicine. The articles have really encouraged me because some people have even made fun of me because of my choices.
S. H., Antigua
The box on page 8 quoted a doctor who stated that the herbs ginkgo biloba and feverfew can interfere with blood clotting when they are combined with prescription medication. I take both of these herbs, along with medications. I had thought all herbs were perfectly safe! This may help me to avoid future problems.
G. G., United States
Calendar Controversy  Your articles are well researched and authoritative; mistakes are rare. However, on reading the article “The Vikings—Conquerors and Colonizers” (December 8, 2000), I did notice a technical error. You stated that the English names of certain days were based on Norse mythology. Although the Vikings did worship Tyr, Odin, Thor, and Frigga, the German people also did so under slightly different names. They brought the worship of these gods to Britain when they invaded in the fifth and sixth centuries. The days of the week are thus Anglo-Saxon in origin.
A. C., Britain
“The World Book Encyclopedia” and other sources indicate that the names for these days are “derived from the names of Norse gods.” However, “The Encyclopædia Britannica” says that these names came “from Anglo-Saxon words for the gods of Teutonic mythology.” Some scholars believe that these Anglo-Saxon words are linguistically linked to Old Norse. Whatever the case, this is a matter that will continue to be debated among scholars.—ED.
Depression  Many thanks for the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Tell Someone That I’m Depressed?” (October 22, 2000) The article appeared at a time when I was very depressed and did not know what to do. Reading the article made me feel that someone understands me. I spoke to my parents, to my best friend, and particularly to Jehovah. He helped a lot. I never want to do without my close personal relationship with Jehovah.
A. P., Germany

