R205 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL, 1881. 

NO. 10. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance- 
includes postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R215 : page 1 

PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETING. 

Service held in "Curry Institute Hall," corner Penn avenue and 
Sixth street, Pittsburgh, at 3:00 o'clock P.M., every Sunday. 
Every Wednesday evening, at No. 80 Cedar avenue, Allegheny, 
at 7:30 o'clock P.M. All are cordially invited. 



R205 : page 1 



THE RESURRECTION. 



The death and resurrection of a human body as a thing distinct 
and separate from the intelligent being, is never mentioned in 
the Scriptures. We never read that Abraham's body died, nor that 
Jesus' body died, nor that any one's body died. 

Being signifies existence, and there can be no being or existence 
without life and body both. Withdraw life and the being or 
existence ceases, for life is but a power or principle, the same in 
the lower animals as in man; the difference in qualities between 
man and the brute, consisting not in a different kind of life, but 
in a different kind of body. 

Any being is properly called a soul or person. This is the 
Scriptural sense and usage of the word soul, so little understood; 
viz. Being (life and body combined.) Thus we read of the 
creation of Adam— "And the Lord God formed man of the dust 
of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life 
(ruach—ihQ same breath said to be given to beasts, birds and 
fishes) and man became a living soul," (being.) Gen. 2-7. 

We will cite a few illustrations of the Bible usage of the word 
soul showing that it signifies being: Lev. 5:2, "If a soul (being- 
person) touch any unclean thing he shall be unclean." Verse 4, 
"If a soul (being) swear." Verse 15, "If a soul (being) commit a 
trespass." Lev. 22:11, "If the priest buy any soul (being) with his 
money." Prov. 6:30, "If he steal to satisfy his soul (being) when 
he is hungry," Prov. 27:7, "The full soul (being) loatheth the 
honey-comb, but to the hungry soul (being) every bitter thing is 
sweet." Prov. 19:2, "That the soul (being) be without knowledge 
is not good." Verse 15, "An idle soul (being) shall suffer 
hunger." Luke 1:46, Mary said, "My soul (being) doth magnify 
the Lord." Jesus said, "My soul (being) is exceeding sorrowful 
even unto death." Matt. 26:38, "Thou shalt love the Lord... with 
all thy soul (being.) Matt. 22:37, The rich man said, "Soul 
(being-self) thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take 
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. But God said existence) will 
(cease) be required of thee." Luke 12:19, "For what is a man 
profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul 
(existence, being,) or "What can a man give in exchange for his 



soul (being existence.") Matt. 16:26. How many illustrations of 
this scripture are furnished us in every day life. Men and women 
labor for wealth, to gain as much as possible of the whole world 
only to find when they are rich that wealth has come at the 
expense of health. How many of those who spend their life in 
laying up earthly treasure, find that their very being- existence- 
has been sacrificed in gaining the wealth. Then what would they 
not give to get back again health, etc. They lavish their wealth 
upon physicians, traveling, etc., but it is of little use: They made 
a poor exchange when they gave their being for money. 

In Acts 2:41. There were added to the church about 3000 souls 
(beings, persons.) Acts 7:14 "He called Jacob and his kindred 75 
souls," (beings.) Acts 27:37, "There were in all, in the ship, 276 
souls," (beings.) "Some purified their souls (beings— lived more 
purely) in obeying the truth." 1 Pet. 1:22. "The law of the Lord 
is perfect converting (changing) the soul" (being.) Psa. 19:7. 
Other souls (beings) were subverted, turned from the truth by 
error. Acts 15:24, Other, unstable souls (beings, persons) were 
beguiled. 2 Pet. 2:14. 

The word soul is used, also to represent the being's affections. 
"O thou whom my soul (being's affections) loveth. Cant. 1:7. 
The soul of David (affections) was knit unto the soul of 
Jonathan.... (The two beings were united.) 1 Sam. 18:1. [The 
word soul is used with reference to fish, fowl and beasts, as it is 
of man; to represent their being or existence, but is usually 
translated "life" in our Bibles as in Gen. 1:20 & 30, etc.] 

With this view of the meaning of the word soul, viz: That it 
includes all being or existence (a combination of life and body) 
let us inquire-what dies— the principle of life, or the body? We 
answer neither; the life principle is one which pervades all 
creation just as does electricity. This principle of life pervades 
and is an essential element of all being, in tree, in fish, in fowl, 
in beast, in man, in angels, and in the fullest degree in God who 
is its source or fountain. This principle cannot be said to die 
though if it be withdrawn from any creature to whom God has 
given it, that creature will die-cease to have being. Thus the 
breath of life is taken from beasts, birds, fish and man. 

Neither can it be properly said that the body dies, since, separate 
from the principle of life the body never had life and 
consequently could not die. The body without the spirit (of life) 
is dead and that which is dead cannot die. 

WHA T THEN IS DEA TH-WHA T DIES? 

We answer, the being dies-ceases to have being or existence. 
Death is the dissolution, or separation of the things which 
combined, constitute being, -namely, life and body. Thus when 
the spirit of life returns to God who gave it (all nature is His 



reservoir of life) then, the being is dead and soon the body will 
return to the dust from whence it was taken." 

We see clearly then, that not the body but the being-called in 
Scripture, soul, dies. Let us notice some instances in which this 
is stated in so many words: Job 31:39 (marginal reading) cause 
the soul of owners thereof to expire" --(dissolve, die.) "Their soul 
dieth in youth, etc." Job 36:14, margin "To deliver their soul 
(being) from death and to keep them alive in famine. " Psa. 
33:19. 

He spared not their soul (being) from death (dissolution). "He 
keepeth back his soul (being) from the pit "...(death.) Job 33:18. 
"He shall deliver his soul (being) from the grave." Psa. 89:48. 
"All souls (beings) are mine... the soul (being) that sinneth it 
shall die." Ezek. 18:4. It was the soul (being) of Jesus which was 
given for our ransom. "Thou shalt make his soul (being) an 
offering for sin".... "He shall see of the travail of his soul and be 
satisfied." "He hath poured out his soul (being) unto death." Isa. 
53:10-12. But, (Acts 2:31.) His soul (being) was not left in hell," 
(hades-the condition of death.) He was raised to being again but 
a being of a higher order-having a grander than human form- 
body. "Put to death in the flesh but quickened by the Spirit." 
And now we come to the point— What will be raised up, in the 
resurrection? The body says some one. Not so I answer, it is the 
BEING that God promises to raise up. It once existed, and lost 
existence and is to be raised up to existence or being again. 
Men, can resurrect a body from the tomb (that is, bring a body 
out of a tomb to the surface;) but only God's power can resurrect 
or bring to existence again a being who has died. 

We see then that resurrection means the restoring of being. 
Now, "with what body do they (these beings) come" (into being 
again?) is a question asked by Paul. (1 Cor. 15:35). [We have 
seen that being is made up of two elements, body, and spirit of 
life— hence if restored to being they must have some sort of 
bodies provided them.] Paul proceeds to tell us, that while each 
must have a body, yet, in the resurrection all beings will not 
have the same kind of bodies. He says that there are two general 
sorts or kinds of bodies-the earthly or natural bodies, and the 
spiritual -heavenly bodies. There are two, perfect illustrations 
of these two kinds of bodies: Adam was the head of the earthly, 
human family and a pattern of the perfect human body. Christ 
Jesus at His resurrection was the first born from the dead to the 
perfect new nature, the spiritual, and He, "thus born of the 
Spirit, is spirit." (John 3:6.) His is a sample or illustration of a 
perfect Spiritual body. 

All humanity, belongs to one of two classes: either they are 
natural men— The ADAMIC SEED, or they have been begotten 
of the Spirit through the word of truth and have given 
themselves up to Christ, that the will of God might be done in 
them. This is the newly begotten man; he belongs to the 



SPIRITUAL SEED. Now says Paul, "God giveth it a body as it 
hath pleased Him and to every seed his own body." That is, 
those who have, during the present life, become partakers of the 
divine nature must needs have a divine form -a "spiritual body" 
"like unto Christ's glorious body" while those who have not thus 
changed nature would have no change of body. When again 
brought into being, they will have natural, human bodies. 

The resurrection which some will have, to spiritual conditions of 
being -with spiritual bodies—is in Scripture designated as 
special, by calling it "The first resurrection," first in importance 
-chief. It is also frequently designated by the article THE (very 
noticeable in the Greek text; but less so in our English 
translations) for illustration-notice the following instances, 
(Luke 20:35.) "They that shall be accounted worthy to obtain 
that world and THE resurrection neither marry nor are given in 
marriage." Again, Paul always taught that there would be "a 
resurrection both of the just and the unjust;" yet he says: If by 
any means I might attain unto THE resurrection. Phil. 3:11. 

R205 : page 2 

The first-to spiritual condition and being. Again he designates 
this resurrection to spiritual being as "His resurrection," because 
Jesus 

R206 : page 2 

was the first one so raised from death to spiritual being. "That I 
might know Him and the power of HIS resurrection (i.e., that I 
might be raised as He was raised.) Then follows an account of 
how he might attain to that glorious resurrection to spiritual 
being, viz.: "knowing the fellowship of His sufferings and being 
made conformable unto His death," (Phil. 3:10.) 

None will attain to this chief resurrection, except they 
consecrate themselves entirely to God's service, "We beseech 
you therefore brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present 
your bodies (and all their powers, talents, reputations -all) a 
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, your reasonable 
service." So shall you be among those who shall be in THE first 
resurrection for "Blessed and holy are all they that have part in 
THE FIRST resurrection: on such the second death hath no 
power; but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and reign 
with Him a thousand years. (Rev. 20:6.) 

We can know little about the perfection and grandeur and 
powers of those who shall become spiritual beings except that 
they will be "like unto Christ's glorious body." (Phil. 3:21.) As 
the Apostle says: It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we 
know that when He shall appear we shall be like Him." (1 John 
3:2.) What an answer is this to those who claim that nothing is 
real but a flesh and bone body. Who would insist that Jesus, 
after His resurrection was the very same flesh and bones He was 



before He died. Was that a glorious body? No, that was the body 
he took for the suffering of death~but being put to death in the 
flesh He was quickened by the Spirit, "a life-giving spirit." (1 
Cor. 15:45) Now He is the express image of the Father's person. 
Is the Father and Creator of all things simply a great Man? Nay, 
verily, "God is a Spirit." "It doth not yet appear, what... but we 
shall be like Him. " Away with that grossness of materialism, 
which can realize nothing higher than the natural, human plane. 
Let us take Paul's account. There are human natural bodies and 
there are spiritual bodies. Both will be glorious, but the glory of 
the human, earthly, (terrestrial) is one thing and the glory of the 
spiritual, heavenly, celestial, is quite another and quite a 
different thing. See (1 Cor. 15:40.) 

The restored world of mankind shall be indeed glorious men like 
the perfect head of the human race, but that glory will not 
compare with "the glory that shall be revealed in us," who have 
given up the human nature and become partakers of the divine 
nature, into the perfection of which we hope soon to be ushered. 
Like the earthly one (Adam) such will they be also that are 
earthly (human)-Like the heavenly one (Christ when "born 
from the dead")~such will they be also that are heavenly, (now 
begotten to the heavenly nature by the word of God through the 
Spirit, then to be born into the perfection of that being). Verse 
48. 

Paul gives us a slight account of the great change from natural to 
spiritual which awaits those who have part in THE first 
resurrection: Vs. 42 informs us "Thus is THE resurrection of 
THE dead: It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it 
is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, 
it is raised in power; it is sown an animal body, it is raised a 
spiritual body." [Diaglott]. 

ORDER IN RESURRECTION. 

All of God's works and plans are full of order: It has well been 
said-order is the first law of heaven. While, there shall be a 
resurrection both of the just and unjust and all shall be made 
alive, and while some shall be made alive as perfect spiritual 
beings, and others in the likeness of the earthly one, Adam, yet 
there are times and seasons and orders for all this, as Paul says: 
"But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits~(Jesus 
the head and we the "members of his body"~yet "all ONE 
body" -The head raised 1800 years ago, the body very soon we 
trust,) afterward they that are Christ's at his (parousia) presence- 
-the "great company." 

These are the first orders and include all of those who are of the 
spiritual family, but there are others-every man in his own 
order-and when all of these orders are complete (Paul mentions 
only those in which the church's interest centered) when all have 
been brought to life and perfection either on the human or 



spiritual plane (except those who die the "second death") "then 
(at the end of the 1000 years reign of Christ and the saints,) 
cometh the end," "when he shall have put down all rule and all 
authority and power." For he must reign until he hath put all 
enemies under his feet— The last enemy that shall be destroyed 
(during that 1000 years reign) is death" (Adamic) in all its 
forms; sickness, and pain, as well as the tomb- "Then the end" 
will have come-the end of sin on earth, the end of the great 
work of ransoming mankind and bringing them into full 
harmony with their Creator. Then— the Son shall deliver up the 
kingdom-dominion of earth to God even the Father; that God 
may be all-and his will done in all. See vs. 23-28. 



R206 : page 2 

FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD. 

(A SUGGESTION.) 

"Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared 
for you from the foundation of the world." Matt. 25:34. 

Which world is this at whose foundation the kingdom is 
prepared? If there were only one world, and therefore the word 
world always meant the same thing, there would be no room for 
discrimination; but as there are three worlds.— The world that 
was, the world that now is, and the world to come, -there is 
room for the question, "Which world is meant?" The Greek 
word translated world, wherever the heading of this article is 
found, is Kosmos, which, sometimes means the people, or world 
of mankind, as in John 3:16, "God so loved the world," but often 
means, as Greek scholars tell us, the order or condition of 
things. The order or state of things-heaven and earth-which 
was, Peter tells us, ended at the flood; the second order ends at, 
or during, the sounding of the seventh trumpet which is 
associated with the second coming of Christ; and then begins the 
new or third order; the new heaven and earth wherein dwelleth 
righteousness. 2 Pet. 3. 

Now from the foundation of which of these three worlds is the 
kingdom of God prepared? Our suggestion is, that it is the third 
world and not the first. That the same expression is used in some 
Scriptures in reference to the first world, we do not doubt; and 
as to which is meant the plan of the ages should in all cases 
determine. 

We think it is clear that the Bible reveals three kingdom ages- 
the Jewish, Gospel and Millennial ages,- represented by the 
Savior as the three measures of meal, in which the work goes on 
to completion. We can find no trace of a kingdom before the 
Jewish age. In it the typical kingdom was organized. In the 
Gospel age, as shown by many of the Savior's parables, the 



church is called the Kingdom. It is not perfect, however, nor 
pure, for in it tares and wheat grow together, until the tares are 
gathered out of his kingdom. They could not, of course, be 
gathered out unless they were in. 

Some think the kingdom means the earth, and that to gather the 
tares out of His kingdom means to rid the earth of all the world 
of mankind, except the saints. But if we understand their 
position, they do not seem consistent, for they teach that instead 
of taking out the tares, the Lord will take out the saints, leaving 
the world of mankind on the kingdom (if the earth is the 
kingdom) to be burned up. We seriously doubt if the earth is 
ever called the kingdom. 

We understand that during the Jewish and Gospel ages, the 
kingdom of God has been in a process of preparation; but it is 
not fully prepared until the end of the Gospel age, when the tares 
are separated, then the wheat shall be exalted to glorious power, 
and then begin to "shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their 
Father." 

It seems that when the kingdom is prepared it is time to set it up, 
as it could not be set up (put in power— glorified) if it had no 
existence, or before it was fully prepared. Just so the Papal 
church (woman) could not have been placed in power-i.e., 
could not have been set up on the beast (Rev. 17,) before she 
had an existence or before she was prepared for that step, by the 
completeness of the falling away, or apostasy from Christ. When 
the counterfeit kingdom was thus prepared, and set up-put in 
power-She was then prepared and ready to gather within her 
pale the millions upon millions who would not previously have 
listened to her voice. So we believe when the true church or 
kingdom of Christ is set up, she will then be prepared to gather 
to her pale those who will hear her voice. 

It seems to the writer that the setting up of this kingdom is 
laying the foundation of the world-to come— the third and 
endless order of things, and that it is so prepared and set up for 
the benefit of mankind, seems clear from the text, and also from 
the fact that "The Spirit and the Bride" shall say "Come." 

The scene in our text is laid when the Son of Man shall have 
come in His glory; and that the saints are with Him in glory 
before He thus comes is evident, because the gathering 

R207 : page 2 

of the saints to Christ must precede their coming or appearing 
with Him; and Paul tells us that "When Christ who is our life 
shall appear, we also shall appear with Him in glory. " Col. 3 :4. 
Let this fact be noted and it will be seen that the "sheep" of 
Matt. 25, are not the saints who are already rewarded and with 
Christ, but another class. It is not our notion, as some think, but 



Paul's statement, that "The saints shall judge the world." 1 Cor. 
6:2. 

With this view that it is the foundation of the third world at 
which the kingdom is prepared, another passage appears 
luminous; "According as He hath chosen us in Him before the 
foundation of the world." Eph. 1 :4. It seems more in keeping 
with the gospel conditions that we are chosen during the gospel 
age, in order to be prepared to share in laying the foundation of 
the coming world or order of things, and also as the next verse 
asserts to adopt children by Jesus Christ to Himself, than that we 
were chosen, as some express it, "Away back in the counsels of 
eternity," when we had no responsibility in the matter. The 
means by which we are chosen in Christ are not omitted by the 
apostle, which show that though the Lord is the prime mover in 
the work, yet they involve the mental action and obedience of 
the chosen one: "Through sanctification of the Spirit and belief 
of the truth." We do not doubt that the plan to the end was 
known and arranged from the beginning, but the man is chosen 
when the truth is applied and obeyed. We regard it as a 
wonderful privilege thus to be called out, and so to be present at 
the laying of the foundation of the future order of things~"The 
world to come," in which all nations shall be blessed. 

J. H. P. 



R207 : page 2 

NEW VERSION OF THE N.T. 

The necessity for a better translation of the New Testament and 
from older and more authentic MSS., has long existed and now 
seems about to be realized in the New Version just completed 
and soon to be published. [We hope the translators have been 
bold enough to correct not only the many mistranslations of 
words; but, also the interpolations without the fear of man which 
bringeth a snare. A number of these interpolations have been 
noticed in a former number of the WATCH TOWER, as lacking 
in all old Greek MSS. written previous to the fifth century: such 
as John 21:25. Also the words~"in heaven the Father, the Word 
and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are one; And there are 
three that bear witness in earth"~parts of 1 John 5:7,8; and the 
words~"But the rest of the dead lived not again until the 
thousand years were finished" and part of Rev. 20:5. 

From what we have heard of this work, it will be very valuable 
and certainly a great improvement upon the present standard 
version. But we venture the assertion that it will be a great lever 
in the hands of Infidelity, and will be used to overthrow respect 
for Christianity, its teachings and its standard~the Bible, in the 
minds of those who have no understanding of how and why the 



changes are right and proper. For this the church's ministers are 
to blame. For years they have sought to instill into people, and 
particularly children, an unreasoning, superstitious awe for the 
Bible, and thousands who attend church, have the impression 
that to question the correctness of one word in the King James' 
version, is infidelity. Ministers who know, or should have 
known that the word hell in our English texts is the translation 
of more than one Greek word and in a large majority of the 
cases should have been translated- the grave— or-the condition 
of death -have preached year after year from texts where the 
word should be grave and have allowed their hearers to 
understand it as meaning-a lake of fire -for fear, some one 
should get the impression that-"God is love," for fear the 
church could not stand, except supported by error. Many have 
preached right along from the interpolation of 1 John 5:7,8, and 
never informed their hearers that the strange statement that—it 
was witnessed in 



[Continued on seventh page.] 

R207 : page 7 

[Continued from second page.] 

heaven, that Jesus was really the Son of God- was not a part of 
the Word of God; but was introduced by Papacy during the tenth 
century. Who there needed such witness— did not all in heaven 
know it? And why did they thus keep the people in ignorance? 
Because they feared that if people knew this, the only text which 
gives even a shadow of support to the doctrine of the TRINITY, 
to be an interpolation to support a papal error, they might 
renounce the error and believe Jesus' words. (John 5:30; 8:28; 
10:29; 14:28; Rev. 2:27.) 

Yes, in the coming and now beginning trouble upon the church 
(Zion's Travail). The new version of the Scriptures as well as 
Infidelity will play an important part, and "From the time that it, 
(the trouble) goeth forth it shall take you: for morning by 
morning it shall pass over, by day and by night; and it shall be a 
vexation only until He shall make you to understand doctrine, 
(truth.) For the (theological) bed is shorter than that a man can 
stretch himself in it and the covering (doctrines) narrower than 
that he can wrap himself in it." For the Lord... shall do His work, 
His strange work; and bring to pass His act His strange act. 
Now, therefore; be ye not mockers lest your bands be made 
strong. For I have heard of the Lord God a consumption (an end 
-a "harvest,") even determined upon the whole earth." (Isa. 
28:19-22, margin.) 

Yes in the whole world there is to be a separation between evil 
and good, truth and error; but in the church first comes this 
harvesting there will indeed be a fearful shaking, both of wheat 



and tares. (Matt. 13,) as the two classes of the church (the tares 
much the most numerous) are separated by the sickle of truth. 
There will indeed be a great and sore trial upon the church when 
one after another, long cherished errors are torn away —it will be 
a hard time for any to stand as Christians. Paul entreats us 
concerning this commencing evil day, "Take unto you the whole 
armor of God that you may be able to withstand in that evil 
day." Thousands who are building on the good foundation, 
Christ, are building with the wood, hay and stubble of human 
creeds and traditions instead of the gold, silver, etc., of God's 
Word— "The fire of that day shall try every man's work (faith 
structure) of what sort it is," (1 Cor. 3:13.) 

Yes, a thousand (in the churches) shall fall at your side, and ten 
thousand at your right hand, yet it shall not come nigh you if 
you make God's TRUTH your shield and buckler. (Psa. 91.) 
How important, then, that we should see that our faith is 
founded on and supported by the word of God, "That our faith 
should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of 
God." (1 Cor. 2:5.) Then we shall have that which is neither the 
arrow of infidelity, nor the pestilence of spiritualism, nor the 
purifying fire can destroy. Thus only shall we be able to stand 
(these evils). And it shall be a trial only until "He shall make 
you to understand doctrine "--the true teaching of His word. 
Then it will be seen that God's plan (bed) is longer and wider 
and higher than the creeds of men, and a man may stretch 
himself on it and rest, fully covered with the amplitude of God's 
mercy, love and grace, which is sufficient for any man to wrap 
himself in it. O, that Christians might get into this place of rest 
where they could realize a little of the length and breadth, height 
and depth, and know something of "the love of God which 
passeth knowledge!" "O, the depth of the riches both of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are His 
judgments, and His ways past finding out." (Rom. 11:33.) 

There's a wideness in God's mercy, 
Like the wideness of the sea; 
There's a kindness in His justice 
Which is more than liberty. 

But we make His love too narrow 
By false limits of our own; 
And we magnify His strictness 
With a zeal He will not own. 

If our love were but more simple, 
We should take Him at His word; 
And our lives would be all sunshine 
In the sweetness of our Lord. 

Search the Scriptures, search and see; 
These, said Jesus, speak of me. 



R207 : page 3 



THE COMING STORM. 



Oh! sad is my heart, for storm that is coming; 
Like eagles the scud sweepeth in from the sea; 
The gull seeketh shelter, the pine trees are sighing, 
And all giveth note of the tempest to be. 

A spoil hath been whispered from cave or from mountain, 
The shepherds are sleeping, the sentinels dumb, 
The flocks are all scattered on moorland and mountain, 
And no one believes that the Master is come. 

He's come, but whom doth he find their watch keeping? 
Oh, where-in his presence-is there faith the world o'er? 
The rich, every sense in soft luxury steeping; 
The poor, scarce repelling the wolf from the door. 

Oh, man, and oh, maiden, drop trifling and pleasure, 
Oh, hark, while I tell of the sorrows to be, 
As well might I plead in the path of yon glacier, 
Or cry out a warning to wave of the sea. 



--Altered 



R208 : page 3 



THE LORD'S SUPPER. 



Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep the 
feast. 1 Cor. 5:7. 

The Passover was a Jewish feast kept annually (and is still 
observed by them) as a commemoration of their remarkable 
deliverance under the tenth plague upon Egypt—the Passing-over 
or sparing from death of their first-born. 

The circumstances as narrated in Ex. 12 -the slaying of the 
Lamb, the roasting of the flesh with fire, and the eating of it with 
bitter herbs and unleavened bread while the eaters stood, girded 
and shod, and with staff in hand ready to depart out of Egypt for 
the Land of Promise- Canaan-are doubtless familiar to most of 
our readers. Also, the meaning of these things which were but 
types: How that Jesus came- "The Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world," and "Christ our Passover was 
sacrificed for us "-how the door posts and lintels of the 
household of faith are sprinkled (typically) with the blood of our 
Lamb which speaketh better things, and saves in a higher sense 
all that are in that house— how that we are to be pilgrims and 
strangers, not making Egypt (the world) our home nor resting 
there, but with staff in hand-how that the "bitter herbs" 
represent the bitter experiences and trials of this life, which are 



needful to us and tend to sharpen our appetite for the unleavened 
bread, (truth in its purity; leaven being a type of corruption or 
error,) and for the eating of our Lamb, who said unless you eat 
my flesh... you have no life in you: Thus we partake of our Lamb 
and have Christ formed within, the hope of Glory. Thus during 
this night of more than 1 800 years, since our Lamb was slain, 
the one true household has been eating— waiting for the morning 
of deliverance—the early dawn of which we believe has already 
come. 

When Jesus died on the very same day, and in fulfillment of that 
part of the type-the Lamb-how fitting it seems that all 
Christians should commemorate the day on which our Lamb 
died. We certainly have much more interest in the day than has 
"Israel after the flesh," who recognize only the type. Then, while 
we keep the feast daily-partaking of Christ and His word of 
truth, would it not be a great pleasure and a beautiful way, to 
commemorate our Lord's death on its anniversary? 

We understand that it was our Lord's wish that this day be 
observed annually as a remembrance of Him, and that he 
instituted what is termed, The Lord's Supper, of bread and wine- 
-emblems of His body and blood, our Passover supper -as a 
substitute for the Jewish observance of the type. 

Everything connected with it seems to show that this was His 
intention. He kept the Passover regularly every year, and at the 
last one, the night in which he was betrayed, he said: "With 
desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you before I 
suffer." What Jesus commemorated was the killing of the 
Passover (Lamb;) and not the "Feast of Passover," which 
followed it for seven days. The Jews at that time kept both, but 
particularly the latter, (the feast). They do not now, and have not 
for a long time commemorated the killing of the Passover, but 
the feast only. 

Jesus commemorated (the last time) the killing only and then 
gave Himself as the real sacrifice. When he had instituted the 
new supper-remembrancers, (the bread and wine) instead of the 
old type (the lamb) he gave to his disciples and said: "This do in 
remembrance of me. " (Keep no longer the type or shadow but 
use these new emblems to commemorate me-the anti-type.) "As 
often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the 
Lord's death, (not the typical lamb's) till He come," the kingdom 
be established and the type completed by the passing over, or 
sparing of the first-born (overcomers) and the ultimate 
deliverance of the entire "household of faith." 

The Passover killing-Christ's death, can be remembered at no 
time so appropriately as on the regular anniversary, the 
fourteenth day of the first month. Jewish time which this year 
falls on April 14th (commencing at 6 o'clock P.M.) The feast of 
seven days eating unleavened bread, which followed 



representing in type the continuous, perfect and everlasting feast 
which we enjoy after and because of our ransom; (seven being 
typical of perfection). 

We are aware that some Christians observe the Lord's supper 
every Sunday, and claim that their custom is based upon the oft 
repeated mention in Acts of the "breaking of bread," and "upon 
the first day of the week when the disciples were come together 
to break bread." (Acts 20:7) etc. They evidently overlook the 
fact that bread-breaking, was of necessity a frequent occurrence 
but that there is no mention of wine in any of these instances 
which constitute as important a feature in the ordinance as the 
bread, nor are any of these meetings on the first day of the week 
ever called the "Lord's Supper" or by any name that should lead 
us to such a conclusion. 

There are several reasons why "The Lord's Day" would not be at 
all appropriate for the commemoration of His death, the 
principal one being, that "the first day," or "Lord's day" was 
instituted and used to commemorate an event the very opposite 
in its character, viz: The resurrection of our Lord. The one was 
in the "night" and called a supper, the other was observed in the 
day. The one was a night of weeping and sorrow, the other a 
morning of joy and rejoicing, saying- "The Lord is risen 
indeed." The one was a type of the present night of suffering- 
the Gospel Age— the other a type of our gathering together and 
communion in the bright Millennial day—after the resurrection 
of the body "very early in the morning." 

When Jesus had risen from death He appeared to the disciples 
frequently, if not invariably on the "first day" of the week, and 
on several occasions made himself known to them in the 
breaking of bread at their ordinary meal. Upon the organization 
of the church what would be more reasonable, than to suppose 
that they would set apart that first day, as especially a day for 
meeting with each other and with Him, and that coming from 
distances as well as because He thus revealed Himself first, they 
would arrange for the having of their food in common on that 
day? But this was always a day of joy as the other was properly 
a night of sympathizing grief. 

The proper observance of this ordinance like that of baptism, 
seems to have been lost sight of during Papacy's reign: This one 
doubtless, was made void, to allow for the deathbed 
administration of the "Sacrament" to keep the dying from 
purgatory, etc. Protestants have not generally given the subject 
much attention, using the words-"As often as ye do this-"as 
authority for any convenient time, and not seeing that "this" 
referred to the Passover, as oft as ye do commemorate this event 
do it in remembrance-not of the type but of the anti-type-Me. 

We do not say that a sin is committed by an untimely 
observance, nor that the non-observance, is sinful; but we do say 



that the observance of it as instituted is much more suggestive, 
appropriate and commemorative than any other. 

We have so observed it here in Pittsburgh for some years and it 
has ever been a blessed occasion. We will celebrate it this year 
at the residence of Bro. W. H. Conley, No. 50, Fremont street, 
Allegheny City, Pa. April 14th, at 8 o'clock P.M., and cordially 
invite all who can do so, to be present and join with us. Brethren 
and sisters from a distance will be entertained by the friends 
here. If possible please send a postal card to "WATCH 
TOWER" office, No. 101 Fifth avenue, Pittsburgh, and call 
there on your arrival. 



R208 : page 3 



IN THE FLESH. 



The proper distinction between "the flesh" and "spirit" and the 
significance of each as used in Scripture relative to mankind, is 
but little understood; yet is very important to an understanding 
of God's word and plan. 

The word flesh is used in a general sense to mean mankind- 
humanity. As originally created it was "very good," an image on 
a perfect though small scale, of the spiritual order of which God 
is the head. 

But through sin and its consequences, death and disease, a blight 
came and flesh is no longer perfect and beautiful, but marred, 
sinful, and imperfect to such an extent that none of the race can 
keep God's law, consequently none can be recognized by a just 
God except as sinners, and the only just thing to do with sinners 
is to punish them, and "The wages of sin is death." Hence we 
read "All flesh is grass and all the goodliness thereof is as the 
flower of the field: The grass withereth, the flower fadeth, etc." 
(Isa. 40:6.) 

There was a time when they that were in the flesh could please 
God. That was when Adam and Eve held daily communion with 
God before sin entered; but now all flesh has become "sinful 
flesh," and therefore now, "they that are in the flesh cannot 
please God." If they live as exemplary moral lives as they know 
how, their best works will be imperfect, hence they cannot claim 
that they are not sinners, nor could God in justice recognize 
them or deal with them in any other manner than as sinners, and 
punish them according to the penalty of his just law—put them 
into the great prison house of death-the tomb. 

R209 : page 3 

But as we have already seen, God has a purpose— a double 
purpose: the first part of which relates to the present Gospel 
(good news) age, and the second part belongs to the incoming 



Millennial age. His purpose is first, to select a part of the race 
whose nature shall be changed so that they will no longer be 
human or earthly beings, but spiritual or heavenly beings, and as 
such enjoy themselves in his service. His purpose secondly 
being that all the remainder of the race may come again to the 
perfection of the human nature, and as perfect earthly beings 
ever live in harmony and communion with Him and His law, as 
Adam did before sin entered the world; and on this, their plane, 
enjoy perfect human pleasure in doing those things that are well 
pleasing to God. Then it will be true of all on both the spiritual 
and natural planes- "I delight to do thy will O God." Then they 
that are in the flesh can please God, because all flesh will be 
perfect and free from sin. This is the "Restitution of which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy Prophets since the 
world began." (Acts 3:21.) 

During the Millennial age all mankind will be brought to a 
knowledge of God—His plan, His wisdom, His power, His Love- 
-"all shall know Him from the least to the greatest," for "The 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth." And it seems 
as though to know Him will mean to love Him, and to love Him 
will mean to obey Him, and to obey Him will mean to have life 
and enjoy God forever, to the great majority of the race. That all 
will then be called upon to exercise faith, to some extent, we 
cannot doubt, for "without faith it is impossible to please God," 
but everything will be favorable to faith. Evil will be restrained, 
(Satan bound a thousand years) error and vice will be checked, 
while righteousness and truth shall be dispensed to the people by 
the antitype of the Melchizedec Priesthood -Jesus and the 
gospel church as Kings and Priests-" A priest upon his throne." 
Priests to instruct in righteousness; Kings to enforce obedience 
to righteousness. Faith then will be easy. 

They will readily appreciate the statement-Christ died for our 
sins- was our ransom, &c. -because they will themselves be 
witnesses that the penalty, death and pain, and sickness, is being 
removed, and that they are again brought into favor with God; 
and it would be only reasonable for them to ask why sinners are 
restored to life, &c, again. Has God changed His mind and 
concluded that sin was not so bad a thing after all, and that he 
had erred when he pronounced sinners unworthy of life and was 
now repenting of his action? 

No, the answer comes, God changes not; you were justly 
condemned, but God loved you and gave His son, and Jesus 
loved you and gave himself a ransom for you. You are redeemed 
and therefore restored. Then it will be easy to believe that- 
" Jesus hath died and there is remission." 

But during this age, as many as now hear ("He that hath an ear 
let him hear,") the good news are by it informed that Christ died 
for our sins, that the price of sin has been paid, and they are 
justified, if they believe it, and that they can come unto 



R209 : page 4 

God not as sinners but as righteous persons, and by faith call 
God "Father." It is as justified (perfect) fleshly beings that they 
now call God Father-because in God's sight restored to the 
condition occupied by Adam before he became a sinner, viz: a 
fleshly or human son. (Luke 3:38.) 

The next step for these justified beings to take, is to consecrate 
their justified flesh (being) to God. "Present your bodies a living 
sacrifice," present it to God alive, for his service. God accepts it 
and reckons you dead as a human being, but alive as a new 
creature (begotten) to a new life of a new (divine) nature, and 
your human nature is reckoned as dead forever, and in due time, 
when perfected as new spiritual beings we will have our 
spiritual bodies. But now we, new creatures, live in these old 
bodies- reckoned dead; yet our Father counts us no longer sons 
on the fleshly plane to which he justified us through Jesus' 
ransom, but sons on the higher plane as begotten of the Spirit, 
and he says of such: "Ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if 
so be that the Spirit of Christ dwell in you." Those who have 
thus given up the human nature -become dead-are reckoned by 
their fellow men as being still in the flesh; but of God, as being 
in the Spirit. To those thus dead God reveals His plan and the 
exceeding riches of His grace. Thus the good news is declared to 
them that are dead, that they might be judged (reckoned) 
according to men (as being) in the flesh but live according to 
God in the Spirit." (1 Pet. 4:6.) 



R209 : page 4 

HOW MUCH WILL YOU GIVE? 

Dear friends we are not going to pass around the contribution 
box now, but thinking this to be an all-important question, one 
upon which depends, perhaps, as much the interest of every one 
of us, as any question we could propound, let us each for 
himself carefully consider it. 

We do not ask how much will you contribute towards paying for 
the organ in the church, nor how much will you subscribe 
toward paying the minister, nor how much you will subscribe 
toward sending the gospel to the heathen, nor even how much 
you will contribute for the relief of the poor, though each of 
these may be considered commendable objects in their time and 
place; but how much will you give for the gospel of Christ? 

But do you say, is it not a free gospel? Does not the prophet say 
"Ho, every one that thirsteth come ye to the waters, and he that 
has no money come ye, buy, and eat; yea buy wine and milk 
without money and without price?" Yes that is a correct 
quotation, but there is nothing in the passage quoted to indicate 



that a man who has money can have the gospel and still keep his 
money; those who are to have it without money are those who 
have no money to pay. But sincerely my brother, my sister, my 
friend HOW MUCH will you give for the Gospel? It is 
exceedingly valuable and you should not expect to get it for 
nothing, you should not be willing to take it for nothing if you 
could, neither can you expect to give an equivalent for it, for "its 
price is beyond rubies, and all the things thou canst desire are 
not to be compared unto it." 

Now if you have some faint idea of its value, perhaps, you will 
be willing to make some offer for it. Offerings are in order for it 
now, this is "the acceptable (receivable) year of the Lord," and 
we are close to "the day of vengeance of our God;" and if you 
want a chance in the high calling, you need to be quick and 
prompt about it; we expect the quota under this call will soon be 
filled and hope you will not be among the number who will 
"stand without knocking and saying open unto us," when it will 
be forever too late. Again we ask how much will you give? 
Suppose we consider the word give (as it has a number of 
significations) first in the sense of yielding, in the phrase to 
"give ear," which signifies to hear, to listen; now are you willing 
to give your attention and thought to this gospel? Are you 
willing to bend your mind to it? Are you willing to carefully, 
prayerfully and persistently consider it? Are you willing to give 
it all the thought which you have hitherto given to matters of 
little or no importance? Consider it well; think of the hours you 
have spent reading works of fiction, wit and humor, perhaps in 
playing some sort of game for diversion, or even in reading 
history or secular news, mainly for the purpose of being 
considered "well informed," or possibly for the purpose of being 
qualified for some position of honor (worldly) or fame. 

Are you willing to give way, to give that attention to the gospel 
that you have to these? Do you answer in the affirmative? That 
is well so far, but that is not enough. Are you willing (notice, 
these questions are for you to answer to yourself in the present 
tense, not to-morrow) to give in the sense of quitting as in the 
phrases, to give place, to withdraw, to make room; are you 
willing if this gospel requires it, to give place to principles 
which will antagonize those which you have hitherto 
entertained? Are you willing to have a radical change made in 
your mind, and in your manner of reasoning, i.e., so that instead 
of reasoning from an earthly or natural standpoint, it shall be 
from a spiritual or gospel stand point, for earthly wisdom 
"descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual; devilish." 
James 3:15. 

Earthly wisdom would reason, "if thine enemy hunger let him 
starve," and everything else on the same line, but heavenly 
wisdom waits to have our heavenly Father who understands all 
the weaknesses of our natures, and all the influences that have 



been brought to bear upon us, adjust matters for us, instead of 
taking them into our own hands and managing from an earthly 
plane, and with earthly wisdom; that is to say, looked at from an 
earthly standpoint, we resign our own wisdom and become fools 
for Christ's sake. You think that is giving considerable do you? 
Well it is, but you cannot become a vessel fit for the master's use 
without. Are you willing? Yes. Very well that is good, but that is 
not enough, for this gospel requirement, very likely will reveal 
to you that very many things which you have hitherto 
considered harmless in their nature, are really very injurious to 
you and you will be called upon to give in the 

R210:page4 

sense of relinquishing, or in the still stronger sense of 
abandoning, i.e., to let go of in the sense of never taking hold 
again— a long good bye-to the things you once loved; among 
them may be earthly hopes and expectations; this heavenly 
wisdom will teach you that all these are transitory and vain, and 
that the more you depend upon them the more you will be 
deceived by them, and the greater will be your disappointment, 
for your expectations will fail to be realized, and your hopes will 
be blasted. You will find everything turned around under the 
influence of the gospel, and that the things which are highly 
esteemed among men are abominations in the sight of God. 
Luke 16:15. 

Notice the words "highly esteemed among men;" earthly things 
needful for our physical well being are not to be despised, nor 
will heavenly wisdom prompt us to despise them, nor are they 
the things referred to as highly esteemed among men, for men 
will sacrifice these for the highest interests of the soul, and if 
you will give way to the influences of the gospel upon you, you 
will be led to abominate that which is HIGHLY esteemed 
among men. 

Let us see what things are highly esteemed among men; what do 
they make the greatest sacrifice for? Probably the greatest effort 
that men make is to be worshiped; honor, fame, a name among 
men; not so much to be superior as to be regarded superior. 

To have men cast out your name as evil, that is a terrible thing 
for a man who knows nothing of the gospel of Christ; to lose his 
reputation is one of the greatest if not the greatest calamity that 
can befall a man, he will not mind as much the loss of his 
character, but the loss of his reputation is most terrible, to the 
man of the world, for if you lose this you will lose your worldly 
friends mostly, some of them will stand by if you have plenty of 
money, but it will take a great deal even of money to hold many 
friends after your reputation is all gone, so if you relinquish your 
reputation for the sake of the gospel (nothing else should induce 
a man to part with it) you will be doing pretty well, you will be 
giving considerable. Do you think you can do it? Y-e-s? Well 



can you not say it with emphasis? "By the grace of God I will!" 
That is good. You are giving yourself poor, after the wisdom of 
this world, aren't you? Never mind, look not at the things that 
are seen; they are temporal. But you have not given enough yet- 
Have you any money? (No, we are not going to pass the 
contribution box now.) Yes, some. Well much or little you will 
need to give it, not to pay for the gospel but out of gratitude and 
that it may be sent to others, and there are some of the Lord's 
brethren living near your house that are hungry or sick and need 
help, so your (?) money will be needed, and with it will go those 
few friends who stuck by you for your money's sake after your 
reputation was gone; you found by bitter (blessed) experience 
that a great share of your friends left you when your reputation 
did, and now the rest of your worldly friends will go and you 
will be left alone; will you do it? "Yes, by the grace of God I 
will!" The sting of death (to the world) is past, isn't it? How 
much easier it is to say yes, now. Praise the Lord! But you have 
not given enough yet. 

Now, my dear friend, you are not far from the kingdom. Will 
you sacrifice your ease, your comfort, yea life itself if called 
upon? Will you let it be worn out, or burnt out, or in any way 
used up for the sake of the gospel of Christ? You will? Thank 
God! I am so glad; you will be so rich. Now let us look over this 
covenant. You have given your attention, your time, your mind, 
your reputation, your friends, your money, your life—seven 
items. You have given yourself poor indeed, haven't you? I 
acknowledge the fact, it is so, poor, very poor, and you have 
done this willingly. It makes me think of something I have 
heard, and while I am looking at you, your countenance seems 
changed; you remind me of some one I have known. Ah, it 
comes to me now, Jesus of Nazareth was his name, why how 
much you resemble him, you must be his brother. "You know 
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet 
for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might 
be rich." 2 Cor. 8:9. Why you have done just as he did and just 
what he intended when he said: "I have given you an example 
that ye should do as I have done to you." John 13:15. Well that 
is the best kind of will you could make, and I am glad to greet 
you as my brother, I also having done the same things~"for 
which cause he is not ashamed to call us brethren." Heb. 2:1 1. 

You can afford to be poor and go about in disguise for a while, 
now, inasmuch as you are an heir of the kingdom. "Hearken my 
beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of this world, 
rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised 
to them that love him?" James 2:5. And now you will learn 
faster and be able to prepare yourself for regal employment in 
the regal family; for "if any man will (wills or wishes to) do his 
will, he shall know of the doctrine. John 7:17. You now belong 
to that company so aptly described by the poet when he said: 



What poor despised company 
Of travelers are these, 
Who walk in yonder narrow way, 
Along the rugged maze? 

Ah; these are of a royal line, 
All children of a King. 
Heirs of immortal crowns divine, 
And lo, for joy they sing! 

Why do they, then, appear so mean? 
And why so much despised? 
Because, of their rich robes unseen 
The world is not apprised. 

But why keep they that narrow road 
That rugged, thorny maze? 
Why that's the way their leader trod; 
They love and keep His ways. 

What! is there, then, no other road? 
To Salem's happy ground? 
Christ is the only way to God; 
None other can be found." 



J. C. S. 



R210:page4 

NUMBER THREE. 

PART III. 

Many of our readers are familiar with the outline of God's plan 
as embodied in three worlds, -The world that was before the 
flood, the world that now is, and the world to come. This is a 
striking example of the fundamental character of number three 
in the structure of the Bible plan of revelation and salvation. 
Each of these worlds, or orders, is spoken of in succession as 
having its own "heavens and earth." 2 Pet. 3. Here we have the 
foundation of the idea of the third heaven. The third earth and 
the third heaven are the final and perfect, wherein "the 
tabernacle of God is with men," (Rev. 21:3) and "wherein 
dwelleth righteousness." 2 Pet. 3:13. 

Be it observed there are heavens, as well as an earth in each 
order. They seem to exist in relation to each other as cause and 
effect, the outer, lower and visible as an expression of the inner, 
higher and invisible. The heavens rule and the earth is subject. 
This is at least clearly so of the second and third orders. In the 
second, called "This present evil world," the "powers of 
heaven," (by permission and with limitations of course, as no 
creature can outwit the Creator) are "wicked spirits," all 



embodied as Satan, their head and Prince. Eph. 6:12 and 2:2. His 
kingdom is invisible, but under invisible 

R210:page5 

control, uses men and nations as visible agencies, and produces 
visible results of the most baneful and atrocious character. The 
earth is in harmony with the heavens; and we would suggest that 
it may be that all evil physical conditions, including wars, 
storms, diseases, pains and death are but the pulsations, so to 
speak, of the powers of darkness. We see an intimation that this 
is so, in the fact that the earth was cursed for man's sake when 
he sinned. It was for man's sake, or on account of man, perhaps, 
in two senses, first, it was a consequence of man's yielding to 
evil, and second, it was for man's good, as pain by fire is to 
teach us to avoid the fire. 

In view of the facts and promises we hail with joy the near 
change from the second to the third world. The day dawn, or 
transition period we believe has come. In the third world the 
power of heaven will be the "spirits of just men made perfect," 
or "raised a spiritual body," and all embodied as Christ, their 
Head and Prince~"The King of kings and Lord of lords." His 
kingdom, having supplanted Satan's and taken its place, will 
also be invisible to mortals, only when for special reasons 
miraculously manifested; (John 3:3-8 and Luke 17:20,) but it too 
shall act through visible agencies, and produce visible results, 
not baneful and atrocious, but grand and glorious. For all nations 
shall serve and obey 

R211 : page 5 

Him, and in Him be blessed. Dan. 7:14-27 and Gen. 22:18. 

Let me ask the reader to which he aspires, ~a place in the new 
earth, or a place in the new heaven?~to be a subject of God's 
kingdom, and so enjoy its blessing, or to be a royal priest and 
reign with Him? He and His royal associates will rule to bless. 
Let us aim high, —at "the mark for the prize of the high 
[heavenly] calling of God in Christ Jesus." Phil. 3:14. 

This present or the second world has its three ages-Patriarchal, 
Jewish and Gospel. These are three progressive steps from the 
lower to the higher in the plan of revelation. 

There are three kingdom ages,-- Jewish, Gospel and Millennial. 
There is no kingdom of God, mentioned in the Bible, as in any 
sense related to the Patriarchal or One Man age. In the three 
ages mentioned, the work is represented as being done by a 
"Woman" -the church; and the progression may be characterized 
as from the Jewish typical to the Gospel mystical or hidden, and 
then to the Millennial glorious- "the manifestation of the sons of 
God," by which the groaning creation is to be "delivered from 
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the 
children of God." Rom. 8:19-21. 



This work of progression and glorious success, seems to be 
illustrated by the Savior's parable, in which He compares the 
kingdom of heaven to leaven, which a woman took and hid in 
three measures of meal until the whole was leavened. Matt. 
13:33. A very plausible and we will add, forcible objection to 
this application of the parable, is based on the fact that leaven of 
bread and of doctrine are spoken of in the Bible as elements of 
impurity and of corruption. Would the Savior represent the 
kingdom of heaven by an element and process of corruption? 
We understand the Savior here uses one feature of the leaven 
only, in His illustration, that is its permeating power. It does not 
cease until the work is done, so God's kingdom will not cease its 
operations until the curse is removed. 

Another example in which the Savior uses only one feature of a 
thing to illustrate a point, may be seen in Luke 17:37, or Matt. 
24:28, when in speaking of the "gathering together unto Him," 
He says: "Wheresoever the carcass [dead body] is, thither will 
the eagles be gathered together." "How could the Savior," we 
have been asked, "compare himself to a dead body?" The 
attraction is the point of the illustration: as the eagles are, by an 
unerring instinct, sure to find the carcass, so that the Divine 
Spirit in the saints will surely bring them to Him whom their 
soul loveth. 

The Savior seems to use the idea of progression in three steps in 
reference to the development of the Gospel age ending with the 
harvest, in His illustration of, "First the blade, then the ear, and 
after that the full corn in the ear." Mark 4:26-29. This may be 
regarded as true also in reference to individual growth in grace 
and in the knowledge of Christ. 

When the Lord sets out to do anything He means to make a 
success of it. Let us imbibe His spirit and follow His example. 

J. H. P. 



R211 : page 5 



PASSOVER. 



As the time draws nigh for the celebrating of the Passover; it 
may not be out of place to consider a few points therewith 
connected. As to the proper time of observing the Lord's supper, 
there is much diversity of opinion. Some claim the first day of 
each week as the only correct time; others, that it should be 
observed every first Sunday of each month, while some only 
partake of the feast once in three months. If there is a correct 
time for the observance of the Passover, it is evident that all the 
above views cannot be correct; and indeed it would seem, from 
the manner in which many speak of it, that God had left the 
matter entirely in our hands; that we might please ourselves, 



observing it just as our opinion of the matter might dictate. From 
examination of the Scriptures, we feel confident that all the 
positions cited are merely inferences drawn by man, and 
therefore if not obeyed would not prove fatal; for there is much 
difference between the doctrines of men, and the 
commandments of God. Without stopping to inquire into the 
various causes for such a variety of ideas as to the proper time 
for the Lord's Supper, we shall at once proceed to investigate the 
Bible-our only guide and instructor in all matters of religion, its 
ordinances, etc. Under the law dispensation, [which was a 
shadow of good things to come; Heb. 10:1,] there was a 
particular time for the killing and eating of the paschal lamb- 
" Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying: In the 
tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a 
lamb;... and ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the 
same month, and the whole assembly of the congregation of 
Israel shall kill it in the evening." Exodus 12:3-6. 

The month referred to corresponds with the new moon of April 
or March; and counting forward from that point the allotted 
time, will bring us to the Passover. That the lamb slain, pointed 
forward to Jesus, there can be no doubt; and when we examine 
minutely, the details connected with His death; the time will be 
seen to be clearly marked. "Then Jesus, six days before the 
Passover, came to Bethany.... On the next day [five days before 
the Passover] much people that were come to the feast, when 
they heard Jesus was coming to Jerusalem... went forth to meet 
Him." John 12:1,12,13. As the lamb was taken up on the tenth; 
so Jesus went up to Jerusalem [where he was sacrificed] five 
days before the Passover, which would be the tenth. "Then came 
the day of unleavened bread, when the Passover must be killed... 
and they made ready the Passover, and when the hour was come, 
He sat down, and the twelve apostles with Him: and he said unto 
them, with desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you 
before I suffer," Luke 22. The lamb pointed to Jesus, and we in 
eating the Lord's Supper; commemorate His death, and also the 
time. If this truth were recognized by Christians; they would not 
attempt to commemorate the Lord's death on the first day of the 
week; for Jesus died not then, but rose from the dead; therefore, 
no one should celebrate His death on the day of His resurrection; 
unless that day should happen to be the fourteenth day of the 
first month, at which time the Lord's Supper should be observed. 
One cannot keep the fourth of May in commemoration of the 
"Declaration of Independence;" then, neither can any person 
celebrate the Lord's death on the day he arose. 

It is true that Jesus said: "For as often as you eat this bread, and 
drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till He come;" [1 
Cor. 11:26.] However, as he did not say how often, and all the 
truth on any Bible subject is not found in one place; we must 
determine, what time it would be proper, from the various 
connections, and the sense demanded by the type. Therefore, as 



the type foreshadows it, and the sense demands it; we conclude 
that the Lord's death should be commemorated at the time He 
died. 

The night in which they ate the flesh of the lamb: typifies the 
whole gospel age: and through this night of 1800 years; we 
should, as each fourteenth day of the first month of the Jewish 
year rolls around, celebrate the Passover in commemoration of 
the death of our paschal lamb. 

The lamb slain was to be, "without blemish." Exo. 12:5. This 
shows beautifully, the perfection and purity of our lamb: "For 
even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us." 1 Cor. 5:7. 
"Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with 
corruptible things, as silver and gold;... but with the precious 
blood [life] of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without 
spot;" [1 Pet. 1:18,19.] "And ye know that He [Jesus] was 
manifested to take away our sins; and in Him is no sin." 1 John 
3:5. 

There are several features to be observed in the application of 
this type. The slaying of the lamb [as already found] 
foreshadowed the death of Jesus; but now we wish to consider 
another point, viz., "And they shall eat the flesh in that night, 
roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they 
shall eat it." Exo. 12:8. In this picture is shown how we [the 
church] partake of the nature of Christ, by eating His flesh; [in 
the figurative sense] for he says: "Verily, verily, I say unto you; 
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink His blood, 
ye have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my 
blood, hath eternal life; for my flesh is meat indeed; and my 
blood is drink indeed." John 6:53,54. The reader will remember 
that the flesh of the lamb was to be eaten with unleavened bread; 
so says Paul: "Purge out therefore the old leaven, [corrupt 
nature] that ye may be a new lump, as ye are 
unleavened.... Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old 
leaven, neither with the leaven of malice, or wickedness; but 
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." 1 Cor. 5:7,8. 

The Passover was not only to be eaten with unleavened bread, 
but with bitter herbs. This shows the suffering of the body of 
Jesus. If we eat, [partake of His nature] we will suffer. The truth 
obeyed, will lead us to give up the world; resist the devil, and 
overcome [crucify] the flesh; which is hard to do, and 
necessitates suffering. Truth declares: "If we 

R212:page5 

have been planted together in the likeness of His [Christ's] 
death, we shall be also in the likeness of His resurrection: 
knowing this, that our old man [fleshly nature] is crucified with 
Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed;... for he that is 
dead is freed from sin." Rom. 6:5-7. 



Again says truth: "For thy [Christ's] sake we are killed all the 
day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter," [Rom. 
8:36.] and, "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." 2 Tim. 3:12. All of these things require an effort 
on our part: self-denial, and suffering; for we bear "about in the 
body the dying [suffering] of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of 
Jesus might be made manifest in our body: for we which live are 
alway delivered unto death [of the flesh] for Jesus' sake, that the 
life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh;" [2 
Cor. 4:10,11] and: "Though our outward man [natural] perish, 
yet the inward man [spiritual] is renewed day by day;" (verse 
16) for: "They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the 
affections and lusts." Gal. 5:24. There is no doubt, that if we 
follow in the footsteps of Jesus, [a life of obedience] we shall 
suffer. This is clearly intimated by our Lord when He says: "Are 
ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be 
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?... And He 
saith unto them, ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be 
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with." Matt. 
20:22,23. By referring to Matt. 26:39. We know the cup spoken 
of was in reference to His death, therefore we drink of the same 
cup; and are baptized with the same baptism, [death] for: "Know 
ye not that as many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, 
were baptized into His death?" Rom. 6:3. By viewing this in the 
above light, it is very significant that Jesus partook of the 
Passover; for as He ate it with "Bitter herbs," [suffering,] so also 
do we, and in this He was our example and forerunner. Let us 
therefore, walk in the narrow [difficult] path of life; the one 
Jesus trod: "Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the 
flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same mind; for he that 
hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin," [1 Pet. 4:1] 
therefore; "Rejoice, inasmuch as you are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings; that, when His glory shall be revealed, ye may be 
glad also with exceeding joy." verse 13. 

The next point in connection with the Passover to be considered 
is: "And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, [loins girt 
about with truth; Eph. 6:14,] your shoes on your feet, [your feet 
shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; verse 15] and 
your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste; it is the 
Lord's Passover; 

R212:page6 

for I will pass through the land of Egypt this night,... and the 
blood shall be to you for a token... and when I see the blood, I 
will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to 
destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt." Exo. 12:11-13. 
This type being a figure of the whole Gospel Age; and the living 
phase of the church, being always represented, we are brought 
down to the end of this dispensation, where the living saints are 
to be changed and caught away to meet Jesus, without the 



tasting of death; [1 Thess. 4:15-17] being: "Accounted worthy to 
escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand 
before the Son of man." Luke 21:36. 

The Hebrew word "Pesach," and the Greek "Pascha," [its 
equivalent] signifies: "A passing over." This feature of the type 
is yet to be fulfilled, Jesus said: "I will not any more eat thereof, 
until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.... I will not drink of 
the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come." Luke 
22:16-18. Hence it will not be fulfilled until we [the living] are 
changed into the likeness of Christ; at which time we will be 
gathered unto Jesus, being those mentioned by the prophets: 
"Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another:... and 
they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts; in that day when I 
make up my Jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his 
own son that serveth him." Mai. 3:16,17. As we are living in 
"That day." [A period of 40 years,] therefore ought we to be 
ready: having our loins girt about with truth; our staff in hand, 
all ready for a journey, [our change] for we know not how soon 
we shall see Jesus as He is: and so be passed over. It will be 
observed that only the "First-born, " were threatened; [Exo. 
12:12] so now only: "The church of the first-born." [Heb. 
12:23,] is in danger: for, if we are not passed over: ["Accounted 
worthy to escape,"] we lose our high calling; and not only so but 
we lose it forever; therefore let us so live, that we may be ready. 
Paul says: "Through faith he [Moses] kept the Passover, and the 
sprinkling of blood, lest He that destroyed the first-born should 
touch them." Heb. 1 1 :28. That being the type, and this the anti- 
type certainly it is as important that we do God's will, lest we be 
not spared as one of the Bride company. 

One more feature of the Passover is worthy of notice: "And ye 
shall let nothing of it [the lamb] remain until the morning; and 
that which remaineth of it until the morning, ye shall burn with 
fire." Exo. 12:10. In this there is a very important truth to be 
observed; viz.: That those who were passed over, had eaten 
during the night. So, during this Gospel Night, we partake of our 
Lamb, [Christ] and apply the blood of sprinkling; but as there 
was none of the lamb to remain until the morning; so in like 
manner here; for, when we are ushered into the full dawn of day 
and the morning has fully come; no one can eat of the lamb, 
[that is, partake of the Divine nature-Immortality] as the Lord's 
Supper will be a thing of the past, for it is to be fulfilled when 
the kingdom has come, [that is, when the living saints are 
changed; and we are thus passed over,] and we need not longer 
keep it in remembrance of His death; hence it will be an 
ordinance forever past, as also will be baptism into Christ; for 
the Christ [anointed] head and body (Jesus and Bride) will be 
complete; therefore, these ordinances pass away with the ending 
(harvest) of the gospel age, and people (those in the light) will 
then look back on these things; [now glorious privileges] as we 
now look back to those ordinances obtaining under the law. 



Finally brethren and sisters in Christ, seeing these things are 
true; ought we not to be earnest? and especially as we have 
reasons for believing the time very short; for if we have not 
Christ formed within~and under the blood of sprinkling when 
the door closes the prize now offered, [Immortality and heirship 
with Jesus] is to us forever lost. 

Can aught on earth compare, 
With the glory we shall share? 
Is there aught to us so dear, 
Twill take the place of Jesus here? 

Ah no ! methinks there naught can be 
To ever sunder, He and me; 
For to Him, myself I give, 
Hence, I shall with Him ever live. 

A. D. J. 



R212:page6 

THE STRANGERS IN ZION. 

The idea which has become general among Christians, that it is 
a very easy thing to be a Christian, a life free from trouble, very 
respectable, containing all the pleasures of natural conditions 
without any of its evils, is one of the great evils of the present 
system of evangelization. The Evangelist says come, leave off 
liquor, profanity, lying and all great presumptuous sins, join our 
church, attend its meetings, give to its support regularly and 
believe, that you may go to heaven and you are one of the best 
of Christians. You will find through the church the passage way 
to wealth, to social standing and the most advantageous 
matrimony, and if you desire a valuable aid to political 
ambitions. Thus you will have the most pleasant and happy time 
of any people living on earth: come, then, with us. 

In this way Zion is full of "strangers"-- they are in her— her 
children, but not of God's begetting. They are tares sown by the 
wicked one; begotten of evil desire—desires of the flesh. The 
desire that she might be great, and her outward appearance and 
prosperity such as would commend her to the world and cause 
her to be admired; that by the numbers and wealth of these 
strange children she might build grander and costlier edifices 
with higher steeples; that her ministers should be noble men of 
titles and large revenues— the language artists of earth; that her 
music should be the most refined and artistic. 

Thus she draws nigh to the Lord with her lips, and honors Him 
with her mouth, while her heart is far from Him, courting the 
world and its vanities and pleasures. She has ceased to know as 
of yore that "the love of God constraineth," and "the goodness of 



God leadeth to repentance, " and now she knows Him only to 
fear, and God says: "Their fear toward me is taught by the 
precepts of men. Because of her love of the world, (which is 
enmity against God,) therefore has He permitted blindness to 
come upon her, and her teachers hath He covered. 

The prophecies and visions of God's word are become unto her 
"as the 

R213 : page 6 

words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is 
learned [a Doctor of Divinity,] saying: Read this I pray thee: and 
he saith I can not, for it is sealed; and the book is delivered to 
him that is not learned, saying: Read this I pray thee~and he 
saith I cannot, I am unlearned.... Therefore behold I will proceed 
to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous 
work and a wonder for the wisdom of their wise men shall 
perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." 
Isa. 29:10-14. 

Oh Zion how hast thou defiled thyself! how hast thou become 
Babylon! how hast thou multiplied thy riches but not thy joy! 
how hast thou increased thy children but not of God -for the 
multitude of thy strangers is as the dust. 

How is the mustard seed become a great tree, spreading itself in 
all the earth for the wicked, yea the fowls of the earth find a 
home in thy branches. Thou art become the habitation of devils, 
the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and 
hateful bird. How art thou become Babylon and confusion? it is 
even the voice of thy confused company of strange children. 

Woe unto thee O Zion, how art thou become Babylon and 
confusion: it is woe unto thee, for thine anguish and travail 
cometh: for the Lord shall take from thee His children, and in 
the multitude of the strangers thou shalt not have consolation. 
With anguish, and through great tribulation shall his children 
come out of thee. For the Lord shall sit as a refiner and purifier 
of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as 
gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in 
righteousness. But who may abide the day of His coming, 
(presence,) and who shall stand when he appeareth? For He is 
like a refiner's fire and like fullers soap." 

But Zion saith: "I am rich and increased in goods and have need 
of nothing," and knoweth not that she is poor, and wretched, and 
miserable, and blind, and naked. Thus saith the Lord: "I counsel 
thee, buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich, 
and white raiment that thou mayest be clothed... and anoint thine 
eyes with eye-salve that thou mayest see. So, then, because thou 
art neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth. Come 
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and 
receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) 



Would that God's children might all realize that their joy should 
come from their faith in His promises, and not from the world's 
smiles; that their pleasure should consist in self denial and 
crucifixion of the fleshly nature, and not from its gratification. 
Then could they indeed count present afflictions a joy, and 
"rejoice to be accounted worthy to suffer reproach for the name 
of Christ." They would think it not strange concerning the fiery 
trial which shall try them, as though some strange thing 
happened unto them: remember that when men shall revile you 
and say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my name's 
sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad." Yea, and whosoever will 
live Godly shall suffer persecution, and persecution has always 
come from some religious class in power. 



R213 : page 6 

"BY AND BY HE IS OFFENDED." 

Jesus tells us of a class who when they hear the truth receive it 
with joy until they find that it costs something to possess it; then 
they are disappointed and would rather surrender the truth than 
pay its inevitable price —persecution and self sacrifice. 

People under different circumstances have different trials to 
encounter and different valuable things to part with if they 
would "Buy the truth and sell it not." As a rule the price of it is 
demanded in those things which the purchaser values most 
highly. Usually social standing, reputation, a good name are the 
most prized of all things, and usually this is the price which we 
must pay for truth. No doubt it is to-day much as it was when 
Jesus was present in the form of a servant. The severest cross 
then was to confess and follow the lowly one, among whose 
followers were none of the Scribes and Pharisees-the 
theologians of that day- whose only answer to Jesus' teachings, 
&c, were, "Give God the glory, we know that this man hath a 
devil." 

The church rulers of that day were the most strict in outward 
forms of any period of Judaism, and no doubt they thought they 
did God service in warning the people against Jesus. They felt 
keenly the importance of their position as Teachers, and were 
proud of it, and hence were in no way prepared to receive the 
meek "Lamb of God." Jesus said they were "Blind leaders of the 
blind," and only the blind ones followed their leading. Those 
who had ears to hear and eyes to see followed the Lord. 

It must have been quite a trial- scorching-for the Jewish 
convert to realize that in believing this Jesus, they were 
opposing the great system of theology that had been in force for 
centuries. It must have tried their courage and faith intensely to 
realize that they, illiterate men, were opposing their ideas 



against the views of all the learned theologians, who pronounced 
the new Teacher a fanatic. Again, it would cut them off from the 
pecuniary advantages accruing from the friendship of the 
wealthiest and most influential class of society. All of these 
things were sore trials, but were put as trial in this way to 
develop and separate the "peculiar people," for Jesus declared 
that if any man was ashamed of him and his words— teachings- 
the same was not worthy to be his disciple. All of this finds its 
perfect parallel in this time of harvest, and now as then. He that 
is ashamed of the Lord's teachings-ashamed to confess his faith 
in His presence is unworthy to be His disciple and is not wanted. 

The theologians of that day threatened and scourged those who 
followed and believed in Jesus as the Christ. (They all believed 
that Christ was coming, but denied His presence and "knew not 
the time of their visitation.") Just so the theologians of to-day 
are the bitter opposers of the presence of Christ. Because they 
know not the time of their visitation; they are "stumbling" as did 
the Jewish church. They threaten and scourge in the synagogues 
(churches) now, too, except it is in a different way; it is now a 
scourging with the tongue-far sharper often and more powerful 
than a literal scourge. 

One of the severest trials at that day was to be put out of the 
synagogue; "They feared the Jews," for the Jews had agreed 
already, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he 
should be put out of the synagogue." (John 9:22.) This was the 
only "respectable church" in those days, and to the poor Jew it 
seemed disgraceful to be cut off from the church. No doubt they 
considered that their relationship to God was dependent upon 
their belonging to the nominal church. The new Teacher spoke 
against the Pharisees and Rulers of the synagogues, and said that 
in many things they were hypocritical; that for a pretence they 
made long prayers and drew nigh with their lips. Some felt the 
truth of this and would have followed 

R213 : page 7 

Jesus and have been willing to join His church, if He had one- 
but the church He represented was bound together by the truths 
he taught, and He said to them: "Rejoice rather that your names 
are written in heaven." (Luke 10:20.) 

So now, "in the days of the Son of Man," those who receive 
present truth are cut off from fellowship with the nominal 
churches. Having tasted the heavenly manna they are no longer 
satisfied with the husks. Yet they have so long been identified 
with the churches, have been so actively engaged in their 
socials, fairs, etc., which in their simplicity they have come to 
regard as "working for Jesus," that the thought of sundering 
those ties is like cutting off a right hand. But dear friends, 
remember that as then, so now, the nominal church stumbles and 
falls, (Isa. 28:13 and Rev. 18:2,21,) and those in it, whose names 



are written in the Lamb's book of life are the only ones now 
recognized as His church. 

As when then present Jesus used clay mixed with the product of 
His mouth to anoint literally the man born blind, and thus gave 
him sight, so now in this "harvest" the words of His mouth, 
mixed with and used through the clay of humanity, may have 
been his agency in the opening of your spiritual perceptions to 
understand his truth and see its beauties. It was on the Sabbath- 
the seventh day—that his eyes were opened: It is now the seventh 
day [--on a grander scale-the 6000 years of time having been 
complete in 1873.] It was by the power of the present Jesus that 
the clay and washing gave sight; so here also. 

Marvel not if in other respects the blind man's case was typical 
of yours. When he confessed his faith in Jesus they said: "Dost 
thou teach us?~and they cast him out of the synagogue." He 
might have kept quiet and believed in his heart and retained his 
standing in the church, but that would have been cowardly and 
had he done so-been ashamed of him he would have missed his 
subsequent communion with Jesus. So here, your eyes being 
opened to the recognition of the Lord's presence and blessings of 
light and truth, which in consequence have come to you-it 
remains with you as it did with him to keep silence and remain 
in the church, or confess his presence and be cast out; to hold 
"the fear of man which bringeth a snare" and be ashamed of 
Him and His words, or confess Him and be confessed before the 
Father and the 

R214:page7 

holy angels. If we love the opinions and respect of men and of a 
worldly "Babylon," church, and seek honor one of another, how 
shall we expect that honor which cometh of God only— To be of 
the bride of Christ. 

"Your brethren that hated you— that cast you out, said-'The Lord 
be glorified:' But He shall appear to your joy and they shall be 
ashamed." (Isa. 66:5.) 

And "Jesus heard that they had cast him out... and He found 
him," (vs. 35,) and became his teacher personally, and the man 
"worshiped Him." So with you, the Lord will hear of your 
witness for Him, and when you are separated from the nominal 
church— "Babylon"— your experience will be that Jesus himself 
will teach you and show you marvelous things of His truth and 
plan. And then you can indeed worship HIM-in spirit and in 
truth, and no longer worship the creeds of men. Jesus' 
explanation of our trial in receiving him will be explained to us 
as to him: "For judgment (a trial) am I come into this world that 
they which see not might see; and that they which see might be 
made blind." (vs. 39.) 



We know of some who are now experiencing this kind of 
scorching. They have heard the word and received it with joy- 
their eyes have been opened to see wonderful things in God's 
word. They have realized that the Lord is present and has 
opened their eyes-they have confessed Him and denied not- 
they have been baptized typically in water, in a likeness of His 
death and raised in the figure. Now they are seeking daily to be 
baptized into death~the death of the old natures-the likeness of 
Christ's. The sun of persecution and reproach has risen and the 
scorching has commenced. If they be stony ground hearts their 
profession and all will wither away and die out, but if good 
hearts, the seed will continue to grow and yield fruit which the 
sun will only ripen and perfect— not wither. 

To these we would say, remember how our master said that if 
any man would be His disciple (pupil-to learn of Him) he must 
take up His cross and follow Him. Remember how you 
promised to follow Him through evil and good report; 
remember, too, that He is an ever present help in time of trouble, 
and thus remembering, may you be enabled to "endure hardness 
as good soldiers"— "Endure as seeing Him that is invisible." 

"Beloved think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is 
to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you. If 
ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the 
spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: On their part He is 
evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified. Nothing glorifies 
God's name and character more than does the grand plan which 
He is showing to us, and which we preach. Rejoice inasmuch as 
ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when his glory shall 
be revealed ye may be glad, also, with exceeding joy." (1 Pet. 
4:12-14.) 



R214 : page 7 

WANTED 1,000 PREACHERS. 

A vast field is open for the employment of the time and talent 
of every consecrated man and woman to whom the Lord has 
committed a knowledge of His truth. 

The harvest message that the King has come, and the separation 
between wheat and tares is progressing, and the opportunity for 
seeking the prize of the high calling to joint heirship with Christ 
as His Bride is soon to end, are important items of truth for the 
entire "household of faith." The knowledge of the plan of God 
as it relates to the blessing of "all the families of the earth" in 
"the ages to come, " and other information concerning the 
manifold grace of God, whereof he has made us stewards, (to 
distribute and use) would be of incalculable value and aid to 



many who so soon will find themselves assaulted with the errors 
of Infidelity, Spiritualism, etc. 

It seems as though the language of Jesus, (Matt. 20:7,) is 
applicable now~"About the eleventh hour (five o'clock P.M.- 
only one hour before the labor of the day would cease) he went 
out and found others standing idle.... He saith to them, 'Go ye 
also into the vineyard and whatever is right that shall ye 
receive.'" 

The church is God's vineyard and we are just at the close of the 
Gospel day. Let us all go in, thankful for the opportunity to be 
co-workers with God here; and if faithful hereafter also. There is 
so great a variety of work that all may find employ-all were 
hired in the parable. If you have a half hour, or an hour, or two, 
or three, you can use it and it will be acceptable with the Lord of 
the harvest. Who can tell the blessings which may flow from 
one hour's service under God's direction. 

To those so situated that they can give one-half or more of their 
time exclusively to the work of the Lord, we have a plan to 
suggest. [We refer to those who have not families dependent on 
them for support- both men and women,] viz: That you go forth 
into large or small cities, according to your ability, as 
Colporteurs or Evangelists, seek to find in every place the 
earnest Christians, many of whom you will find possessed of a 
zeal for God, but not according to knowledge; to these seek to 
make known the riches of Our Father's grace, and the beauties of 
His word, giving them tracts; and as a work of kindness and love 
to them, endeavor to sell them the "Day Dawn," or to take their 
subscription for the "Watch Tower," [or if interested, but too 
poor to purchase, presenting the same as a gift from God.] 

As few could afford to travel, pay their board and clothe 
themselves without some income, we propose to furnish the 
TRACTS and DAY DAWNS free, and to allow any such person 
to take subscriptions for the WATCH TOWER, using the money 
obtained from both of these sources, ("Day Dawn and Watch 
Tower,"- the Tracts are free and must not be sold,) in defraying 
necessary expenses. Should your receipts be more than would be 
needed to pay expenses, (not at all probable,) you would be 
expected to make some returns to us. 

Now, who has a burning desire to go and labor in the Vineyard, 
and has been praying that the Lord would open the way. Is not 
this the way? This offer is made to you by the 

"WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY." 

The immense proportions which the tract work seems to be 
assuming suggested the idea of a combination of effort in this 
direction, and the result is the forming of this Society. There is a 
great demand for tracts. Over 900,000 pages have already gone 
out, and we are now making contracts for several millions of 



pages. We trust that the Lord may be pleased to use these as the 
agencies for opening blind eyes to the beauties of His word, as 
He once used even clay and spittle to open natural eyes. 

To all we would say: Order all 

R214 : page 8 

the tracts you can use to God's glory. We repeat our previous 
suggestion, viz: That you give them, not all at once, but one at a 
time, and generally in their order as issued-keeping a list. 



R216:page8 



HOW TO TEACH. 



To these who would go forth to use either much or little of their 
time, we would say: It is a matter of great importance not only 
to teach the right thing but to present truth in a proper manner 
and order. This may be observed as a rule of life, pertaining to 
everything we undertake: if we would reap good fruit we must 
not only plant good seed, but it must be planted at a proper time, 
in a soil previously made ready, and it must be cared for until it 
becomes possessed of strength. So, too, must the seed be 
carefully, prayerfully and wisely sown, and the words of our 
Master are: "Be ye wise as serpents but harmless as doves." 

Present first the Restitution and the beauties of God's unfolding 
plan; then show that all this awaits and is dependent on the King 
and kingdom coming. Then, when your hearer or reader has 
come to love the King and to long for his kingdom, may be quite 
soon enough to present the manner of His coming-that it is not 
Jesus the man but Jesus a spiritual being, who comes, unseen, 
except to the Bride's eye of faith, enlightened by the golden 
candlestick— the word of truth. 

And lastly present "the time, that now we are "in the days of the 
Son of Man," "the day of the Lord" -if they scoff and say, 
"where is the promise of His coming~(parousia~ presence) 
while all things continue as they were?" (2 Pet. 3:4.) Point them 
to Matt. 24:37 and Luke 17. But let time be the last part of the 
"good news," and tell no one of the time and presence, except 
they show that they have "an ear to hear," and "him that hath an 
ear let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches," not 
unto the world. 



R215 : page 8 



A PRAYER FOR LIGHT 

[These lines were written by Mrs. Commodore Inman, of 
Philadelphia, whose husband gave the name to the popular line 



of trans- Atlantic steamers. They are only recently from her pen, 
though she is upwards of eighty years of age.] 

Life! great mystery! Who shall say 
What need hath God of this poor clay? 
Formed by his hand with potent skill- 
Mind, matter, soul and stubborn will; 

Born but to die; sure destiny-death. 

Then where, Oh, where this fleeting breath? 

Not one of all the countless throng, 

Who have lived and died and suffered long, 

Returns to tell the great design- 
That future-which is yours and mine. 
We plead, Oh God! for some new ray 
Of light for guidance on our way; 

Based not on faith, but clearer sight, 
Dispelling these dark clouds of night; 
This doubt, this dread, this trembling fear; 
This thought that mars our blessings here; 

This restless mind, whose bolder sway 
Rejects the dogmas of the day 
Taught by jarring sects and schools, 
To fetter reason with their rules. 

We seek to know Thee as Thou art- 
Our place with Thee-and then the part 
We play in this stupendous plan, 
Creator Infinite, and man. 

Lift up this veil obscuring sight, 
Command again: "Let there be Light ! " 
Reveal this secret of Thy throne; 
We search in darkness the unknown. 

The above we clip from one of the daily papers, because it so 
clearly shows the longings and groanings of creation. The 
"whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until 
now," "for the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the 
manifestation of the sons of God." (Rom. 8:19-22.) From how 
many hearts this wail and groan for truth ascends to God we 
may never know in this life, but certain it is that freedom of 
thought (unsectarian- not creed-bound) is largely on the 
increase. 

Even the natural man is so fashioned (mentally) in the image of 
his creator, that with intelligence, (notwithstanding the depravity 
and degradation under which he now is) he cannot but look 
upward and realize that there must be a great Creator: and 
reasoning further, he knows that he must have been created with 
reference to some great plan; and reasoning that so great and 
powerful a being must be great in Love and benevolence as well 



as in power, he longs to know something of that plan and his 
part in it. He looks about him for a solution of the mystery of his 
being and future, as though expecting that the great loving One 
would have anticipated his wants and have made preparation for 
their answer. 

Before him stands the Christian world with its hundreds of sects 
and isms and creeds of men; each contradicting more or less the 
others- each claiming the Bible as its text book and guide—each 
supporting its claims by some (often very few) passages from 
that book. He is confused, yet listens. They all declare man's sin 
and need of heavenly help; that commends itself to him as truth; 
they each point to God as the only helper, and most of them to 
Jesus as the ransom from sin and death. This is not 
unreasonable. He listens, still they offer no solution to the 
mystery, whence came sin and why? But they begin to describe 
God as either a being so weak and helpless that he could neither 
prevent sin nor abolish it, or else as a loveless one who 
possessed the power to overthrow sin and evil, and could elect 
all the race to glory and happiness, as well as the few whom 
they claim will be so blessed, but did not want to-wanted to 
illustrate His great power at the expense of the endless torment 
of his weak and helpless creatures. He hears, but neither of these 
views give him rest. No, he "groans" show me a God not only 
possessed of more power than myself but one also possessed of 
wisdom to frame a plan in harmony with a love and mercy 
greater than my own, and I will worship Him. 

Thus not only does the reflective natural man find no rest, but 
those in the church who are possessed of the best and most 
loving minds (and therefore most God-like and Christ-like) 
groan and agonize and pray for light, by which they can see 
God's love; for all who know him at all, know that "God is 
love." The condition of this last mentioned class is described by 
the prophet (Isa. 28:20.) "For the bed (theological resting place), 
is shorter than a man can stretch himself on it." The creeds may 
serve as a resting place for those who are curled up in 
selfishness and fast asleep, but when they awaken and attempt to 
stretch themselves, they will find it no longer a resting place. 

And now dear brethren and sisters what have we to offer these 
distressed ones? Thank God (to Him be all the glory) we are 
living in the morning of the Millennial Day when the "mystery 
of God" is being finished-completed, and the fragments of 
truth, held by the various denominations of Christendom, are 
taking their places in one great, grand, harmonious PLAN, based 
not on isolated passages of Scripture, but comprehending and 
including every passage in harmony- Showing the selection by 
FAITH of "a little flock" in order that in God's due time the 
masses of mankind should be blessed through these —showing 
the necessity of Evil in the proper education of man in order to 
prevent his ever choosing it or thinking it good in the future. 



The numbers of those who weep and mourn in Zion are on the 
increase daily, and it is your privilege and mine to comfort them 
and point them to the glorious plan, which illustrates our 
Father's glorious character to be, Wisdom, Power, Justice and 
Love combined. 

Are we using every effort to make known the riches of God's 
grace, which so many are ignorant of, yet all are longing to 
hear? Are we sparing ourselves either physical or mental 
exertion or pain? Are we selfishly satisfied to rest in God 
ourselves, and permit others to grope in darkness-groaning until 
by and by the Sons of God will be manifested with power? 
(Rom. 8:19.) If so, we are cherishing an un-Christ-like spirit and 
may never be exalted with those who walk in His footsteps as 
He hath set us an example-counting not their lives dear unto 
them. 

It is a glorious privilege to spread the truth and open blind eyes 
now, and if we do not love it enough to undergo some sacrifice 
for the privilege, we are not sufficiently interested to be among 
the few engaged in that glorious work in the ages to come. It is 
he that is faithful in the least that shall in due time be given 
greater opportunities. 



R214 : page 8 



THE JEWS. 



The condition of the Jews in Germany has long been one of 
exceptional honor and influence, and "In no country have they 
supplied such a large number of leading scholars, poets, judges, 
administrative officials, and politicians." But the old jealousy, 
which in the middle ages brought such terrible cruelties upon 
them, alike in Germany as elsewhere, seems still to exist, and 
has of late begun to manifest itself in the formation of "Anti- 
Semitic Leagues" in Berlin and elsewhere. The movement is 
said to have originated in certain discourses of the Court 
Chaplain, Dr. Stocker. The Emperor has been appealed to, and is 
said to have expressly commanded his Chaplain "to discontinue 
his effusions." The president of an Anti-Jewish Society started 
in Dresden "desires that the Jews be deprived of their political 
and social rights and privileges, and that the German 
government should purchase, or otherwise obtain possession of, 
Palestine, in order to force the Jews of Germany to emigrate en 
masse to the Holy Land. "-Glasgow Messenger. 



R217 : page 8 



IN NEWARK, N. J. 

The friends in Newark may expect three meetings on Sunday, 
April 10th. Bro. A. D. Jones and the Editor will meet with you. 
Bro. Jones will remain over and celebrate with you the Lord's 
Supper on the evening of its anniversary- April 14th. 



A CORRECTION. 

By mistake, an article appeared in last paper as an editorial 
which should have been credited to Bro. J. C. Sunderlin. It was 
headed "Looking unto Jesus." 



EXCUSE BRIEF LETTERS. 

The editor feels that he owes himself an apology. His time is 
very much occupied. The Watch Tower, the tracts, the Sunday 
and Wednesday meetings besides other necessary business 
occupy his time fully and the mail correspondence is necessarily 
much neglected. 

I receive and read with interest your many kind letters, but I 
cannot answer them all, much as I should like to: sometimes 
they go entirely unanswered and sometimes very briefly. 

I do not make these remarks to hinder your writing, but to 
excuse and explain what otherwise might seem like negligence 
or indifference. I am ever glad to hear from you— to know of 
your welfare and your trials and to learn your questionings -I 
can read ten letters, while I would be answering one— therefore 
write on, but accept the articles of the WATCH TOWER as 
special answers to your letters. 



DEAD SEA PRODUCTS. 

A French Company is said to have been recently formed for the 
purpose of utilizing the products of the Dead Sea. An engineer 
last May visited the ground, to report upon the feasibility of 
procuring from its waters and shores natron, salt, petroleum, 
sulphur and other chemical substances, to be brought by a small 
boat to the north-west shore, near Jericho, and thence to be 
carried to the Mediterranean Sea at Joppa. At the same point on 
the sea a small factory will be put up, to reduce crude materials 
to pure and more compact state. Should the scheme assume a 
practical shape it will do much to bring about that development 
of trade with the eastern shores of the Mediterranean which the 
study of prophecy leads us to expect. -Selected. 



REGULAR MEETINGS. 

We desire to make a list for our office of all places where our 
readers hold regular meetings and services of any kind, whether 
in churches, halls, or private houses. Evangelists and Teachers 
frequently pass the "twos and threes" en route from one point to 
another. 

If you have no gathering of this sort, let me recommend you to 
establish one in your own home with your own family, or even a 
few that may be interested. Read, study, praise and worship 
together, and where two or three are met in His name, the Lord 
will be in your midst-your teacher. Such was the character of 
some of the meetings of the church in the days of the Apostles. 
(See Philemon 2.) 



WHY EVIL WAS PERMITTED. 

Tract supplement No. 4, accompanies this number and will, we 
trust, be acceptable to you all. It is a subject much thought of by 
all, and more than one child has asked, "Why did God make the 
Devil?" It is a subject which should command some attention 
from all thinking Christians. 



R216:page8 

THE Turkish government in Palestine has secured 80,000 acres 
of land between Jerusalem and Jaffa, for a colony of Jews. The 
proposition is to open up a settlement for the persecuted 
Israelites in Europe; and England and America are raising funds 
for the project. 


