From Our Readers
The New Morality
Congratulations for your courage and timing in bringing before the public the articles about the new morality. (June 22, 1982) The subject is terrifying, alarming and scary, but true. Plain language and true issues that concern every human being. I think everybody should know the facts.
P. M., Florida
I read and reread your issue on “The New Morality.” (September 22, 1982, French edition) I was surprised and hurt. I didn’t think it was so serious and so extensive. Thank you for telling us the truth, for being practical and for giving us good advice on how to stay free of this world and its practices. Thank you for your frankness and the concern that you have for us.
S. B., Canada
A Shocking Injustice
I read the article “A Shocking Injustice!” [the Oneda trial and conviction, Italy] in your October 22, 1982, issue. Clearly the parents have been wronged. They have been treated as the worst kind of criminals. Not they but the authorities responsible for such illegal treatment have broken the law. Let us hope that in the next trial justice will not continue to be trampled upon.
D. K., Germany
About Ulcers
May I heartily commend you on the article “So You Think You Have an Ulcer?” (September 8, 1982) Having experienced a vagotomy operation myself four years ago, I found the article so fascinatingly accurate and practical. In fact, if I had had the wealth of information the article contains, I might have avoided getting an ulcer, or certainly have handled the situation better than I did. Keep up the good work!
I. B., England
Keeping Your Job
I want to thank you for the important information presented in your magazine. I work in a firm where there is a big problem of employees’ leaving the job. Many do not worry about keeping their job. I remembered the article “Keeping Your Job” published in an older issue. (March 8, 1981) I reread it and then made a photocopy of it and put it in a plastic envelope and took it to my manager. He was so enthusiastic that at the next meeting of workers he read the entire article to the 100 employees attending. The results were very satisfying. And 10 of them asked for subscriptions for Awake!
H. M., Brazil
Sugar​—How Sweet?
May I tell you how much I enjoyed the articles on “Sugar​—How Sweet?” (November 22, 1982) It proved what I knew was true in my case, and that is that sugar raises my blood pressure. So I can’t indulge in eating it. Now maybe my doctor will believe it, because I plan to show the article to him. I’ve been trying to convince him for years. Thank you so much.
B. P., California

