Announcements
WARNING OF ASSAULT BY GOG OF MAGOG—Ezek. 38:3, 4; 39:1, 2.
The Scriptures clearly show that in these concluding days of this “system of things” God’s servants will be faced with a great test. Led by Satan, prophetically described as Gog of Magog, the visible and invisible foes under his direction will combine to bring about the undoing, if possible, of those who worship God. But Satan will not be successful, for Jehovah has promised to protect his own. Are you assisting others to fortify themselves by taking in knowledge of God? During September take part in house-to-house witnessing with Jehovah’s witnesses, and share in offering either the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures or the New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures (Vol. I) and a hard-bound Bible study aid book on a contribution of $2.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society holds its annual meeting on October 1 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. During 1954, October 1 falls on Friday, on which day the meeting will be held at 10 o’clock in the forenoon. At that time the annual meeting will be held in the newly constructed Kingdom Hall and registered office of the Society, which is located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, corner of Parkman Avenue, in Pittsburgh.
The members of the corporation will receive the usual letter of notice advising them of the meeting and sending them proxy forms. We should like to have all of the proxies returned to the office of the secretary of the Society not later than the 15th of September. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not. Those who are members of the corporation should be certain that the secretary’s office has their proper mailing address so that the notice of the annual meeting will be certain to reach them.
THE GIFT OF GOD
How can we receive the greatest of all gifts—the gift of everlasting life? God answers through his Word the Bible: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3, NW) It is essential, then, to take in knowledge of God’s loving arrangements and to learn what he would have us do in order to qualify for the gift of God. The specially prepared Bible study aid “This Means Everlasting Life” is a marvelous aid to clear understanding. You will enjoy reading all 320 pages of this book. It is obtainable on a contribution of only 50c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 26: Recognizing the Theocratic Organization for Life.
Week of October 3: Examples of Recognizing the Organization.

