Warning of Assault by Gog of Magog
WHO is Gog? Where is Magog? Whom does Gog assault? Why? When? What warning must be given? Wherein lies protection?
Gog of the land of Magog is mentioned in both the prophecy of Ezekiel and that of Revelation. The context of each, however, indicates that they refer to two different time periods, and our concern at this time is with the prophecy having the earlier fulfillment, in fact, in the very near future, that found in Ezekiel chapters 38 and 39.a
Who is Gog? From what appears in other parts of the Scriptures regarding Christians’ fighting not with flesh and blood and having invisible spirit enemies, and also from what appears in Ezekiel’s prophecy itself, it is apparent that Gog is none other than Satan the Devil, the prince of demons. This should not surprise us, for do we not find Satan referred to as the king of Babylon at Isaiah 14 and as the king of Tyre at Ezekiel 28?
This prophecy directed against Gog of the land of Magog has its fulfillment at the “end of the years,” or during the time of the end, particularly since 1919, after Satan and his demons were cast out of heaven, as noted in Revelation, chapter 12, and after the servants of Jehovah were restored to their “land” of pure worship as a New World society. So the term Gog would apply to Satan really only after that time, Magog fittingly describing the debased position he and his demons occupy since being cast out of heaven.
The prophecy shows Gog staging an all-out attack with a great host of mixed peoples, representing Satan’s forces, invisible and visible. And against whom does he come? Against Jehovah’s people who have been restored to their “land” of pure worship. And why does Gog come against them? Because their pure worship proves him a liar, because he envies their prosperity in both spiritual and material riches and numbers. He sees his own system of things going from bad to worse economically, politically, religiously, morally, and so is determined to wipe out the New World society, whose prosperity stands out in such contrast. Of course, actually Jehovah is leading Gog on to the attack by letting his people be in a seemingly vulnerable situation.
When will the attack come? Other Scriptures indicate that it will come within this generation. And how and where can we find protection? Not by cowardly fleeing from the “land” or condition of pure worship of Jehovah in the new system of things as members of a New World society; no, not by breaking faith with Jehovah. Rather, deliverance lies in not running. Jehovah will furnish protection to those who stand their ground today even as he did for those who remained true to him in times of old.
That attack by Gog upon Jehovah’s servants will force Jehovah God to take action and will result in the greatest demonstration of power that mankind has witnessed in its six thousand years of existence, and that elsewhere is termed “the war of the great day of God the Almighty,” Armageddon.—Rev. 16:14, 16, NW.
So that men of good will may be forewarned of the attack of Gog, let all those now dwelling securely in the “unwalled villages” tell to all who will hear the truth about the imminence of Gog’s attack and what they must do to find protection with the New World society in Jehovah’s new system of things.—Zeph. 2:1-3.
[Footnotes]
See The Watchtower, October 1, 1953, for details.

