From Our Readers
Hope for the Mentally Ill
I am writing to express my gratitude for your articles on “Hope for the Mentally Ill.” (September 8, 1986) I am now being treated for mental illness. I have had problems for many years, but not knowing what to do, I just kept putting up with it. Then this past September my mind got particularly bad. I went to the hospital for an examination and was given medicine. My condition has improved considerably. I am happy you made the point that the medicines are not addictive and that those who take medication are not weak. I wish that the shame associated with accepting treatment could be done away with.
T. K., Japan
Nationalism
I cannot understand your constant criticism of nationalism when you try to maintain a nonpolitical stance. Religion, history, and a sense of nationality are the guiding tenets of human destiny. Many people maintain that Christ in his time on earth was a Jewish nationalist opposed to Roman rule.
J. M., Scotland
Regarding nationalism, British historian Arnold Toynbee said: “It is a state of mind in which we give our paramount political loyalty to one fraction of the human race . . . whatever consequences this may entail for the foreign majority of the human race.” Author Ivo Duchacek observed: “Nationalism divides humanity into mutually intolerant units.” Former UN Secretary-General U Thant observed: “So many of the problems that we face today are due to, or the result of, false attitudes . . . Among these is the concept of narrow nationalism​—‘my country, right or wrong.’” The renowned Argentinean writer Jorge Luis Borges stated that nationalism “is the arch-villain of all the evils. It divides people, it destroys the good side of human nature, it leads to inequality in the distribution of wealth.” As for Jesus Christ, his position was clearly expressed at John 18:33, 36 in his answer to Pilate’s question: “Are you the king of the Jews?” Jesus stated: “My kingdom is no part of this world.”​—ED.
Water Shortage
Please forward 200 copies of your issue “Are We Running Out of Water?” (November 22, 1986) How timely this material on water is, and how vital! Thank you for being Awake! to this most dangerous situation.
W. J. K., United States
Simple Ulcer Remedy?
I used the water treatment remedy from page 31 of your September 22, 1983, issue. I had been on Tagamet for months without being able to clear up a stomach problem or sufficiently reduce pain. I stopped the medication and drank a full 16 ounces of water at the times mentioned in your item and also any other time I had pain. When I drank the water, the pain was gone in ten minutes. In a short time I no longer needed antacids, and in a couple of months I no longer needed to follow this treatment. I could hardly believe that such a simple remedy that didn’t cost a penny worked!
C. G., United States
The item referred to was a report on a guest editorial by Dr. F. Batmanghelidj appearing in the June 1983 issue of the “Journal of Clinical Gastroenterology.” “Awake!” does not recommend one form of treatment above another but publishes items like this only as information for our readers. We are not encouraging all ulcer patients to abandon their prescribed medicine for this simple ulcer remedy, but we are happy to observe that some have benefited from the information.​—ED.

