Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
Men of faith turn to God for guidance. Regularly they talk to God in prayer, and they walk with God by ordering their lives in harmony with his Word. During August, Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to help others to appreciate the wisdom of walking and talking with God by presenting to them the 704-page Bible-study aid “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules!, along with a booklet, on a contribution of 75c.
ANNUAL MEETING
Yearly the annual meeting of the members of Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania is held on October 1, and in 1964 this date falls on Thursday. The meeting will be at ten o’clock in the forenoon on Thursday, October 1, and will be held at the office of the Society located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213.
A regular letter of notice of annual meeting will be sent to each of the members of the corporation. The members will wish to be certain that these letters of notice reach them by seeing to it that the secretary’s office has their present mail address to which to send the notices.
As is the usual procedure, the notices will be accompanied by proxies. The proxies should be returned by the members promptly in order to reach the office of the secretary of the Society not later than September 15. The proxy should be returned by each member whether the member is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
DO YOU UNDERSTAND THE LORD’S PRAYER?
How many times have you repeated the Lord’s prayer? Do you know what the two expressions mean or how God will answer such parts of that prayer: “Hallowed be thy name,” and, “Thy will be done in earth”? Here are two books written especially to show what the Bible has to say on these vital points: “Let Your Name Be Sanctified” and “Your Will Be Done on Earth.” Both are hard bound and total 768 pages. They can be yours for a contribution of only $1. Send today. You will be glad you did.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 13: The Identifying Mark of Love. Page 489.
September 20: “Love Never Fails.” Page 495.

