From Our Readers
Rich Nations Exploit Poor Ones  I am 14 years old, and I am very grateful to you for the series “Will Rich Nations Always Exploit Poor Ones?” (November 22, 1995) My geography teacher gave us an assignment to write on the subject “Misery.” I looked in newspapers and magazines but found nothing that would be suitable to use. Then, at the crucial time, this magazine arrived to serve as the basis for my report. I received the highest mark in the class, and I am very grateful for these articles.
A. O., Brazil
Compulsive Behavior  Thank you for the upbuilding article “Compulsive Behavior—Does It Control Your Life?” (February 8, 1996) I suffer from compulsive behavior, and it is very encouraging to know that I am not alone. It has bothered me very much since childhood. Since studying the Bible, I have been obsessed with the thought that I have sinned against the holy spirit. Gradually, I have got my problems under control. How good to know that Jehovah understands his imperfect servants!
A. B., Germany
I appreciated very much that our Creator understands this malady and that he “is greater than our hearts and knows all things.” (1 John 3:20) Please continue to publish articles of this kind; they are of great encouragement to us.
W. E., Switzerland
You cannot imagine how much this article comforted me. I have had terrible, blasphemous thoughts, which have led to depression and sometimes to thoughts of suicide. But now it is as if an enormous weight has been lifted off my shoulders, as I realize that Jehovah has not rejected me but loves me deeply.
I. B., France
Since I was small, I have washed my hands repeatedly. I check the stove three times, even if I have to return from outside to do it. I check that the tops are on my pans, that I have closed all the doors properly. I go to bed exhausted from battling compulsive behaviors. Thank you for your article.
M. P., Venezuela
Robins  I was enchanted by the article “The Friendly Robin.” (February 8, 1996) A few years ago, while digging a trench in the garden, I heard the delightful song of a robin that was standing on the nearby lawn observing me. No sooner had I tried to imitate its voice than it was standing beside me in the trench. The robin enjoyed picking out the insects that surfaced with each spadeful of soil. Please continue publishing reports about the animal world!
F. S., Germany
Icebergs  Thank you for the article “Crystal Palaces of the Sea.” (December 8, 1995) Just reading that material and imagining myself in front of one of those gigantic blocks of ice, I was impressed by the marvelous things that our Creator, Jehovah God, has provided for our pleasure. As the psalmist said of Jehovah at Psalm 104:24, “the earth is full of [his] productions.”
A. I. B., Brazil
School Essay  The story of Eric’s school essay “If I Could Change a Moment in Time” (February 22, 1996) really moved me. It aroused in me a sense of admiration and gratitude for his parents. They must have dedicated much time and energy to raising a son who has such remarkable courage and love for Jehovah, despite his tender years.
C. N., Italy

