





LIFE STORY
I Have Never Stopped Learning
AS TOLD BY JOEL ADAMS

I THANK Jehovah for the privilege of having him as my “Grand Instructor.” (Isa. 30:20) He teaches his worshippers by means of his Word, the Bible; his amazing creation; and his organization. He also uses fellow humans​—our spiritual brothers and sisters—​to help us. Though I am almost a century old, I am continuing to benefit from Jehovah’s instruction in all those ways. Let me explain how that is so.





With my family in 1948






I was born in 1927 in a small town near Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A. Father and Mother had five children​—Jetha, Don, me, Karl, and Joy. We were all determined to serve Jehovah whole-souled. Jetha went to the second class of Gilead in 1943. Don, Karl, and Joy went to Bethel in Brooklyn, New York, in 1944, 1947, and 1951 respectively. Their fine example, as well as that of my parents, truly impressed me.



OUR FAMILY LEARNS THE TRUTH

Father and Mother were Bible readers who loved God and instilled that love in us children. Dad, however, had lost his respect for the churches after serving as a soldier in Europe during World War I. Mother, very thankful that he had come home alive, said to him: “Karl, let’s go to church like we used to.” Dad replied: “I’ll walk you there, but I am not going in.” She asked: “Why not?” He answered: “During the war, clergymen who belonged to the same religion but were on opposite sides of the conflict blessed the soldiers and their weapons! Was God on both sides?”
Later while Mother was at church, two of Jehovah’s Witnesses called at our house. They offered Father the two-volume Bible study aid Light, which discussed the book of Revelation. Dad was interested and accepted the offer. Once Mother saw the books, she began to read them. Then one day she saw a notice in the local newspaper inviting interested ones to a Bible study with the help of the Light books. She decided to go. On her arrival, an older woman answered the door. Holding up one of the books, Mother asked, “Are you studying this here?” The answer? “Yes, sweetheart, come in.” The next week Mother took us children with her, and after that we went regularly.
At one meeting, the conductor asked me to read Psalm 144:15, which says that those who worship Jehovah are happy. That text impressed me, as did two other verses​—1 Timothy 1:11, which says that Jehovah is “the happy God,” and Ephesians 5:1, which urges us to “become imitators of God.” I concluded that I should take pleasure in what I could do for my Creator and thank him for the privilege​—truths that became pivotal to my life.
The closest congregation was 32 kilometers (20 mi) away in Chicago. Nevertheless, we attended, and my knowledge of the Bible grew. I recall that on one occasion the conductor called on Jetha to comment. Listening to her, I thought: ‘I knew that. I could have put my hand up to comment.’ I began preparing and making my own comments. More important, I grew spiritually, right along with my siblings. I got baptized in 1941.



LEARNING FROM JEHOVAH AT CONVENTIONS

I especially remember the 1942 convention in Cleveland, Ohio. Over 50 other locations in the United States were tied in by telephone. Our family stayed in tents in a nearby “trailer city” compound that our brothers arranged. World War II was then raging, and opposition to Jehovah’s Witnesses was growing. In the evening, I saw groups of brothers parking their cars with their lights facing out. All had agreed to have someone in each car stand guard throughout the night. If there was any sign of trouble, the brothers were to turn on their headlights to blind the attackers and to honk the horns. Others could then rush over to help. I thought, ‘Jehovah’s people are well-prepared for everything!’ Thus reassured, I slept soundly, and we had no trouble.
Years later, reflecting on that convention, I realized that my mother showed no hint of anxiety or fear. She placed full trust in Jehovah and his organization. I will never forget her fine example.
Not long before that convention, Mother enrolled as a regular pioneer. So she took special note of the talks discussing full-time service. On our way home, she said, “I would like to continue pioneering, but I cannot do that and take good care of our home.” She then asked if we would help. We said yes, so she assigned each of us one or two rooms to clean before breakfast. After we left for school, she would check that the house was in good order and then go out in the ministry. She was a busy woman, but she never neglected her children. When we came home for lunch and after school, she was always there for us. Some days after school, we went with her in the ministry, which helped us to understand what it meant to be a pioneer.



STARTING FULL-TIME SERVICE

I began pioneering at the age of 16. Although Father had not become a Witness yet, he was interested in how I was doing. One evening, I told him that despite my trying hard, I had not found anyone who wanted a Bible study. After a pause, I asked, “Would you be willing to study with me?” He reflected for a moment and replied, “I cannot think of a good reason not to.” Yes, my first Bible student was my father. What a privilege that was!
We studied the book “The Truth Shall Make You Free.” As our study progressed, I realized that Father was helping me to be a better student and teacher. For instance, one evening after we read a paragraph, he said: “I see what the book says. But how do you know that the book is right?” I was not prepared for that, so I said: “I cannot prove it to you now, but by our next study, I should have an answer.” And I did. I found verses that supported the point we had been discussing. Thereafter, I prepared better for our study, learning to do research. That contributed to my spiritual growth and that of my father. He applied what he was learning and got baptized in 1952.



NEW GOALS FURTHERED MY EDUCATION

I left home when I was 17. Jethaa became a missionary, and Don, a Bethelite. Both loved their assignments, which greatly encouraged me. So I applied for Bethel and for Gilead School and left the matter in Jehovah’s hands. The result? I was invited to Bethel in 1946.
Over the years, I have had many different Bethel assignments, so I was able to learn many new things. Indeed, in my 75 years at Bethel, I was taught how to help make books and how to do accounting. I also learned the import and export trade. Above all, though, I enjoy the ongoing spiritual education that Bethel provides by means of morning worship and Bible-based lectures.




Teaching a class of congregation elders



I also learned from my younger brother, Karl, who came to Bethel in 1947. He was an excellent student and teacher of the Bible. I once sought his help with a talk that I was assigned to give. I explained to Karl that I had gathered a lot of material but was struggling with how to use it. He led me to the solution with one question, “Joel, what is your theme?” I quickly got his point​—just use the relevant material and put the rest aside. I never forgot that lesson.
To be happy at Bethel, we need to have a full share in the ministry, and that can result in encouraging experiences. One that I vividly recall began early one evening in the Bronx in New York City. A brother and I called on a woman who had previously accepted The Watchtower and Awake! We introduced ourselves, saying, “This evening we are helping people to learn upbuilding things from the Bible.” She replied, “If it’s about the Bible, come in.” We read and discussed several scriptures about God’s Kingdom and the coming new world. That obviously impressed her, for she invited several of her friends to join us the following week. She and her husband later became faithful servants of Jehovah.



LEARNING FROM MY MARRIAGE MATE

I had been looking for a marriage partner for some 10 years before I met my wife. What helped me to find a suitable wife? I gave prayerful thought to the question, ‘What do I want to do after we get married?’




With Mary in the circuit work



Following the 1953 convention at Yankee Stadium, I met a sister named Mary Aniol. She and Jetha had been in the second class of Gilead, and Mary was my sister’s missionary companion. With much enthusiasm, Mary told me about her missionary assignments in the Caribbean and the Bible studies she had conducted over the years. As we got to know each other, we realized that we had been pursuing the same spiritual goals. Our love for each other grew, and we were married in April 1955. In many ways, Mary proved to be a gift from Jehovah and an example to imitate. She was happy in whatever assignment she was given. She worked hard, sincerely cared about others, and always kept Kingdom interests in first place. (Matt. 6:33) We served in the circuit work for three years, and in 1958, we were invited to Bethel as a couple.





I learned a lot from Mary. For example, early in our marriage, we decided to do our Bible reading together, covering about 15 verses at a time. After one of us read a section, we would comment on the scriptures and discuss how to apply them in our life. Mary often told me things she had learned at Gilead or in her missionary service. These discussions gave me insight and helped me to improve my talks and the personal encouragement I give to sisters.​—Prov. 25:11.
My dear Mary died in 2013. How I long to see her in the new world! In the meantime, I am determined to continue learning, trusting in Jehovah with all my heart. (Prov. 3:5, 6) I find both comfort and joy in thinking about what Jehovah’s people will do in the new world. That certainly will include learning new things from and about our Grand Instructor! Yes, I cannot thank him enough for all that he has taught me so far and for his many expressions of undeserved kindness.



a See the life story of Jetha Sunal in The Watchtower of March 1, 2003, pp. 23-29.

