From Our Readers
Down’s Syndrome
I have been an Awake! reader for over 25 years, but this was the first time I read an article dealing with a situation so near my own. I am the mother of a 22-year-old son who suffers from Down’s syndrome. I read the article about Valérie in your French edition over and over again. (English, January 8, 1984) It has helped me to overcome the feelings of guilt, shame and failure that have been assailing me for 22 years. Valérie’s parents expressed their feelings quite openly and their candor moved me to reconsider things to see what I can do in a positive way for my son who is in an institution. Thank you for this unexpected help! I am on the right path now!
Name withheld, France
Homosexuality
In my early youth I always wanted to be a woman and as a result became homosexual. The churches I attended encouraged me to assume the role I wanted. So I pierced my ears, began to take hormones to enlarge my breasts and began to wear women’s clothes. My sister, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, showed me Bible texts condemning homosexual practices, but I merely answered that I did not believe the Bible. She gave me some magazines to read, including an Awake! that carried the story of a man who was in a similar situation. (June 22, 1980) And he was able to desist from homosexual practices. I took this to heart, began to look into the Bible and learned the power of prayer. In time, I accepted a home Bible study and was able to stop my homosexual practices, and now I am a dedicated servant of Jehovah. Thanks to Awake! and all the other help I have received.
J. R., Brazil
Leaving Home
Thank you so much for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Ever Grow Up if I Don’t Move Out?” (September 8, 1984) I pray that all young ones will read and apply that article. I moved away from home to grow up, and whenever I think about it I regret it. I can’t help but think how much easier it would have been to grow up with the help of people who really loved me and cared about my future. My advice for young people would be to stay home and learn as much as possible. Then when the time comes and they have reached true adulthood, they will have a much easier and happier time of living on their own.
A. H., Nevada
Keeping in Touch
We who are serving as missionaries far away from home especially appreciate the article “Will You Keep in Touch?” (October 8, 1984) Receiving letters from loved ones and friends is a real joy. It’s so encouraging to know that one is remembered by someone. If one could see the beaming face of a loved one living far away who has just received news from home, I’m sure more of us would be moved to take the time to write. Thank you very much for this well-written, thought-provoking article.
M. and C. S., Senegal

