World Government​—How It Will Be Realized
SINCE 1945 three major international organizations have been formed to keep world peace: the UN (United Nations) in 1945, NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) in 1949 and the Warsaw Pact (Warsaw Treaty Organization) in 1955. Not one has made major progress toward global peace. As a matter of fact, since 1945 the world has been rocked by more than 100 armed conflicts, including 40 major wars, which have slaughtered more than 30 million people, and it is now tottering on the brink of a nuclear fire storm.
Despite the sincerity of its supporters, the UN has proved to be toothless. The other two organizations have experienced wrangling among their member nations. While countries of NATO and the Warsaw Pact point their sinister nuclear missiles at one another, and their citizens nervously pray that these will never be launched, the UN sits embroiled in debates as to who is to blame for the arms race. If your trust is in these human institutions to unite the earth in peace, it is misplaced. All of them have dangerous flaws, some of which are more visible than others.
But suppose there was a ruler who was just and compassionate, who understood the principle of biological interdependence and had the means to unite the world in peace. Would he not be able to bring about a successful world government? Of course! But where can we find such a ruler?
The Incoming World Government
The Creator of the heavens and the earth, Jehovah God, intimately knows the interconnections of all things, animate and inanimate. It was, in fact, because of his will that “they existed and were created.” (Revelation 4:11) He, obviously, is above petty nationalism; “in the heavens is his throne.”​—Psalm 11:4.
Moreover, Jehovah God has declared himself concerned about the problem of world government and has selected a tested, proven and perfect administrator as King. This One is superhuman, yet related to all mankind​—his Son, Jesus Christ. (Hebrews 5:7-10) Some may laugh at the idea of Christ as Ruler, as a real King. Why?
Well, many people imagine Jesus either as a cuddly baby wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger or as a pitiful creature nailed to a cross. In both cases he is seen as helpless. But is either of these a true picture of Jesus today?
No! Jesus Christ is a very much alive Prince, being the Son of the Almighty King, Jehovah God. Jehovah gave him rulership and authority. The ancient Bible prophecy foretold: “The princely rule will come to be upon his shoulder. And his name will be called . . . Prince of Peace.” (Isaiah 9:6) This prophecy was fulfilled when, after his death on a stake at Calvary, Jesus was raised to heavenly life. Eventually, in heaven, he was enthroned as God’s King.​—Acts 2:22-36; Revelation 19:16; 20:6.
So Jesus no longer resembles a helpless babe or a vulnerable victim. He is God’s reigning King! Already more than two and a half million people, living in the four corners of the earth, willingly submit to his rulership. They are living testimony that it really does work. Soon Christ will be used by God to bring peace to all the earth and unite mankind under his righteous rulership.​—Isaiah 11:1-9.
What One Rule Will Do for Earth
World rule by Jehovah God through his Son, Jesus Christ, will successfully overcome all obstacles. Righteous-hearted mankind will experience a global change based on genuine caring for one another.
‘Can people really change?’ some may ask. Yes, people can and do change their beliefs, if there is a powerful enough motivation.
Imagine a world where knowledge of technology will be used to advance human society in a good way because that knowledge is tempered with genuine concern for others and for the rest of creation!
Imagine a world where there will be no fear of war, ever again. Instead, all earth’s resources will be put exclusively to peaceful use.
‘Stop there!’ some may shout. ‘That’s just old religious twaddle.’ To those who raise this objection, we ask: Has man’s rule worked? Can you point to sound reasons for believing that it ever will? If not, then why not at least seriously examine the Bible to see what one government by God would do for earth and if it could work?
The following are some more changes God’s rule promises to bring to the earth.
[Box/​Pictures on page 8, 9]
Food for All:
  “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.”​—Psalm 72:16.
Housing and Work for All:
  “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy . . . and the work of their own hands my chosen ones will use to the full.”​—Isaiah 65:21, 22.
Good Health for All:
  “And no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”​—Isaiah 33:24.
Full Disarmament:
  “He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth. The bow he breaks apart and does cut the spear in pieces; the wagons he burns in the fire.”​—Psalm 46:9.
Peace Earth Wide:
  “In his days the righteous one will sprout, and the abundance of peace until the moon is no more.”​—Psalm 72:7.
[Box on page 9]
  Some may feel that these are simplistic answers to multidimensional problems​—a Utopian dream. Again, we ask: Realistically, do you believe man will solve these problems? Or would not man’s Creator be the only one with the ability to do this? We invite you to examine the Bible carefully to learn what more than two million people already have proved for themselves​—that God’s rule works!

