How to Use Who Are Doing Jehovah’s Will Today?
New Brochure Designed to Direct Bible Students to the Organization
 1. What is the threefold purpose of the Jehovah’s Will brochure?
1 Have you started using the new brochure Who Are Doing Jehovah’s Will Today? Its purpose is (1) to familiarize Bible students with us as a people, (2) to help them learn about our activities, and (3) to show them our organization in action. The Jehovah’s Will brochure contains one-page lessons that can easily be covered in just five to ten minutes at the end of each study.
 2. Describe the design and features of this brochure.
2 How It Is Designed: The brochure is divided into three sections, each of which discusses a different aspect of Jehovah’s organization, as noted above. The title of each of the 28 lessons is written as a question, and the bold subheadings that follow answer that question. Photographs from over 50 countries are labeled throughout to show the international scope of our work. A number of lessons have “Find Out More” boxes, which contain suggestions that you can encourage your student to pursue.
 3. How can we use the Jehovah’s Will brochure?
3 How You Can Use It: Start by calling attention to the question that is the title of the lesson. Then, as you read the lesson together, highlight the bold subheadings. Finally, consider the review questions at the bottom of the page. You can read the lesson straight through or read and discuss it in sections. Use your judgment in deciding which cited scriptures to read. Do not forget to consider the pictures and the “Find Out More” boxes. In most cases, the lessons should be discussed in order. However, feel free to jump ahead to a lesson that deals with something of immediate interest. For example, if an assembly or a convention is coming up, you could skip to lesson 11.
 4. Why are you happy to have this new tool?
4 When we study the Bible with someone, we help him to get acquainted with our heavenly Father. However, we also need to teach him about Jehovah’s organization. (Prov. 6:20) How happy we are to have this new tool that makes it easy to do so!

