Welcome Them!
 1. What occasion offers us an excellent opportunity to give a witness, and why?
1 No occasion offers us a better opportunity to give a witness than the annual Memorial observance. Consider: This year over ten million visitors are expected to attend the Memorial and hear about the two greatest expressions of love, which were manifested by the ransom. (John 3:16; 15:13) They will learn about the blessings available to them because of Jehovah’s gift. (Isa. 65:21-23) However, the speaker is not the only one who will give a witness on this occasion. All in attendance will have the opportunity to give a powerful witness by warmly welcoming the visitors.—Rom. 15:7.
 2. How can we warmly welcome visitors?
2 Rather than just finding your seat and silently waiting for the program to begin, why not take the initiative to introduce yourself to those nearby? Visitors may be nervous and unsure of what to expect. Our warm smile and friendly greeting will go a long way toward putting them at ease. To find out if someone is present as a result of receiving an invitation, you might ask if this is his first time attending one of our meetings or if he knows anyone in the congregation. Perhaps you can invite him to sit with you and share your Bible and songbook. If a Kingdom Hall is being used, it may be possible to give him a brief tour. After the talk, make yourself available to answer his questions. If your congregation must leave quickly to make room for another congregation, you might say: “I’d like to hear what you thought of the program. Is there a way that I can contact you?” Then make arrangements to follow up on the interest. Elders will especially want to be alert to encourage inactive publishers who attend.
 3. Why is it important that we take the initiative to welcome visitors at the Memorial?
3 For many visitors, this will be their first taste of the joy, peace, and unity of the spiritual paradise that we enjoy as Jehovah’s people. (Ps. 29:11; Isa. 11:6-9; 65:13, 14) What impression will visitors take away? Much will depend on our taking the initiative to welcome them.

