Announcements
STAYING AWAKE TO THE KINGDOM MINISTRY—1 Cor. 16:13, 14.
“Stay awake, stand firm in the faith, carry on as men, grow mighty. Let all your affairs take place with love,” counsels the inspired apostle Paul. His counsel is particularly important to us today. We must be awake, not asleep; firm, not yielding; manly and mature, not infantile and childish; mighty, not weak. And how do we acquire the desirable qualities spoken of? By faith in God and study of his strength-giving Word. Having come to an accurate understanding of Jehovah’s purposes for mankind, all of Jehovah’s witnesses will stay awake to their Kingdom ministry privileges this month by going to the homes of people to impart to them good news regarding God’s kingdom by Christ Jesus. Prompted by love for those who need this vital information, after giving a three-to eight-minute sermon, they will offer householders subscriptions for both The Watchtower and Awake! with six Scriptural booklets, on a contribution of $2 a year.
To awaken many more to the importance of the Kingdom, on Sunday, October 5, at each Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the world, in all languages, will be given the public talk “God’s Kingdom Rules—Is the World’s End Near?” This is the same speech that was so much enjoyed by over a quarter of a million persons at the Divine Will International Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses in New York. Be sure to be present and invite others to attend with you.
ARE YOU AWAKE?
We are living in momentous days, but are you awake to their significance? Are you informed on the issues and events of our day? Do you know how they relate to God’s Word? Are you alert to how discoveries by science confirm the Bible’s accuracy? Do you keep informed on the things learned in the many other branches of human knowledge and endeavor? The Awake! magazine will keep you awake to all these things. It is the companion magazine to The Watchtower. The popularity of Awake! is revealed by the fact that 2,800,000 copies are printed every issue. It is a magazine you should have in your home, especially if you are a busy person. Its short but meaty articles permit busy people to keep well informed on many branches of human knowledge, including world affairs. For the small amount of $1 it can be sent to you every two weeks for an entire year.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
October 26: Fight Materialism for Your Life. Page 581.
November 2: Self-Examination Vital to Fight Materialism. Page 597.

