Vol XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JULY 1, 1918 


No. 13 


A SOUND MIND 

"For Qod hath not given us the spirit of fear, tut of power and of love and of a sound mind." — 2 Timothy 1:7. 


Fear is one of the principal things that make life troublesome
. It was doubtless for this reason that our Master admonished
 us, saying, "Fear not, little flock." Fear, when it is unbalanced
 by hope, becomes desperation; and desperation spells 
misery. Fear is a prodigious magnifier, especially when it has 
been excited by any unusual object. The traveler rarely sees 
a small tiger; the landsman seldom experiences a gale at sea 
that is not a hurricane. 

In a Christian, the "fear of man that bringeth a snare" is 
counterbalanced by the fear of displeasing his Lord- As the 
Master said : "Fear not them that destroy the body but after 
that cannot touch the soul; but fear rather him who after 
he hath destroyed the body is able also to destroy the soul in 
Gehenna fire." 

We fear usually one or all of three things: weakness, disesteem
, mistakes — and the uncertainty which follows in their 
wake. Fear instilled into the mind of childhood unconsciously 
impresses and influences the whole life, years after the small incidents
 which gave rise to the fears have passed into oblivion. 

But the Apostle intimates in our text that the Father has 
not been content merelv to advise us to be fearless, but that 
he has given us those things which are necessary to put fear 
out of our lives. He has given us the spirit of power, i. e., 
power of purpose, which is courage; he has ^iven us the spirit 
of love, and the spirit of a sound mind. This is the powerful 
alliance against fear. For if we have power and courage we 
do not fear weakness; if we have love overflowing in our hearts 
we have that which makes us estimable in the Father's sight, 
and even to some extent in the sight of others. Hence we do 
not fear disesteem; for "there is no fear in love; perfect love 
casteth out fear." And if we have prudence, judgment, common
 sense, we have no fear of the desperation which needless 
mistakes bring. 

Courage may be likened to the little brother, love to the 


little sister, and common sense to the watchful guardian. 
Power might be disposed to use itself roughly at times; love 
might be too much impelled by tender feeling; but a sound 
mind modifies and directs them both. 

SOUND MIND MEANS SOUND JUDGMENT 

That quality which the Apostle terms "a sound mind" and 
which is popularly designated as "common sense" may be defined
 as the sound judgment of the mind when reflecting upon 
problems of truth and conduct, without bias from logical 
subtleties or selfish interests. Balanced judgment is as valuable
 as its application is rare. It is sometimes possessed to an 
astonishing degree — on matters of purely human import — by 
those outside of covenant relations with God. But this should 
not discourage us; for they were merely better born. 

But the Lord's people have a power within them which, if 
responded to and followed, will kelp develop the main features 
of a sound mind in them, no matter where they start on the 
scale. That power is a desire for the truth. Honesty, or a 
love of truth, is the basic requisite of a sound mind; for if 
we do not really desire the truth, then we are bound to become
 immersed in a hopeless tangle of illusions. One of earth's 
wise men has said: "The love of truth is the most noble 
quality of the human intellect, the most enjoyable in the interchange
 of confidences, yet of all qualities it is the most rare." 

Coupled to this desire for the truth is the capacity for its 
apprehension, which is possessed by every spirit-illumined 
child of God, and not by others. This fact is made plain by 
the Apostle: "The things of God knowcth no man, but the 
Spirit of God. Now we have received, not the spirit of the 
world, but the Spirit which is of God; that we might know 
the things that are freely given to us of God. Which tilings 
also Ave speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, 
b-t which the holy Spirit teacheth; comparing spiritual things 


[6281] 


US5 196) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


with spiritual. But the natural man receiveth not the things 
of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; neither 
oan he know them, because they are spiritually discerned .... 
but God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the 
Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God." 

Both the desire and the capacity for understanding the 
truth come from God. As we are again told: "It is God that 
worketh in you, both to "will and to do of his good pleasure." 
(Philippians 2:13) The desire for truth is from God, in the 
first place, while we are still natural men, in the sense that it 
is a fragment of the original likeness to our Creator. After we 
are begotten and illuminated by the holy Spirit this desire becomefl
 stronger an4 stronger and at the Bame time our minds 
are enabled to grasp the truth to an extent hitherto impossible. 

The Master himself places truth at the bottom of the 
structure when he says : "If ye continue in my word, then are 
ye indeed my disciples, and ye shall know the truth and the 
truth shall make you free." It is not merely doctrinal truth 
that we shall know, but also truth concerning ourselves and 
our spiritual status. How could we be set free from our own 
errors, if we did not desire and recognize the facts concerning 
ourselves? Common sense, or a sound mind, in the measure 
that it is possessed, enables one to see things as they are and 
to do things as they should be done. 

There is a number of elements which go to make up a 
sound mind, none of which must be overlooked. But let it not 
be thought that a sound mind is a passive thing, a kind of 
reference library. In some ways the everyday term "common 
sense" is to be preferred; for a sound mind means simply the 
capacity for sound, accurate, reliable judgment on the problems 
of life as they arise from day to day. 

PHILOSOPHY OFTEN UNESSENTIAL 

And let us observe right here that the philosophy of character
 development cannot be called a requisite as long as we 
are developing with reasonable satisfaction. It becomes valuable
 to us chiefly when something is wrong. It assists us to 
recognize just how far we have progressed and how far we have 
retrograded, and where the greatest pressure should be exerted
, to start us on again. But perception and reflection will 
accomplish nothing in us worth while without obedience. Obedience
, or conformity to the instructions given us by our Lord, 
is the vital thing in any case, whether we understand all of the 
steps of the process or not. More than one scriptural expression
 emphasizes this thought: "If ye know these things, h-appy 
are ye if ye do them"; "If ye do these things, ye shall never 
fall," etc. 

Our Christian course is like an apprenticeship at a trade. 
The master workman might sit down and attempt to explain 
the whole thing to the boy at the start, but very little would 
the boy understand or remember. What he does do is to say: 
"Now you do just as I tell you; and I will guarantee that 
after so long a time you, too, will be a master workman." So 
the Lord says, essentially, to us: "If ye love me keep my commandments
"; 'and I will make you meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light. 1 The Lord does invite us to 'reason 
with him* and to 'think on these things/ still he makes it likewise
 plain that we can know only in part, until that which is 
perfect is come. 

We have probably all known some old brothers or sisters 
who had grown rich in the spirit of the Lord, not because they 
were able to explain the process of growth, but because, like 
the lily, they lent themselves to sun and air, and growth was 
a natural result. It never occurred to them to wonder why a 
certain command was given. It was enough to know that it 
was given. When they heard the Lord say: "Love your enemies
; bless them that curse you and pray for them that despitefully
 use you and persecute you for my sake," they simply 
loved their enemies, they blessed and they prayed without 
doubt or hypocrisy. When he said to them: "If ye forgive 
not men their trespasses, how can ye expect your heavenly 
Father to forgive your trespasses?" they simply forgave freely, 
up to seventy times seven and, like God, were too courteous 
ever to mention an account once cancelled. When he said: 
"Seek, ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness," they 
sought that kingdom. When he said: "Centre your mind on 
things above and not on things on the earth," they have simply 
done it, and in doing it have shown the greatest wisdom that 
was ever shown. When he said: "Speak evil of no man." 
they have kept their lips from speaking guile. 

It is largely when we realize ourselves at a standstill, or 
as making very slow progress that we can most profitably consider
 the whys and wherefores. 

STEPS TO GOOD JUDGMENT 
Perception, memory, thought, alertness, deduction, foresight
, reason, judgment: these are the steps which must be 

[628 


taken, consciously or unconsciously in the formation of sound 
judgment on any question. 

Perception stands for the first impress of an idea through 
one or more of the senses. When we see, hear, feel, touch or 
taste a thing we have perceived it. While this is an elemental
 step, still it is a very necessary one. Even the little 
rnollusks and tadpoles are capable of receiving impressions, and 
power to perceive increases with the elaborations and sensitiveness
 of the organism. The Apostle represents hearing as 
being that sense which is employed to announce the truth to 
us. He says: "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the 
Word of God." That is, Cod's Word contains a message which 
acquaints us with certain facts, without which we would be 
unable to form an accurate judgment or to make a reliable decision
. The Master intimates that this message has gone forth ; 
still, "Who hath believed our report?" Not many. "Blessed," 
therefore, "are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for 
they hear. For indeed I say to you that many prophets and 
righteous men have desired to see what you observe, but have 
not seen; and to hear what you hear, but have not heard." 

But while hearing is a blessing, it is merely the start. The 
parable of the sower goes an to explain this matter further 
and to say: "When anyone hears the word of the kingdom, but 
considers it not, the Evil One comes and snatches away that 
which was sown in his heart. This explains that which was 
sown by the road." Those who do not consider the Lord's message
 do not go very far toward the development of a sound 
mind. "Israel doth not know ; [ because 1 my people doth not 
consider," complains the Prophet Isaiah. 

"That which was sown on rocky ground denotes him who, 
hearing the word, receives it immediately with joy; yet having 
no root in his mind, he retains it only a snort time; for 
when affliction or persecution arises on account of the word he 
instantly stumbles." Such a one perceives, thinks, and is alert, 
but he fails on deduction. He does not, or perhaps cannot, 
hold the proper relationship between the value of the truth, 
the present condition of the world, and the privilege of persecution
 for the Ward's sake. He does not exercise common 
sense, or he would know that anything of value must cost him 
dearly. Note the distinction between that man and the one 
who so valued the pearl of great price that he went and sold 
all that he had to obtain it. 

"That which wa3 sown among thorns denotes that hearer 
in whom the cares of this life and the deceptiveness of riches 
choke the word and render it unproductive." Such a one fails 
on foresight, reason and the final judgment or decision. 

"But that which was sown on good soil and produced fruit, 
one a hundred, one sixty and one thirty, denotes him who not 
only hears and considers, but obeys the word." To hear, to 
consider and to obey-j then, are the" three main steps to the acquirement
 or to the manifestation of a sound mind on any 
given subject. But aside from these three steps, there are five 
other intermediate steps which are well worth considering. 

PERCEPTION, MEMORY, THOUGHT 

Here, say, is a problem before us on which we wish to exercise
 common sense. Though we have heard and received the 
general message of the Lord, it may be that we have not yet 
perceived all the instructions he has given on the immediate 
question under hand. Here we should "search the Scriptures" 
with that love of directness and simplicity without which it 
is impossible to come to an accurate decision. 

For instance, we encounter the statement: "The righteousness
 of the law is fufilled in us who walk not after the flesh 
but after the spirit.*' We roughly perceive the ideas of walking
 after the spirit and walking after the flesh. Memory is at 
once called into play, for the meaning of the individual words 
themselves, then in a brief search of the mind to see if we can 
find anything that sounds similar. We 'call to mind the former 
things' and are thus enabled to profit not only by our own 
past experiences but also by the experiences of others. Without
 memory life would be a blank — a dreary void. 

Perception and memory merge into thought. We begin to 
consider — that is, if we love the truth above all things else. 
We ponder, we reflect, we contemplate; but, if we desire the 
truth, we do not dream. We are informed that, "as a man 
thinketh in his heart, so is he." If he thinks deceitfully, he is 
deceitful to that extent. Thought determines character. 

Thinking, not natural growth, makes perfect manhood. 
There are some who, though they are done growi ng, are only 
boys; the reasoning is feeble. Many who can run and jump 
and bear fatigue cannot observe, cannot examine, cannot 
reason or judge, contrive or execute — they cannot think. To 
have a sound mind it is necessary that we examine ourselves 
about our thinking. We should set ourselves to understand 
whatever we see or read. The Apostle assures us that if we 
"think on these things"— the thing* that are true, noble, pure 

2] 


July 1, 1918 


THE IV A TCH TO WER 


(197-198) 


and lovely — we will be built up to them. We cannot use common
 sense to walk either after the flesh or after the spirit without
 thinking. 

It is not reading, but thinking that gives us possession of 
knowledge. A person may see, hear, read and learn whatever 
he pleases, and as lni-ch as he pleases; but he will know very 
little, if anything, oi it beyond that which he has thought 
over and made the property of his mind.. Like certain silk 
worms which yield silk colored according to the food they have 
feci on, so our life gradually takes the tinge and hue of the 
thoughts to which we most accustom ourselves. If we think 
about the things of the flesh, make provision for pampering its 
desires and appetites, we are living after the flesh, and if we 
are thinking about the things of the spirit, the great principles 
whion Jehovah has established, and seeking to apply them to 
ourselves in harmony with Ms Word, we are living after the 
spirit. 

ALBKTNES8— MENTAL ENERGY 

Alertness is the next requisite. We are admonished to be 
"vigilant," to be "watchful," to be "ready," not to "sleep," nor 
be "slothful," In one place the Apostle seeks to "stir up our 
pure minds by way of remembrance." Alertness is energy applied
 toattention. It is like steam in a boiler. The boiler and 
the engine may be in 'perfect condition; but if there is no 
steam, no work will be accomplished. 

On this very point of mental vigilance cumes, perhaps, the 
severest test of our honesty in our search for the truth on any 
given subject. Our own faults, like our own noses, are so close 
wo cannot see them without great effort and insight. But, as 
the poet says: "Self-love is not so great a sin as self-neglecting
." For want of spiritual energy we allow the precious, 
though oft-times unpleasant truth concerning our motives to lie 
hidden; and we do not make progress. 

The value of our thought depends much upon the course 
we take — whether the subject in hand is examined fully and 
carefully, or only given an undecided glance, our thoughts reverting
 to other matters, to be treated in the same desultory 
way. That mental disposition is of great value which will 
enable us to give our close and undivided attention to any subject
 which we wish to investigate. Some may try to investigate
 a matter, but find that the mind wanders. It needs alertness
, effort, vigilance. 

However splendid may be a man's genius, brilliant his 
talents, and profound his intellect, if devoid of energy he is 
practically lifeless, and his powers are useless to theXord, to 
himself and to the world. Energy, literally from the Greek, 
means inwardworkingness; the bloom of the flower is energy, 
the increase of fruit is energy, the growth of the body is energy, 
yet in all these there i3 no violence. So with the holy Spirit, 
power or energy in us; its efficacy is not destructive, but none 
the less vital 

A man may possess a high degree of refinement, with stores 
of knowledge, and even a well-disposed mind; but if he is 
destitute of energy, he is like a watch without a mainspring, 
beautiful but inefficient and unfit for service. God has given 
us new courage, he has refreshed our despondent spirits by a 
message of cheer and hope, and he does refresh them by continual
 reminders of his grace. Let us, therefore, not stop in 
our efforts toward right decisions because of a dearth of alertness
; for we cannot dream ourselves into a character. But 
with the instruments and the forces which the Lord has given 
us we must forge one. 

DEDUCTION AND FORESIGHT 

Our alertness or mental energy opens up new avenues; it 
broadens the field of attention. Mental energy pushes the mind 
to draw deductions from the new things observed. Time and 
again our Lord and the apostles invite us to deduce the logical
 conclusion from the facts which have hitherto been made 
known to us. Our Lord chided the Pharisees, saying that they 
were able to draw correct deductions regarding the weather 
from the appearance of the sky, yet they were not able to discern
 the outcome of the most apparent spiritual situations. 
"Have ye not known?" "Dwye not see?" "Know ye not?" are 
all arguments which the Scriptures use and which show that 
we are expected to use our powers of deduction. But let us 
not deduce something that is not there. Our brethren in the 
centuries gone by made mistakes in this way. They saw that 
most of the worJd was not fit for the state of heavenly bliss 
and they deduced that the unfit must therafore go to eternal 
torment. If eternal torment had been & divine arrangement, 
so stated in God's Word, and if there had been no other time 
of trial or arrangement for mankind, then the deduction would 
have been correct. 

We are supposed to draw deductions from facts, not fancies. 
With the help of other Scriptures we can safely deduce that 


if we are walking after the flesh we are not walking after the 
spirit. We can safely deduce, too, that if we are walking after 
the spirit the righteousness of the law is being fulfilled in us, 
though we may not be able to see very much of that righteousness
. 

"LET US EEASON TOGETHER" 

Next in the attainment of a sound mind on any given 
problem comes foresight. Foresight is the power of looking 
ahead to determine the probable effect which the carrying out 
of our deductions will have. Closely linked to it and really 
growing out of it is precaution. We are not only told in the 
Scriptures that 'if we live after the flesh we shall die' but we 
are also told to make straight paths for our feet. If we stand 
on a railroad track and see a train coming, that is foresight; 
if we get off before it hits us, that is precaution. Foresight is 
a prerequisite of sound judgment, or common sense. How often
 we hear the exclamation: "Why didn't 1 think of that?" — 
meaning, "Why didn't I foresee that?" 

All these things lead us up to the point of reason, which 
is the process of comparison. We are admonished to "prove all 
things, hold fast that which is good." To prove a thing is to 
compare it with some known standard. It is a direct violation 
of this precept to allow such facts as we may possess to become 
rusty from disuse or to submit our minds implicitly to another 
without proper reasons therefor. 

Reason is the art of fixing the relativeness of things. It is 
by means of reason that it is possible to differentiate facts 
and to indicate to what category they belong. Thus and thus 
only can we "rightly divide the word of truth." Thus and 
thus only can we (t give a reason for the hope that is in us." 
Only thus can we fulfil the Apostle's prayer that 'our love may 
yet abound more and more in knowledge, and in all perception, 
in order that we may examine the differences of things.* — 
Ffhilippians 1:9, 10, Diaglott. 

To reason about a thing is to dissect it, to examine it from 
every point of view before adopting it, before deferring to it 
or rejecting it. Only by reasoning can we judge ourselves dispassionately
. The Psalmist approaches the question thus: 
"Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse [rectifyl his ways? 
By taking heed thereto according to thy word." Applying 
this principle to ourselves we see that we are to look at our 
ways, our thoughts, our words, our actions and compare them 
with the standards given us in the Lord's Word. If we be impelled
 by a desire for the truth and if; we "Judge soberly" we 
shall see wherein we have already attained to those standards 
and wherein we are still lacking. "Come now, let us reason 
together, saith the Lord of hosts." 

DECISION, THE SOUL OF CHARACTER 

We now come to the decisive factor of a sound mind, judgment
 or decision. We may perceive the things of the spirit; 
we may reflect upon and contemplate them; we may be keen in 
our interest and draw some very accurate deductions as to advantages
 to be derived ; we may foresee ourselves enjoying the 
fruits of the spirit and acting as an ambassador of the Lord; 
we may count the cost by process of comparing the things of 
this present life with the joys that shall be revealed in us, but 
when we definitely make the decision and gay, "I will do it; I 
will pay the price, cost what it may," then* and first then, is 
character really molded — and devils steo back an extra pace. 

Some one has aptly said: "A wise man is like a pin, his 
head keeps him from going too far." If a whole man be like 
a pin, then certainly decision is the point of that pin; for by 
decision his powers become penetrative and effectual. Decision 
is like a ratchet brake on an incline railway; it keeps one 
from slipping hack over the ground just gained. Again, decision
 may be likened to the skin of an apple. Not only is it 
the most 'beautiful part, but it preserves the rest of the fruit, 
as decision preserves the process of thinking just passed 
through with more or less labor. It is really better for the 
character to decide wrong than not to decide at all. We can always
 decide something about a question. We can decide to 
let it alone, or decide to let it rest until more information is 
at hand. 

"A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways." "Unstable
 as water, thou shalt not excel." These texts show the 
disadvantages of indecision. How many occasions for doing 
£Ood are passed by from irresolution! While we are saying 
to ourselves, Shall I, or shall I not? the moment flies awav and 
the blossom of joy which we might have jsriven to it is withered 
and often cannot be revived by anv tears of repentance. The 
irresolute man cannot perform any action well. 

On the other hand, decision of character is one of the most 
important of qualities to attain and maintain. In fact we 
must possess a good denl of it before we can give ourselves to 
the Lord. ( Knowledge is not our chief end; it is action — action
 inspired by love, but still action. We may hare a fine 


[6283] 


(198-199) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


RlOOKLVS. V. Y. 


education, learn to think most correctly and talk moat beautifully
; but when it comes to action, if we are weak and undecided
 we are of all beings the most wretched. All mankind feel 
themselves weak, beset with infirmities, and surrounded with 
dangers; the acutest minds are the most conscious of difficulties
 and dangers. They want shove all things a leader with 
that boldneBs, decision and energy which, with shame, they do 
not find jn themselves. Just such a leader we find in our 
Lord, who not only trod the way we tread, but trod it alone. 

Next to being* upright and faithful in the performance of 
duty, we should be decided; and then we shall make either 
friends or foes worth while. It is in vain to hope to please all 
alike: "Woe unto you when all men speak well of you/* Let 
a man stand with his face in whatever direction he will, he 
must necessarily turn his back to one-half the world. If a thing 
be right, let us do it boldly ; if it be wrong, leave it undone. 
Every day is a little life, and our whole trial time is but a day 
repeated. 

FOES OF A SOTJKD MIND 

There are three foes to the exercise of a sound mind. One 
is impulse, a perversion of power and judgment. Another is 
sentimentality, a perversion of love and wisdom. The third is 
illusion, a perversion of deduction and reason. 

Impulse is like a spring trap that operates generally to the 
injury of someone. It is action under snap judgment, wherein 
all the steps between perception and decision, except alertness, 
are almost completely overlooked. Adam's transgression itself 
was largely of this nature. He felt, he was keen on the subject
, he acted. When TJzzah steadied the ark he did it under 
impulse and paid for his lack of reasoning with his life. Had 
he remembered the Ijord*s commandments, had he thought of 
them sufficiently beforehand, had he been alert with a sense 
of obedience, had he been exercising the foresight which moments
 of quiet contemplation should have taught him as he 
walked beside the ark, he would have been preparM to stop his 
tendency to an impulsive meddling in matters not his own. 

Peter was impulsive in proclaiming hig lasting fidelity to 
the Lord. He merely perceived that Jesus wa^ the Christ, the 
son of the living God, and assumed that everything must be 
outwardly favorable to our Lord, who was one, naturally, with 
whom Peter would like to be always associated. His judgment
 lacked the calm, careful consideration and insight which 
became his at Pentecost. No one can allow his impulsiveness to 
govern and at the same time exercise a sound mind well, because
 a sound judgment includes careful and moderate comparison
 of the facts involved. The impulsive ones are very apt 
to be prejudiced in their conclusions; for prejudice is premature
 judgment. They jump from perception to energy and 
from energy to decision. They are always starting something, 
but it is oft-times something they wish they could stop. Sometimes
 they are like the man looking through the yellow-stained 
glass, when everything appears peculiarly honny : then they 
are like the other one who looked through the" blue-stained 
glass, when everything looks sombre and hopeless. Neither had 
an accurate judgment of the situation. 

Impulsiveness is a false enthusiasm traceable not to our 
fixed ideals, but to our wishes. It is often truer "Thy wish 
was father to the thought," Impulsiveness was the difficulty 
with the Galatian brethren; as the Apostle says: "Ye did run 
well for a time .... foolish Galatians," who hath bewitched
 you? 1 ' They had not properly fortified themselves 
with the reasons for their faith and were in danger of losing 

It is doubtless because we tend to jump bo conclusions and 
to other associated actions that the Lord has laid upon us certain
 restrictions such as, "Render not evil for evil." The impulsive
 tendency is to strike or apeak back wnen we are injured
. Occasionally such action mi#ht be right in itself. The 
Mosaic law provided for such retribution. But if we have parefully
 pondered the various phases of the Lord's will for us and 
if we have grasped the thought that he would be better pleased 
to have us consider a situation before we act, we are to that 
extent guarded, and our energy and decision are forced to wait 
on thought, foresight and reason. "He that is slow to anger 
is better than the mighty; and he thai ruleth his own spirit 
than he that taketh a city." 

Another hindrance to sound judgment is sentimentality. 

SENTIMENT VS. SENTIMENTALITY 
Now sentiment is a. noble thing. It was the noblest sentiment 
which God had toward the world which prompted him to make 
the arrangement for its redemption. No one can ever have a 
sound mind who absolutely ignores sentiment, if that were possible
. But sentimentality is the quality present when sentiment
 overrules reason, or when it forces a decision before reason
 has time to consider. Impulse and sentimentality often go 
hand in hand, like their legitimate prototypes, power and love. 
It was sentimentality when the inhabitants of Lystra named 
Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercury, and said: "The gods are 
come down to us in the likeness of men." Again, when St. Paul 
shook off the poisonous serpent from his hand and lived, the 
people of the island would do him worship, thinking he must 
be a god. 

Never will common sense have a chance to manifest itself in 
tose who permit such ephemeral and enfeebling impressions to 
govern the judgment and who fail to harmonize common sense 
and the emotions of the heart. Sentiment reasons and is capable
 of devotion. Sentimentality excludes reflective thought and 
ignores generosity. We are capable of sacrificing ourselves for 
sentiment. Sentimentality exacts the sacrifice of others. 

We have seen mothers oppose the departure of their sons, 
preferring to oblige them to lead an obscure existence near to 
them, rather than impose upon themselves the sorrow of a 
separation. Sentimentality and its derivatives, puerile pity 
and false sensitiveness, create illusions for those who do not 
practise the art of reasoning. 

ILLUSIONS LIKE WILL-O'-THE-WISPS 

Both impulse and sentimentality contribute to ot lead to illusions
. Illusions, like ideals, are made by imagination and 
hope. Inaccuracy is the difference. Imagination, in the sense 
of power to form and hold a mental image of an idea or of 
its effect on us, is real I v necessary to any process of reasoning. 
The Apostle sets this thought forth in the following words: 
"We behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord and are 
changed Tby the effect of that image on our minds], from glory 
unto glory." That is, from the fragmentary descriptions in 
God's Word we are able to form a mental image or conception 
of his character. 

But imagination is usually so linked with sentimentality 
that the word has come to have a bad savor. So tho^ Apostle 
says: "Casting down imaginations and every high thing that 
exalteth itself against the knowledge [the exact knowledge or 
acquaintanceship! of God, we bring into captivity every thought. 
to the obedience of Christ." The idealist and the illusionist 
perceive alike, but the latter is not impelled by a desire for the 
truth. His wishes take the place of his memory of previous 
experience and of the promises and directions of the Lord. 
With such a one reverie takes the place of thought. There is 
indolence instead of alertness; fancy instead of deduction; desire
 instead of foresight; sophistry instead of reasoning. Is it 
any wonder that the decision, such as there is, is erroneous, and 
that illusion enshrouds the true powers of discernment? 

The "righteous" Jews of Jehus' day deluded Hiemshlves into 
thinking that no blessings could pass them by; but they, with 
the rest of the world, were drunken. They thought that, not 
because of a passion for the truth, but because of prejudice, 
which is traceable to nothing more than mental and moral indolence
. 


'BE OF GOOD COURAGE" 


"He of good courage find he shall 
Jesus gave us a perfect example of true courage based upon 
implicit confidence in the divine promises — such a courage as 
is needed by all of his people at this time. The Apostle suggests
 that we consider him, lest we become faint and we&ry in 
our minds. There is one kind of fearlessness, however, which 
is begotten of self-esteem, lack of humility. This is not the 
kind enjoined upon the Lord's people. They are to be both 
tender-hearted and humble-minded. The spirit of courage possessed
 by the saints is based largely upon their faith in the 
Lord. Realizing the divine love and providential care, these 
can apply to themselves the gracious assurance that "the 
Father himself loveth you," and that "all things shall work 
together for good to them that love God, to the called ones acstrengtli
&n thine heart." — Psalm 27:14. 
cording to his purpose/' — John 16:27; Romans 8:28. 

It is this realization of divine all -wisdom and all- power 
that gives the strength of heart referred to in our text. It will 
be readily seen, then, that this courage is based upon faith, 
though of course the faith must have a foundation of knowledge
. The proper relationship of our growth is primarily 
knowledge: faith, courage, activity, and all of these continue 
to grow, and in their maturity make us wise, faithful, courageous
 overcomers in respect to the spiritual matters to which 
we have been called through the great and precious promises. 

Sometimes we realize our deficiencies and are not able to 
locate the cause. Some one says, 'I want to be an overcomer, 
to gain the victory over the spirit of the world, over the teaT
6284] 


Jr:.v 1, 1918 


T HE WATCH TO W E R 


(200-201) 


dencies of my own fallen flesh anil over the wiles of the adversary
, but somehow I cannot; I fail.' Such should learn 
to look for the source of failure, the deficient element, and 
should fortify himself in respect to the same. Let him ask 
first, 'Is my failure to overcome due to a lack of courage? Am 
I fearful, "and hence unable, to fight the good fight of faith 
and, by the Lord's assistance, to gain the victory?' If he has 
the courage he may find that he has not been sufficiently trusting
 the Lord, but leaning too much on his own strength. Such 
should remember the Apostle's words, "When I am weak, then 
am I strong"; reversely, 'when I am strong in self-assurance, 
I am then weak, because the Lord wishes me to rely not upon 
my self j but upon him, his strength, his grace.' If the courage 
be found deficient, the reason evidently is that the faith is lacking
; and if so, there is a reason for it — either a lack of knowledge
 on which to build a faith, or a lack of exercise and development
 of faith. The knowledge is to be sought from the 
right quarter, in harmony with the Lord and his Word, and 
the faith is to be exercised continually, recognizing the Lord's 
interest in us as his children, as testified to by his Word andby 
noticing the leadings of divine providence in our daily affairs. 
LOVE CASTS OUT FEAR 

There is a proper fear, or reverence, and disinclination to 
offend our heavenly Father and our Redeemer, which we wish 
never to lose. Perfect love will not cast out this fear, but 
rather intensify it. The fear which love casts out is timidity, 
a servile fear or dread of the Lord or of Satan or of the fallen 
angels or of men and what they might do unto us. Perfect 
love cannot be attained without knowledge, faith, courage and 
overcoming. It is the result of the exercise of all this divine 
arrangement that brings us nearer to God and makes us truly 
thankful and appreciative of his gracious purposes and omnipotent
 power for their accomplishment. 

The spirit of courage needs special cultivation by the Lord's 
people; and this cultivation means growth in all the graces. 
For instance, if calamity befall us or threaten us we should 
immediately think of the fact that our Lord assures us that 
even an insignificant sparrow cannot fall to the ground without
 the Father's notice, and that we are of much more value 
than many sparrows. This thought at once strengthens t the 
heart, nerves the arm, quickens the pulse of endeavor, provided 
we can realize that God is for us, that no earthborn cloud intervenes
 between our souls and the love for us which he has declared
. If a cloud does obscure the Father's love we must the 
more earnestly, the more persistently get from behind it by 
getting our hearts right with the Lord, by going to him in 
prayer, by confessing our trespasses and by requesting mercy 
and grace to help and to restore us to his favor. 

"Be of good courage and he shall strengthen thine heart," 
is one of the blessings assured us in his Word. In the divine 
order courage is necessary to strength and victory. Some one 
has said, "One with God is a majority." With courage to 
grasp this thought and to hold it, things almost superhuman 
seem possible to the Lord's people, while without this courage 
they may naturally be weak and easily vanquished. 
COURAGE IN THIS EVIL DAY 

Never before, perhaps, was courage so needed as it is now 
needed in this evil day ; but the prophets' descriptions of this 
great trouble time are very figurative when they speak of fire 
and clouds and pillars of smoke, saying of this time, "I will 
show wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood and fire 
and pillars of smoke," etc. But the consecrated children of 
God need have no timidity in respect to these matters if they 
have the proper courage, developed by proper exercise and built 
upon proper faith, founded upon the knowledge of divine revelation
. Their attitude of heart will be, "I will fear no evil, 
for thou art with me ; thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me." 

Whether, therefore, storms financial, political, religious or 
demoniacal come his way the child of God may rest secure and 
be of good courage. The Lord is both able and willing to care 
for his interests and bring him off victor. Should the fallen 
angels he permitted again to materialize and personate either 
the dead or living, this class need have no fear. Their perfect 
love for the Lord, based upon a knowledge and appreciation of 
his truth, will lead them to triumph courageously over all the 
wiles of the adversary and his hordes. 

THE ELECT TO BE tTNDECEIVABLE 

The Scriptures abound with testimonies to the effect that 
the severe trials of the near future will be along the lines of 
deception. They speak of lying angels and deceivableness of 
unrighteousness and "lying wonders," and tell us that the Lord 
will send or permit a strong delusion that they may believe a 
lie. (2 Thessalonians 2:9-11) If we gain the right conception 
of the matter these deceptions are to affect the whole world, including
 fifes wise men, and indeed practically everybody except 
the "elect": and the "elect" will be preserved, not through 


their own wisdom or superiority, but through the power oi 
God. "For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, 
and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it 
were possible, they shall deceive even the elect." — Matthew 
24:24. 

Our Lord in the parable of the wheat and tares tells of the 
harvest work and how he would "gather together his elect 
from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other." 
(Matthew 24:31) It is by thus gathering them that they are 
protected in this time of strife and trouble when others are 
deceived. But they are not gathered physically into one place, 
but spiritually; their minds, their hearts, their affections are 
gathered together, centered. Our text tells us that our Lord 
is this great Center to which his elect must all be gathered if 
they would have rest or peace, if they would overcome the 
world, the flesh and the peculiar snares of the adversary, 
which will now be laid for the feet of all and will more or less 
entrap all except the elect class. 

"GATHER MY SAINTS TJNTO ME" 
Figuratively all of these "elect" ones a*e gathered, and the 
place is thus described, **I will say of the Lord, he is my 
refuge; in him will I trust"; and again, "He that dwelleth 
in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the 
shadow of the Almighty." Ah! no wonder that we also read, 
"No harm shall come nigh thee." How could harm come to 
any who aTe thus close to the Lord ? "A thousand shall fall at 
thy side, ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not 
come nigh thee; because thou hast made the Lord thy refuge; 
thou hast made the Most High thy habitation." — Psalm 91:1, 
2, 7. 

This nearness to God, into which his "elect" are gathered, 
is the source of their protection. And the dangers to others are 
in proportion to their distance from this citadel of strength. 
this fortress, this refuge or tower. 
"Then let our songs abound, 
And every tear be dry; 
We're traveling through ImmanueVs ground 
To fairer prospects nigh." 

"ALL POWER IS GIVEN UNTO ME" 
These were our Lord's words after his resurrection. They 
were true then. They have been true throughout the Gospel 
age, and they are still true today, because we are now living in 
tiie time of which it is written, "He shall take unto himself 
his great power and reign." His reign has in some senses of 
the word already begun. He has already marshaled forces 
which will complete the overthrow of everything opposed to his 
kingdom and its righteous laws. And we may be sure that the 
members of his body still in the flesh this side of the vail are 
no less subjects of his providential care than are the world 
and its affairs. We may be sure that nothing is transpiring, 
either in the nominal church or among the kingdoms of the 
world, among socialistic or political parties or in the financial 
world contrary to what will best serve our Lord's purposes in 
connection with the events just before us and the outworking 
of the same in fullest accord with the prophecies. 

Oh, that we could get this thought rightly settled in our 
minds! Yea, as the Scriptures say, "Settle it in your hearts" 
— that our Lord is at the helm superintending all of earth's 
affairs at the present time in a much more practical sense 
than ever in the past. And have we not seen his graciousness 
towards the church during the forty years of the harvest period
 that are already past? And can we doubt his continued supervision
 of the affairs of his betrothed to the grand consummation
? "He who hath begun the good work in us is able to 
complete it," and he who has thus conducted the harvest work 
is able still to direct his cause, to order, bless and use it to his 
own praise and to the blessing of his people. 

"Who led thee first will lead thee still; 
Be calm and sink into his will." 
Let us not be timid either as respects the affairs of the 
church in general, or as respects our own personal relationship 
to it and to the Lord. Let us learn more and more to be on 
the lookout for the leadings of his providence and for utilizing 
knowledge which he has given us from hia Word. Let us not 
be surprised concerning the fierv trials which try us and the 
stormy billows which may at times seem about to overwhelm 
us; "for greater is he that is on our part than all that are 
against us" — however numerous, however strong, and whether 
demons or men. Let us remember that we are called to be 
overcomers and that the victory that over com eth the world is 
our faith. — 1 John 5:4. 

REMEMBER OUR VOW 
"Resist the devil and he will flee from you," is the Lord's 
testimony, through James. This implies an assault by the 
adversary. It implies that he should be resisted and can be 


VII— 30 


[6286] 


(J01-204) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


resisted and that in the end he will flee from us, not because 
of arrogance or power on our part, but, as our Master said, 
"He hath nothing in me" ; so if he finds it useless to continue 
his assaults he will probably flee also from us to other fields 
of service. We remind all of our readers that whoever comes 
under the influence of Spiritism, Christian Science, Hypnotism 
or any other form of Occultism is thereby endangering himself, 
not only for the moment, but also for the future, because the 
evil spirits operating through these various channels seek, 
some in one way and some in another, to delude, bewilder, confuse
 the reason and bring into subjection the minds of those 
with whom they have to do. Hence any of the Lord's people 
who have affiliation at any time with any of these are specially 
warned of liability to intrusion by these spirits now. We remind
 all that the special channel through which they have had 
special success is human curiosity. We urge all of the Lord's 
people to restrain their curiosity, to rely on the Lord's Word 
and to have.no dealings whatever with any of these occult systems
. Let us remember our Vow unto the Lord along this line. 
One dear sister told us recently that before coming into 
the truth she had dabbled with Christian Science and Spiritism, 
and had been entrapped with mediumship. She was a writing 
medium and could distinctly feel something take hold of her 
hand and guide her pencil while she wrote on topics of which 
she had no personal knowledge. After coming into the truth, 
and realizing the source of this power, she resolutely repelled 
it in every way, asking the Lord by prayer for assistance. She 
gained strength to resist this influence, but has again been annoyed
 by the spirits taking her hand and endeavoring in various
 ways to arouse her curiosity so that she would yield her 
hand to them in order to learn their message for her. She 


remarked that she has now a fear and a dread of the evil 
spirits and a strong desire to be free. She finds herself freer 
from their influence when in the company of the Lord's people. 
We advised her against fear and against refusing to remain in 
a room by herself. By so doing she would be cultivating fear 
and subserviency and bringing herself into a condition of mind 
much more amenable to their intrusions. We advised her, and 
now advise all similarly affected, to set the will resolutely in 
opposition, to refuse all communication, to ask no questions, to 
receive no answers in any manner, but in the name of the Lord 
to command the evil spirits to depart, meantime going to the 
Lord in prayer "for deliverance and grace to help in every 
time of need." In times of peace and freedom from assault 
the mind can be stocked with strengthening Scriptural passages 
or helpful poems or words, so that these may be drawn upon 
in times of need. 

In conclusion, then, dear brethren, let us be of good courage
, of strong faith, of heroic determination. Let each see that 
his faith is not in himself, nor in his vows, nor in his very 
best endeavors, but in the Lord. Trust in the Lord and practise
 with your faith at controlling your thoughts, words and 
deeds and at bringing yourself closer to our Father and Redeemer
. We live in a time when worldly wisdom is taking 
note of this need of courage; and much courage there i*. But 
the greatest courage is moral courage, the true courage which 
the Word of God inculcates and through which we may not only 
rejoice in all of the present experiences of life, but ultimately 
come off "conquerors, yea, more than conquerors through him 
who loved us and died for us." "Be of good courage and he 
shall strengthen thine heart." 


"THERE WAS ALSO A STRIFE AMONG THEM" 


Alas! that in his last, sad, sacred hours on earth, 

There should be strife among the Master's chosen twelve — 

A strife to be the greatest, seeking selfish ends, 

Ignoring their sweet privilege to minister 

Unto their Lord, in this, his time of saddest need. 

Ah, me! that he, the alpha and omega, first 

And last, in lowliness must wash their dii3t-stained feet, 

To show that he who serveth most is chief of all! 


Ah, then! shall we not daily watch and humbly pray 
That no defiling "root of bitterness" spring upf 
Shall we seek selfish honors here, or rather wait 
Until we reach the* other side, where he, our king, 
Shall seat us in his throne, exalt his lowly bride! 
Dear Lord, oh, make us gentle, merciful and wise, 
Help us in honor each the other to prefer, 
Fulfilling thus the law of Christ, the law of Love! 


WORKING IN THE CHURCH 

Acts 2:41-47; 4:32-35; 6:2-4.— Augtmt 18. 


[Paragraphs 2 to 21 inclusive of this article, as it originally 
entitled, "The Early Church," published in issue of January 1, 1 

Whoever today refuses to acknowledge Christ Jesus as the 
Messiah, the Sent of God, whoever refuses to obey his teachings
, to follow him, is unrepentant no matter how fully he 
may believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah, the Sent 
of God. Even though one may sorrow at the record of the 
sufferings of Christ, he has not come to the point of repentance 
until he has renounced the sins for which Christ suffered, and 
has become a follower of the Master. Only such as are thus 
repentant have part or lot in the household of faith. God's 
proposition is not to save people in their sins, but to save them 
from their sins; and during this Gospel age the first condition
 of acceptance with God is that the sinner shall renounce 
his sins, accept our Lord as his personal Savior and follow in 
his steps. 

PROVIDING FOR THE POOR 

Some time later an emergency arose in the church, calling 
for a force of seven deacons to look after various temporal matters
, all of whom were chosen by the congregation — not by the 
apostles — as men of honost reputation, wise, and filled with 
the holy Spirit. This incident -suggests to us the loose character
 of the organization of the early church. It did not have 
cast-iron rules and laws, except that the Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Redeemer, was the Head of the church, and that no one could 
be recognized as a member thereof unless he had recognized 
our Lord as Savior and made full consecration to him, thereby 
receiving his spirit, and had also recognized as of his appointment
 and of the holy Spirit's designation his especially appointed
 apostles, as the authorized instructors of the church. 


appeared in issue of July 1, 1918, were reprinted from article 
902, which please see. The remainder is printed below. 1 
Aside from -this, the necessities of each case seem to have 
guided; and yet we may safely presume that in all the arrangements
 of the church, as well as in the teachings of the 
apostles, the holy Spirit directed, for the benefit also of those 
believing on the Lord throughout the entire age. 

We are not to suppose that there was an intentional partiality
 or neglect of the Grecian more than of the Hebrew 
women. Possibly it arose from the fact thai the apostles appreciated
 more keenly the needs of the native widows than of 
the foreign-born. These were all Jewesses, of course, whether 
born in Palestine or in Greece; for up to this time the Gospel 
had not been sent to the Gentiles. Doubtless there was some 
reasonable cause for the murmuring. In any event the apostles
 manifested their honesty of purpose in the matter by 
promptly instituting measures for the correction of the difficulty
, 

Jn this incident there is a lesson for all of the Lord's people, 
[f difficulties arise, based on temporal questions, likely to 
sprout a "root of bitterness" or to cause a schism in the church, 
the proper course would be to throw the responsibility upon 
tihe shoulders of the entire congregation, by asking for the election
 of some of the number who could give the matter better 
attention and could see that all were justly dealt with. We are 
not to forget that in this as in other ways the Lord has clearly 
indicated that the church as a whole is under his supervision, 
and that it is therefore proper that the general affairs of the 
church be conducted by the congregation, and not by one man 
nor by a clergy class. 


SPEAKING FOR CHRIST 

Acts 1:1-8. — August 25. 

[The first 12 paragraphs of this article, as it originally appeared in issue of July 1, 1918, were reprinted from article entitled
, "Good Confession Versus Bad Confession," published in issue of January 15, 1914, which please see.] 

Whatever circumstances may arise, the Lord's people will seems to give the thought: 'Do not be worried when you shall 
have such faith ami trust in God that they will conduct them- he brought before kings and Judges.' The way in which God 
selves courageously, relying on divine power. The Greek here will give us a mouth and wisdom may vary according to cir- 

[6286] 


.tur.v 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(?<r> :?om 


eumstances. Perhaps it may be by suggestions from another, 
perhaps in the hearing of the testimony of some one else; or it 
may be that an especially helpful text of Scripture would come 
into our mind. But the thought is that our trust is in the 
Lord, and that we are not to be in fear and trembing. 

If we find ourselves in any straits, any difficulties, we are 
to remember that the Scriptures assure us that "the angel of 
the Lord encampeth round about them that fear [or reverence
] him, and delivereth them." (Psalm 34:7) This thought 
should tend to make us cool and collected in mind, and should 
enable us to conduct ourselves courageously, feeling our close 
relationship with the Lord and having the confidence this 
would give us. Furthermore, we realize that we are not wise 
enough to know just what God's purposes concerning us may 
be. We know not, therefore, just how the Lord may prefer to 
have this or that matter eventuate. Unt "faith can firmly 
trust him, come what may." 

WORK OF THE CHURCH IN THE FLESH 

The Scriptures invariably teach that the church of Christ 
in the flesh is his representative. As the Apostle Paul says, we 
"fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, for his 
body's sake, which is the church." (Colossians 1:24) As wc 
have to do with the suffering of the Anointed One, so we have 
to do with the witnessing or ministry by which the members of 
the body have been called out from the world, separated, instructed
, and thus prepared for a share in the glorious kingdom
 and for the great work of judging the world which that 
kingdom will inaugurate. It is in this sense that our Lord declared
 to his disciples after his resurrection: '*Ye shall be my 
witnesses both in Jerusalem and in Judea, and in Samaria and 
unto the uttermost part of the earth." 

Primarily, the apostles were the witnessed who testified to 
us respecting our Lord's words, his death, his resurrection, his 
ascension, and his promises of a return to accept las faithful 
followers to a share in his kingdom, when he snail take unto 
himself his great power and reign. In a secondary sense all 
who receive the apostolic testimony and who declare it to 
others are likewise Christ's representatives and witnesses. 

Tn order that the apostles might fill this position of witnesses
 and might be enabled to give a clear testimony on the 
important subject of Christ's death and resurrection, which 
constitute the foundation for our hope, our Lord was present 
with them alter his resurrection and, as St. Luke declares. 
demonstrated the fact of his resurrection "by many infallible 
proofs," meanwhile explaining to them things concerning his 
coming kingdom, for which he had taught them to pray : ''Thy 
kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven." THE MESSAGE OF THE KINGDOM 

This explanation respecting the kingdom was necessary because
 as Jews they had properly looked for an earthly kingdom, 
and now needed to be informed that before the earthly kingdom 
could be established a heavenly kingdom must first be inaugurated
, and that they were eligible to a place in that heavenly 
kingdom, through which in due time the blessing would come 
to the earthly kingdom and would ultimately extend to all the 
families of the earth. — Genesis 22:16-18. 

As long as the Jewish dispensation remained, this information
 was not due to be given. It would be "meat in due season
" only after the Jewish nation, through its representatives, 
the priests and doctors of the law, had rejected the Messiah 
and had crucified him. But now that our Lord had died, it 
was "meat in due season" to the faithful to know that for a 
time God had rejected fleshly Israel from being his peculiar 
people in order to gather a spiritual Israel to be the holy nation
, the peculiar people, the royal priesthood, to show forth 
his praises and to constitute his chief agents for the blessing 
of mankind in due time. 

This work of calling the spiritual Israelites, and of inducting
 such as would heed the call into the new relationship, 
was the work which our Lord was committing to his apostles. 
To them he unfolded the things pertaining to the kingdom of 
God in such measure as they were able to appreciate them, 


leaving to the future the work of guiding them into all truth, 
into the deep things of God, under the ministration of the 
holy Spirit, which he had previously promised would show tlu*in 
things to come. 

Our Lord wished the apostles to understand distinctly that 
they wore not then in condition to undertake the new work, 
that the proper time for action had not yet come, that they 
would not be prepared until they should receive the holy 
Spirit, a power and unction from the Father, which would 
especially qualify and guide them in the important service of 
their commission. Moreover, it would be to them, and to all 
l>e]iever$ through them, a divine attestation that our Lord's 
work was approved of the Father and constituted a basis of 
reconciliation by which sinnoi'3 might return to harmony with 
their Creator. Furthermore, to those who consecrated themselves
 to the divine service and received the holy SpiriL i* 
was evidence that they wore accepted of the Father in the Ueloved
 and owned as, children and heir-; nt his promiM 1 **. jnintheirs
 with Jesus Christ their Lord, if po be that they would 
suffer with him that they might also be glorified together in 
(lie kingdom, when the due time should come. — Romans X:]<>, 
17. THE TIME FOR THE KINGDOM 

It was appropriate at this time, and in view of our J,ord\ 
instructions respecting the kingdom and the preparatory work 
for it, which the apostles were commissioned to do, that they 
should inquire respecting the time for its establishment. Therefore
, not knowing that the Lord was about to leave them, they 
asked respecting the ancient promises of Israel'3 restoration, 
whether or not these promises were now due to be fulfilled, 
whether or not Israel was to be released from the domination 
of the Romans and to become the greatest nation of the world, 
to be used of God in the blessing of other nations. 

It is worthy of careful note that our Lord did not rebuke 
the apostles, nor tell them that the thought in their question 
was foolish and would never have a realization. On the contrary
, his answer clearly implies that their expectations at 
least approximated the truth, but that he was not at liberty 
to gratify their curiosity as to the time features of the divine 
plan. The things to which they referred, and which God had 
promised, would be fulfilled in due course] but the times and 
seasons were not for them to know, the Father not being as 
yet pleased to reveal this information. 

Our Lord, however, clearly indicates that before Israel's 
restoration to divine favor the mission of his apostles must 
first be accomplished — that to which he was appointing them. 
He would not inform them whether or not their mission would 
be quickly accomplished. As a matter of fact, we see that it 
has extended over more than eighteen centuries. The restoration
 of Israel to divine favor cannot take place until Christ, 
}iis apostles and all hi3 faithful followers shall first have accomplished
 the work of witnessing to the world and of selecting
 the full number of the elect, of spiritual Israel. This is 
the work of chief concern. 

The times and seasons for the fufillment of God's promises 
to Israel after the flesh and to the world were to be left in 
God's power, with the assurance that when the due time shall 
have come the brethren shall not be left in darkness on this 
subject, but shall be guided by the holy Spirit into this and 
all other truths, a3 these become "meat in due season" for 
the household of faith. 

The work of witnessing was properly to begin at Jerusalem
, the center of Judaism, which God himself had chosen, as 
represented in the Temple. It was properly to begin with 
those who had knowledge of Jesus and his crucifixion. Amon^ 
these who had this knowledge were some of the most devout 
Jew-s from all quarters of the earth. It was appropriate that 
the truth respecting our Lord's death, resurrection, ascension 
and glorification with the Father, and respecting the gathering
 of spiritual Israel and of our Lord's second coming to receive
 them and to exalt them with himself in the Messianic 
Kingdom should be declared to those who had been instigators 
of his ignominious death and witnesses of his crucifixion. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


SOME WHO SAT IN DABKNESS NOW SEE THE LIGHT 
Deab Bbethben: — 

We wish to advise you that we are still in harmony with 
the divine plan, and that you have our sympathy and our 
prayers at all times. In the Lord's good time we hope to 
meet you at "the general assembly and church of the firstborn
, who are written in heaven." 

For the past twenty-six years I had been employed here 

as agent of the without even a reprimand or a demerit 

mark. Suddenly, without a moment's notice or a word of explanation
, I was dismissed and another man put into my place. 


I appealed to our superintendent for an explanation of this 
strange procedure; and he advised me that I had been dismissed
 by request of , the reason for which I was no doubt 

aware. This occurred four weeks ago. 

This procedure was all brought about by some Catholic 
priests who were sore because some of their flock had left 
them and had gone to the Methodist church. Later, these converts
 heard Brother in a public lecture here, and thereafter
 they came to our class. These friends are all Polish, but 
understand English quite well; and they are so delighted with 
the truth that they are very enthusiastic. There were thirty- 


[6287] 


(207-194) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, K. Y. 


eight immersed here an April 7 ; and the next day eight more 
came for immersion. We have heard that there are forty 
more who would be glad to come our way if it were not for the 
intense opposition. The population here ia mostly Polish Catholic
, and there is a wonderful awakening among them. A Polish
 speaker and three colporteurs came here, and were all arrested
, and thrown into jail. The colporteurs are out on $10,- 

000 bail; but the speaker will have to remain in jail until the 
war is over. 

May our dear Lord direct us in our efforts to serve the 
cause until we finish our pilgrimage here below is the prayer of 
Your brother in Christ, R. S. — Wise. 

GLADLY ENTERED THE GATE OF SACRIFICE 
Dejlr Brethren in Chbist: — 

Find enclosed a money order to be applied as you see fit in 
the interests of the Lord's work, and especially if needed in connection
 with the trial of the faithful brethren at this time. I 
wish also to express my appreciation of the truth and its service 

1 have enjoyed each volume of the Scripture Studies as only 
a truth-hungry soul could; and I cannot doubt that the author 
was divinely aided. 

I have always sought after God; and at the a^e of fifteen 
I began teaching a class of little girls in a nominal church. 
This was really a sacrifice to me in that I missed the fellowship
 of the other young folk in the older classes. But I stayed 
by it faithfully; and in the three years of my teaching I missed 
only three days, two of them being on account of sickness. But 
when I received the truth on God's plan for the whole world 
I saw how far short we Sunday School teachers were fallen. 
And how I did rejoice in the knowledge, which came to me as 
fast as I could assimilate it! I gladly entered the low gate of 
sacrifice in October, 1917, and am striving each day and hour 
so to run that I may win. 

As would be necessary to one coming in so late, things 
oame to me rapidly ; and I advanced accordingly. So I am now 
enjoying the meat of the Word, and praising God's holy name 
for his many favors toward me and for his numerous manifestations
 that I am his child. I am especially thankful for the 
"meat in due season" furnished through The Watch Toweb a,t 
this time. It has encouraged me so much to press on untiringly
 and to help in the reaping of the vine of the earth, to 
the extent of my ability. I am also rejoicing in the fulfillment 
of prophecy as manifested in the recent fiery trials, and am 
glad that you have been accounted worthy to suffer for him 
who bore it all for us. 

Praying continually for all the dear brethren, and looking 
forward to the great convention beyond the vail, I am 

Your sister in the one hope of our calling, G. B. — Jnd. 
GEATEFUL APPRECIATION OF THE WATCH TOWER 
Dicar Brethren: 

Beloved in the Lord, greetings in the name of our dear 
Savior. The Father's bounty supplied through The Watch 
Tower during the past twelve months has been lavish indeed. 
The last issues especially give evidence of the near approach 
of the kingdom of Messiah, for which we rejoice with you 
and all the dear family. May the Lord's grace and strength 
abide with you in your closing labors for all the saints. 

W T ith the assurance of my deepest love and sympathy and 
constant pravers, I am humbly, W. A. T. — Canada. 

HERALDS OF THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM 
Dearly Beloved Brethren in Christ: 

With peace and love we greet you. We" are remembering 
you dear brethren in our prayers, and we rejoice to note how 
wonderfully our Lord and Savior is guiding you and directing
 the work in these closing hours of the Harvest. Rejoice 
with U3, beloved ones, to know that all the saints of the Most 
High have been sealed and are now waiting their deliverance, 
when and as our heavenly Father deems best. What a wonderful
 time, to be standing on the verge of the inauguration 


of the Millennial Kingdom of our Master, for which the poor 
groaning creation has so long waited! Let us constantly 
keep our hearts within the vail, firmly trusting our Lord. 
"Faith can firmly trust him, come what may." 

Bear brethren, continue to fight the good fight of faith ; 
for without it we may as well drop out of the race at this 
time, and thereby lose the greatest prize ever proffered by 
our Creator, an offer never to be repeated. So may we voice 
the words of our dear Brother Paul: "I have fought a good 
fight; I have finished my course; I have kept the faith. 
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness 
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that 
day; and not to me only, but unto all who love his appearing
."— 2 Timothy 4:7, 8. 

We are the heralds, the antitypical John class ; and surely 
we are rejoicing very heartily to know that the Messianic 
Kingdom is so near its establishment, and that we shall have a 
share in it if we but remain faithful to the end of our way. 
If we do, Satan will be sorely disappointed; for we are the 
objects of his intensest hatred now. But let us keep our minds 
filled with our Father's rich promises. His generous assurances
 should not only anchor our hearts arid thoughts within 
the Most High, but dispel every approach of gloom. We are iu 
the light, which is shining stronger and stronger unto the per 
feet day. We have long known and experienced the force of the 
Master's words, "If the world hate you, ye know that it hated 
me before it hated you," Not being greater than our M aster, 
we need not be concerned in the slightest degree what the 
world's attitude is ; for we are sure of our heavenly Father's 
love. Let us pilgrim on, and not cease until we reach our 
heavenly Canaan. With loving wishes, I am 

Your brother by his grace, F. T. — Ohio. 

DUE CONSIDERATION FOB THE EIGHTS OF OTHERS 
Deab Brethren: 

Pardon me for taking your time just to ask if you would 
be so kind as to put into The Watch Toweb a piece asking 
brethren not to give such long talks in opening a testimony 
meeting and such long prayers in public. We have had to endure
 this for a long, long time. It seems to take the good 
spirit out of the meeting to have such long talks at the very 
beginning. I do not wish to find fault but the practice mentioned
 above does not seem to be the proper way of conducting
 a meeting. Your sister, M. M. 
[The above suggestion should be taken into very careful consideration
 by all who are leaders of devotional classes — -prayer 
and testimony, meetings. See suggestions on page- 319-322 of 
Volume Six Studies. Those who are chosen as class leaders 
should of all persons be the most careful in their consideration 
of the rights of others.] 

"APPLES OP GOLD IN PICTURES OP SILVER' ' 

Deab Brethren in Christ: — 

I feel impelled to express in this inadequate way my very 
deep appreciation of the May 15th Tower. My heart leaped 
for joy to see it arrive this morning, bearing these words of 
life and cheer to help us on to God. When we learned that 
the dear brethren were in bonds, we hardly dared hope for 
further "apples of gold in pictures of silver." But truly *'God 
is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart." 

The article, "Let Patience Have Her Perfect Work," seemed 
like a heart to heart talk with God, meat in due season, 
strength to the weary. We do appreciate your labors of love 
on our behalf and your faithful ministry towards the Lord's 
little ones. Who could doubt the organization or the message 
through the Towers? As we ponder over their precious messages
 we think, *He knows and loves and cares.* 

May God bless and sustain you all in every trial, and at 
last grant you the victory through our l^ord Jesus Christ. 
With sincere Christian greetings to all at Bethel, I am 

Yours in Christ's service, M. A. — B. C. 


Thursday night, June 20th, shortly after 10 o'clock, at the 
end of a fifteen-day trial, the jury returned a verdict of 
"Guilty" against all the brethren who had been arrested here 
early in May. Each one of the defendants feels absolutely 
innocent, knowing that he has no desire or motive to do 
injury to any one. At exactly 1:00 o'clock the next afternoon 
fin reality exactly at noon, as all clocks were running an hour 
fast on account of the daylight-saving aet] the sentence was 
pronounced by the Court: Twenty years imprisonment in the 
Federal Penitentiary at Atlanta, Georgia, for each, excepting 
Brother Giovanni De Cecca, the Court reserving sentence in his 
case until his past record could be investigated. 

We feel that the Lord, in hia perfect wisdom, has permitted 
it all for a good purpose and will overrule it ultimately for 


THE TRIAL AT BROOKLYN 

good and to his glory. Brother Russell stated that the work 


of the harvest would end in the summer of 1918, that the door 
would close and the dark night would settle down. The Master
 said, "When ye see these things begin to come to pass, then 
look up and lift up your heads; for vour deliverance draweth 
nigh." 

Take courage, beloved in the Lord, the kingdom is here; 
and soon by his grace we shall be forever with him and with 
each other. In the next issue of The Watch Tower we hope 
to give a more detailed statement concerning the trial. Be 
calm, be trustful, keep close to the Lord. Continue to prav for 
us, as we do for you. We all hope in a little while to oe in 
the presence of our king, where we shall have joys unspeakable 
nnd pleasures forever more. 


[628S] 


IN RE LITERATURE IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES 


Hereafter no literature in a foreign language will be issued 
from this office. The names of all subscribers to the foreign 
Towers will be transferred to the English Watch To wee list 
for the remainder of the term of subscription, unless the subscribers
 shall notify us to the contrary. Should any subscriber
 to a foreign Towee prefer to have his money refunded 
for the unexpired term of subscription, this will be done upon 
his written request to this office. 

