VOL. XXXIV APRIL 15 No. 8 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

God's Sympathy for His People 115 

The Lord's Method of Deliverance 115 

The Time, My Soul, Is Short (Poem) 116 

Privileges of the Sons of God 117 

The Divine Object in Answering Prayer 117 

Training for Membership in the Kingdom 118 

Lessons in Every Experience of Life 118 

The New Creature's Struggle for Existence 119 

Death of the Flesh Essential 119 

Cross-Bearing a Privilege 120 

Cross-Bearing the Way of Growth 121 

"What Shall I Render Unto the Lord?" 

(Poem) 121 

Re Christ's Resurrection 122 

The Gifts of Whitsuntide 123 



"Ye Are All One Body" 124 

The Sowing and the Reaping 125 

Many Stripes and Few Stripes 125 

The Abrahamic and the New Covenant 127 

An Interesting Question 127 

page 114 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



PLEASE REMEMBER THESE THINGS 

Give your full address at the top of each letter you write, 
and please print it if you cannot write plainly. Please address 
your communications to the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY, whether 
in Brooklyn or London or Melbourne. Only very personal 
matters should be addressed to the Editor— Pastor C. T. 
RUSSELL. Our work here is different in the various departments; 
for instance, the Pilgrim Department, the Colporteur 
Department, the Volunteer Department, the Convention Committee, 
etc. In case the subject matter of your letter makes 
it specially appropriate to one or another of those Departments, 
please add the same to the address, but always make 
the main address the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY. 

The general Convention season is approaching, and we desire 
to know about how many to expect at each of the different 
gatherings. We have purposely scattered them this year, so 
that no one of them may be too large or unwieldy. Experience 
shows that better spiritual results are obtained when the 



crowd is not too large. We prefer Conventions ranging from 
a thousand to two thousand, rather than either larger or 
smaller ones. We have taken your interest into consideration 
in the arrangements, and hope that all may be pleased, and 
still more than usually profited. Scattering of the Conventions 
permits the attendance of some who could not so well 
be present at a greater distance from their homes, which 
would involve greater expense for travel. 

We note again, as formerly, that no one should endeavor to 
attend a Convention expecting the cost to come under $1.35 
per day. We can procure rooms at fifty cents, or room and 
board for one dollar, in nearly every case, per day; but in 
some cases the board would not include luncheon. Of course, 
street car fare would be extra, and little incidentals should 
not be forgotten. 

We are mentioning the lowest rate with more than one 
person in a room. A separate room will generally cost $1.50 
with board, and from that up to $5.00 or more per day. We 
are solicitous for those who wish to economize. Others can 
always find accommodations. We would like to hear as quickly 
as possible from all the friends who anticipate attending 
Conventions this year. We want to know just how many to 
expect at the different places, and how many to attempt to 
provide for. Write, please, as soon as you conveniently can. 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S LARGE MAIL 

I wish to express my appreciation to the dear friends of 
THE WATCH TOWER list for their thousands of kind letters- 
some of them individual and some of them from Classes. 
These letters tell me of your love and that you are praying for 
me, and that you have absolute confidence in my integrity. It 
would afford me great pleasure to answer these kind communications, 
and to tell you all of my love for you. I reflect, 
however, that such personal answers would accomplish no 
real good, and that you all hear from me regularly twice a 
month through THE WATCH TOWER. I console myself with 
the thought that you will know that my time is being otherwise 
engaged in the Master's service, and that you will be 
fully content with the expression of your love, etc., without 
hearing from me in return— except in such cases as really require 
answers. 

Very truly your brother and servant in the Lord, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



STORM AND FLOOD SUFFERERS 

Our Society's funds are strictly limited for spiritual services 
—providing spiritual food and the robe of Christ's 
righteousness. 

However, some thoughtful brethren have provided a 
"Comfort Fund" under the care of Brother Russell. So far 
as it goes it is available for the temporal needs of any 



WATCH TOWER readers who have suffered in recent storms. 
We will be glad to hear from such, either directly or through 
the I.B.S.A. class secretary. 

THE WATCH TOWER SOCIETY will be glad to assist by 
making good losses of its publications. Advise at once. 



1913-NEW VOLUNTEER MATTER-- 19 13 

All orders received will soon be filled. We are hoping for 
good results this year. Classes that have not sent in requests 
for Volunteer matter, please take notice. 



R5217 :page 115 

GOD'S SYMPATHY FOR HIS PEOPLE 

"Thus saith the High and Lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, 
whose Name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with 
him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive 
the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the 
contrite ones."— Isaiah 57:15. 

JEHOVAH is the High and Lofty One who 

inhabits eternity. Before the mountains 

were brought forth, or the hills, before the 

First-born was created, He is God. To 

Moses at the burning bush, He said, "I AM 

THAT I AM." (Exodus 3:14.) Our God 

is very great, very wise, very high. Nevertheless, 

the Scriptures show us that He is 

also very sympathetic. He is a God of 

Mercy and of Love. 

The passage from which our text is taken informs us 
that if God were to contend with humanity, the end of 
the strife would be that mankind would be blotted out of 
existence. But He remembers that we are dust, and has 
compassion upon us. In this respect He is different from 
the gods of the heathen, who are domineering, apparently 
bent on wreaking vengeance upon those in their power. 

Besides being very great and lofty, our God is particularly 
sympathetic towards those who are of a broken 
and contrite heart, whose spirit is humble, who realize 
that they are imperfect, who desire to be in accord with 
Him, and to dwell in holiness. To such He is ever near— 
to revive the spirit of the humble, to give them strength. 
He will not trample them into the dust, as many an earthly 
potentate has done to his subjects, but will assist them in 
the right way, and revive the heart of the contrite. These 
are to know that our God is a God of sympathy, compassion 
and love, who takes pleasure in reviving their hearts 
and in bringing them back into harmony with Him, if they 
are willing to be led. 



DISCOURAGEMENT WITH SELF A FAVORABLE CONDITION 

There is a difference between a broken and a contrite 
heart. A heart is broken when it is bowed down with 
grief and sorrow; a heart is contrite when it has a quiet, 
deep, continual sorrow for acts not in harmony with 
righteousness. A broken will is not necessarily the same; 
for there are those whose wills are broken, but who are 

R5218 :page 115 

not submissive to the Divine will. 

To be repentant is to be thoroughly submissive to the 
Divine will, and implies a change of mental attitude toward 
sin. This humble, discouraged condition becomes 
a very favorable one if the person will seek Divine assistance, 
if he will become submissive to the Lord and ready 
to do the Divine will. Such will surely receive the blessing 
of God; for the Lord is very nigh to every one who is 
broken-hearted. The way to full consecration would be 
very short to him. 

If such as be of contrite heart will be submissive to the 
Lord, He will save them from their difficulties and bring 
them into a large place, as the Prophet David states. 
(Psalm 18:19.) This does not necessarily mean that He 
will deliver them from financial troubles, but that He will 
give them peace and rest, which are better than money. 
If they have family troubles, they will find in Him a superior 
Friend, who is able and willing to administer 
superior consolation and refreshment. 

Come, ye disconsolate! where'er ye languish, 

Come to the mercy-seat, fervently kneel; 
Here bring your wounded hearts; here tell your anguish; 

Earth hath no sorrow that heaven cannot heal. 

Joy of the desolate, light of the straying, 

Hope of the penitent, fadeless and pure! 
Here speaks the Comforter, tenderly saying, 

Earth hath no sorrow that heaven cannot cure. 

THE LORD'S METHOD OF DELIVERANCE 

The Scriptures assure us that, "There is none righteous, 
no, not one." There is relative righteousness, however, 
which God can approve. Those who are seeking to be 
in harmony with Him to the best of their ability, who are 
walking in the ways of righteousness, and at the same 
time are trusting in the precious blood of our Redeemer- 
such are spoken of as righteous. Of these it is said, 
"Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; 
for they shall be filled."— Matthew 5:6. 

This class, however, shall have afflictions. The Scriptures 
tell us that all who will live godly lives shall suffer. 
(Acts 14:22; 2 Timothy 3:12; Romans 5:3-5.) The reason 



why this is true is that the world is traveling in the 
opposite direction to righteousness— in the way of selfishness 
and gratification of the flesh. We read, "If any man 
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him." 
(I John 2:15.) This is especially true of this Gospel 
Age, when some are following in the footsteps of the 
Master. It was also true of the Jewish Age, when some 
were seeking to walk in the way of righteousness. The 
Lord delivered them out of their afflictions, not in the 
sense of shielding them from trials, but in that of not 
permitting them to be overcome by their difficulties. 
The Ancient Worthies fully appreciated the Divine 
favor exercised in their behalf, and took joyfully the 
spoiling of their goods, in order that they might have 
the continuance of that favor and larger blessings by and 

R5218 :page 116 

by. God delivered them out of their trials and difficulties 
by not permitting these to overcome them. This was 
also true of our Lord, and is true of the Church as well. 
The Lord delivers us out of our trials and difficulties, so 
that mentally we are not oppressed by them in the same 
way as are others. He will sustain and support us in our 
experiences and will eventually deliver us by giving us a 
share in the First Resurrection. 

The sons of God by adoption are, during this Gospel 
Age, especially beset by trials and difficulties. If they 
should fall, however, the fact that they have stumbled 
will not make them feel like going back into sin, if their 
hearts are of the right stamp. On the contrary, they will 
feel like St. Peter, who, when others were stumbling, said, 
"Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of 
eternal life." (John 6:68.) The true people of God have 
no desire to go to any one but Him. If they stumble, they 
recover themselves, avail themselves of His arrangements 
for forgiveness and press on. By these stumblings they 
learn of their own weaknesses, and then fortify themselves 
so that they may be strong in the Lord, and in the 
power of His might.— Ephesians 6:10. 

A just man will not fall into sin. The very most 
that could happen to him would be to stumble. There are 
various causes for stumbling. But if the heart is right, 
the man will rise again; for the Lord will show him that 
he has made a mistake and will point out the way to him 
by which he may recover himself. If he is a lover of 
righteousness, he will desire to press on toward that 
which is right, just, approved of the Lord, even if he 
should stumble many times.— Psalm 37:23,24; Prov. 24:16. 

THE EVIDENCE OF FAVOR WITH GOD 

So far as our humanity is concerned, we are undone 
by reason of the fall. It behooves us, then, to be very 
humble, to feel our own littleness, our own fallen condition. 
It becomes us to be very contrite, very much in 



opposition to sin, to feel that sin is the great blight upon 
the whole race, and that God will not be in harmony with 
anything except that which is righteous and holy. 

All, therefore, who would be in harmony with God 
must be repentant in respect to their own shortcomings 
and must be appreciative of His lofty standards— His holy 
standards. He, in turn, informs these that they have His 
sympathy, and that they shall have His succor. He appreciates 
the attitude of mind in which they are; and 
therefore, as our text tells us, He is ready to revive the 
spirit of the humble and contrite ones. To such He will 
show His salvation; to others He will not. 

Only the humble-minded can really appreciate their 
own condition. God not only will revive their spirit, but 
is willing to lift them up and to make them again sons 
of God, with all that this implies of blessing. He has this 
attitude toward the humble and contrite in the present 
time, and He has always had this spirit toward the humble 
and contrite ones. Throughout Christ's reign this humble 
class will have His favor and blessing. Only the humble 
and contrite ones have the opportunity of becoming joint-heirs 
with our Lord. 

God resists the proud. To the humble He gives grace, 
and opens the eyes of their understanding. They become 
His children because they are in the attitude to receive 
His blessings and to be guided by His instruction. The 
text applies not only in the present time, but will have 
an application in the next Age. "Go through, go through 
the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast 
up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard 
for the people." (Isaiah 62:10.) These words are all 
intended to indicate the preparations for the incoming 
Age. There is no provision for the proud, none for the 
haughty, none for the self-conscious— but all for the 
humble-minded. 

If God has these blessings in store for the humble 
only, and if the humble are few in number at the present 
time, what of the others of humanity? God is allowing 
now a humiliating influence to work with people, which 
should teach them humility and lead them to be contrite 
of heart. But much more will this be the case in the next 
Age. "When Thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants 
of the world will learn righteousness." (Isaiah 26:9.) 
All the blessings will be upon the contrite and 
humble. And this will be so markedly before the attention 
of the people that all will know a change has taken place. 

Now the humble and contrite are trodden down in the 
street. Now the proud are happy. "Now we call the 
proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are set up; 
yea, even they that tempt God are delivered." (Malachi 3:15.) 
But in the new Kingdom every one that exalteth 
himself shall be abased, and the humble shall be exalted. 
(Luke 14:1 1.) God has provided a thousand years for the 
education of all. A thousand years may seem a short 
period for this work when we know that for six thousand 
years things have been going wrong. But we must recollect 



that during the six thousand years, many of the people 
have lived but a short time— many dying in infancy. 

In the new order of things this will be changed, and 
each will live longer. "There shall be no more thence an 
infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his 
days; for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the 
sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed." 
(Isaiah 65:20.) "Judgment [justice] also will I lay to the 
line, and righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall 
sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow 
the hiding-place."— Isaiah 28:17. 

And then it will not be necessary for one to say to 
another, "Know the Lord; for they shall all know Me, 
from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith 
the Lord." (Jeremiah 31:34.) The high standard that God 
has for His people will be recognized. Then all who have 
humility and the right condition of heart will come into 
harmony with God. All who refuse to come into harmony 
with God will get the wages of sin— the Second Death. 



R5227 :page 116 

THE TIME, MY SOUL, IS SHORT! 

No time to linger by the way, 
No time for ease, no time for play; 
No time for earthly loves or joys, 
No time for worldly cares or toys— 
The time, my soul, is short! 

No time to murmur or complain, 
No time to heed the heart's dull pain; 
No time for tears or mournful song, 
No time to ask, How far? How long?— 
The time, my soul, is short! 

Ah, yes! 'tis short— yet time enough 
To run thy course, so steep and rough; 
Just time to reap "the fields," so white, 
Before the coming of "the night"— 
Just time, my soul, just time! 

Just time to make thy heart more pure, 
Just time to make thy "calling sure," 
Just time to enter through "the door," 
To reign with Christ for evermore- 
Just time, my soul, just time! 

GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5219 :page 117 

PRIVILEGES OF THE SONS OF GOD 



"Your Father knoweth what things 
ye have need of."— Matthew 6:8. 

THESE words were not addressed to the world 

in general; for the whole world is lying in 

sin, altogether out of relationship with God. 

These words were not addressed even to the 

ordinary Jew; for the Jews are also members 

of the Adamic race, which is out of 

harmony with God, and their Covenant was 

not one of sonship, but of servants. Moses 

was faithful as a servant over all his house. 

(Hebrews 3:5.) We never find Israelites 

referred to as sons of God. In the prophecies there are 

references made as to what God would do for them in the 

future. But there is no direct statement that He was 

their Father, or that they were His children. 

We all see that this was so. It would have been improper 
that this should be otherwise, for the Sin-Atonement 
has not yet been made for the world. Neither a Jew 
nor one of the world today has a right to call God his 
Father, nor to think of Him as his Father. The only ones 
who have a right to call God "our Father," are those who 
have come into covenant relationship with Him through 
Christ. Through this relationship, the Apostle John says, 
"Now are we the sons of God." 

We are not yet in the Kingdom, to be sons of God 
without imperfection; but in the future, in the moment 
of our "change," we shall be "sons of God without rebuke," 
and be like our Master and share His glory. But in the 
present time we are sons of God, and have this blessed 
privilege, this honor, of calling God our Father, because 
we have received His Holy Spirit. We have this treasure 
of the Holy Spirit in earthen vessels, and walk by faith, 
not by sight. All those who have come into the Body of 
Christ by full consecration are sons of God by faith, and 
are permitted to call themselves such, to realize Him as 
their Father, and to think of the testimony of the Scriptures 
as fully and completely referring to themselves. 

SONS OF GOD BY FAITH 

But the question is, Why did the Lord use these 
words to the early disciples before He appeared in the 
presence of God on their behalf and made an imputation 
of His merit for them? Were they not really under the 
Law Covenant still? We answer, Yes. They were still 
under the Law Covenant. Only by faith were they permitted 
to call God their Father. They had accepted 
Christ as the Way, the Truth and the Life, had accepted 
Jesus as the Sent of God, the One who would ultimately 
accomplish all that He had come to do. They were to 
manifest their faith by calling God their Father, calling 
themselves the sons of God— although we find that they 
did not really speak of themselves as the sons of God. 



It was some time after our Lord's death that their 
faith began to grasp this privilege. The Jews would have 
been afraid to call themselves sons of God, or to call Him 
their Father. If they had spoken of themselves as sons 
of God, they would have thought that they were doing 
something reprehensible. When Jesus spoke of Himself 
as the Son of God, they said that He was a blasphemer.— 
John 5:18; Luke 22:70,71. 

We find from the context that the Lord is advising us 
that we should not think of our petitions to the Heavenly 
Father as being for His information. Our Lord said, 
practically, "You have not an ignorant Father. The 
heathen go through great supplications, as though their 
God was asleep, or indifferent, when they petition him. 
But you, as My disciples, know of God as your Heavenly 
Father; and as a good earthly father loves his child and 
makes provision for it, so your Heavenly Father knoweth 
the things you have need of before you ask Him. It is 
not necessary for you to give Him advice; for He knows 
your needs better than you do, and is aware that some 
of the things for which you ask would be injurious." 

THE DIVINE OBJECT IN ANSWERING PRAYER 

Why then do we ask at all, since He is our Father, 
and, as a loving Father, makes all the provisions necessary 
and needful? We answer that our instruction to pray is 
intended to awake a further realization of the fact that 
all of our blessings come from the Heavenly Father; 
otherwise we should fail to get a great spiritual blessing 
from contemplating His love and care. He would not 
have us get the blessing in the same way that trees take 
in moisture. He would have us to be intelligent, to consider 
that He is our Father. He knows our needs and 
has made provision for them. He wishes us to exercise 
faith in respect to His care and to all the things promised. 

The Divine object, then, in answering prayer is that 
we may have a stimulation of faith in connection with 
our receiving daily blessings— both temporal and spiritual. 
The Lord knows the things that the world has need of, 
and He is making a general provision for the world. He 
has already arranged a way by which the world ultimately 
will return as sons on the human plane, and He is making 
all things to work together for good to them in a general 
and broad way. God has a great Plan of redemption 
through Jesus, and a great Plan of exalting the Church 
to be with her Lord in the Heavenly Kingdom. Then 
that Kingdom shall pour blessings upon the earth for the 
rolling away of the curse, and for the Restitution of 
mankind to the original perfection of Adam in Eden. 

To whatever extent any one has an ear to hear, it is 
proper to tell him about these good things. But only 
those who have the ear to hear are to be specially instructed 
at this present time. The knowledge of God's 
grace at this time has been especially for the called-out 
ones. The remainder of mankind has been allowed to 



remain in ignorance. It is quite proper that, as they begin 
to be awakened, they should hear a little and understand 
a little; but we are certain that the world cannot see the 
deep things of God. As the Apostle tells us, "The natural 
man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for 
they are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, 
because they are spiritually discerned." Again he tells 
us that "The Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep 
things of God."— I Corinthians 2:14,10. 

WHO MAY PRAY 

The Lord is not dealing with the world; for they are 
not in covenant relationship with Him and, therefore, 
they cannot please Him now. His last dealing with the 
world was when they were condemned in Adam. They 
had no right to life. They were sinners and must die. 
He has not yet completed the arrangement for the healing 
of the breach. He has been getting ready for that New 
Covenant arrangement for the restoration of the world. 

The only ones who are now in relationship with Him 
are the members of the Body of Christ. "If ye abide 
in Me and My words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye 
will, and it shall be done unto you." If we go out of 
relationship to Christ, then we have no right to pray. 
But if we maintain this relationship, if His Word abides 
in us, if we are conforming our lives to His will, and 
if we are in harmony with His will and the Spirit of His 
Word, we may ask what we will, and it shall be done. 

Those who are abiding fully in Christ would not want 
anything except God's will to be done. And if they have 

R5219 :page 118 

His Word abiding in them richly, they will know what 
things they may properly ask for. But if they are ignorant 
of God's will in the matter, then they would surely say, 
"Not my will, but Thine be done!" So whatever would 
be the petition, they would get it, because they desire 
God's will to be done. 



R5219 :page 118 

TRAINING FOR MEMBERSHIP IN THE KINGDOM 

"Consider the lilies of the field, 
how they grow."— Matthew 6:28. 

IN THE Sermon on the Mount, the Master is 

teaching His disciples certain important lessons. 

He is not teaching the world, but 

those who had come to Him, especially desiring 

to be taught, desiring to be His disciples. 

He points out to them that if they would be 



His disciples, thenceforth their main object 

in life would be to seek to become members 

of the Kingdom of God. He Himself is to 

be the great King; and an elect, choice number 

from the world are to be associated with Him in that 

Kingdom. When this election is completed, that Kingdom 

will be established. Then the blessing of all the world 

will follow under that Kingdom, in harmony with the 

promise made to Abraham, "In thee and in thy Seed shall 

all the families of the earth be blessed." 

These, then, who aspire to be members of the Kingdom 
class should make this the chief aim and object of life: 
"Seek first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness"; 
that is to say, the righteousness necessary to attain a place 
in that Kingdom. And all things necessary are promised 
to be supplied to such aspirants and seekers. Our Lord 
did not promise rich clothing, fine houses, ease or luxury; 
nor could we suppose that these would be specially helpful. 

Certain training is necessary for membership in the 
Kingdom. God, the great Husbandman in one picture, 
the great Overseer in another, would supervise the affairs 
of each member; and all things would be made to work 
together for their good. If they needed experience in 
trials, difficulties and privations, He would see to it that 
they got those experiences. If they were proud, they 
would get experiences that would humble them. If they 

R5220 :page 118 

were rude, they would have experiences that would make 
them polite. It is necessary for them to have these experiences; 
for if they did not learn at all, they would 
never get the inheritance to which they have become heirs. 

LESSONS IN EVERY EXPERIENCE OF LIFE 

The Master took note of the fact that the majority of 
people are full of the cares of this present life— what 
they shall eat, what they shall drink, and wherewithal 
they shall be clothed. He saw that many of the poor 
were distressed, not knowing, perhaps, whence the next 
meal would come. If such were the Lord's people, they 
should exercise faith. If the Father permitted His children 
to be in these difficulties, He saw that there was 
some good lesson for them to learn. They were to seek 
to learn that lesson, and not to fret about their condition. 

This did not mean that His followers were to be negligent, 
to care nothing about their appearance or about what 
they should eat. This is not the way to do; but while 
appreciating the beauties of nature, of dress, etc., they 
were to have faith in their Heavenly Father and to realize 
that the luxuries of life might not be the best for them. 
But they were to be content— knowing that all things 
would work out good to those who were rightly exercised. 

This matter of taking anxious thought for food and 
clothing is not confined to the poor. Some of the middle 



class, as they rise to wealth, find themselves engrossed with 
the cares of this life, eating, drinking and dressing— saying 
to themselves, What shall I wear this time, or that 
time, etc.? Eating and drinking and dressing seem to 
be the engrossing thoughts of both rich and poor. 

The Lord's people are to be content with such things 
as they have. They are to seek to provide things honest 
and decent. But honest and decent things are not extravagant 
things. The Lord's people are not to be inclined 
to use money in self-gratification. As they look 
about and see others of the Lord's children, they see that 
they must not take too many of these blessings for themselves, 
but that they should use their money with economy. 
They should use their money as a part of their stewardship, 
and know that they are to give an account of it. 

We are to seek first of all the interests of the Kingdom. 
If the interests of the Kingdom need money, we would 
feel guilty if we should use the Lord's consecrated money 
in self-gratification. Presumably this is the reason that 
the Lord has left the interests of the Kingdom in a condition 
of semi-poverty— in order that His people may forward 
the interests of that Kingdom. Our God is very rich. 
All the gold and silver are His, and the cattle on a thousand 
hills; and if it was for the interests of the Kingdom 
class, He would forward them money in abundance. 
Things are left as they are, then, that we may practise 
economy, may have an opportunity of denying ourselves 
present blessings for the interests of the Kingdom. 

LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE LILIES 

In this connection, our text comes in, illustrating the 
thought by the lily of the field. Indigenous to the soil, it 
has those things provided which are necessary for its 
development. The Lord did not choose a hot-house plant, 
dependent upon the horticulturist, but He chose a flower 
from the field. That flower grows under those conditions 
because the great Protector has arranged for its interest. 

This does not mean for the plant to be idle; for if it 
were idle, it would die. The bulb is continually sending 
up nourishment to its stalks. It is not idle by any means. 
But does the plant do this by worrying? No. It merely 
uses the opportunities that come to it. It merely exercises 
its functions by the laws of its nature. 

God makes provision for the lily in its native soil; 
and as it grows in its beauty, "even Solomon in all his 
glory was not arrayed like one of these." So is it to 
be with God's children. When the Father begets us as 
His children and we are placed under present conditions, 
we may be sure that He who so placed us made the necessary 
arrangements for us; that He is not unwise; that 
He has not put us in conditions that are unfavorable for 
us. They are all of Divine arrangement. 

If we move ourselves out of these conditions, we may 
be responsible in some degree, but as long as we exercise 
no will of our own to take ourselves out of His providential 



care, we may be sure that all things will be overruled 
to work for good to us. If we then seek to adorn 
ourselves with all the graces of the Holy Spirit, and if 
we use the opportunities that are in our immediate grasp, 
we shall be using the means for our own development. 
The lily has a right to use everything within its power 
for its own nourishment. So it is our right and our duty 
to use the means within our power for beautifying our 
characters and for our spiritual nourishment, knowing 

R5220 :page 119 

that He who began the good work in us is able to complete 
it unto the Day of Jesus Christ. 

DEVOUT CONTEMPLATION OF THE DIVINE CHARACTER 
HELPFUL 

Our Lord calls attention to how such simple things 
in nature should be studied, be considered. The lessons 
to be learned in connection with all the affairs of life 
will be helpful to such as approach the study from the 
right standpoint of faith in the Creator, and a realization 
that He is necessarily the embodiment and representative 
of the very highest and very noblest qualities of which 
the human mind could conceive— perfect in Justice, perfect 
in Wisdom, perfect in Power, perfect in Love. 

The heart that thus considers, makes progress, grows 
in grace, in knowledge, in love. The heart that fails to 
consider the little things, is hindered from a proper consideration 
of God and from a proper appreciation of His 
Plan, and thus from a proper appreciation of His 
Character. 



R5220 :page 119 

THE NEW CREATURE'S STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE 

"I keep my body under and bring it into subjection,... 
lest I myself should be a castaway."— 1 Corinthians 9:27. 

THERE is a duality in Christians that is not to 

be recognized in others. The natural man 

has no distinct entity aside from his body. 

The New Creature is recognized as having 

a life and entity distinct from the body; and 

this New Creature is temporarily being developed 

and nourished in the old body. The 

old body has its will, its desires. The New 

Creature has its interests, its desires. Consequently 

there is a conflict between them. 

In the first part of the text— "I keep my body under"— 
we may see the thought of mastery. The New Creature 
should say, "I am the master— I will not allow my body 



to master me," as though there were fear lest the old 
creature should get the New Creature down and strangle 
it. It is a battle to determine which will win, which will 
live and not be destroyed. 

The first thing, then, is for the New Creature to get 
the body under, and thus have the mastery. The New 
Creature having gained the mastery should, as a secondary 
step, bring the old nature into subjection and not 
do its bidding. The old creature is continually trying to 
assert itself. Very frequently it argues as to how it should 
be treated and how it should not be treated. Sometimes 
through false sympathy it might be treated too well. 

We must remember that the life of the old creature 
means the death of the New Creature. We must vanquish 
the flesh; and we shall not be the victor until the flesh is 
entirely destroyed. Our victories as New Creatures will 
not be gained until we as old creatures die. So the battle 
is unto the death, and there should be no particular sympathy 
between the two natures. 

That which would enliven, encourage, the flesh in any 
way is a foe, and must be banished from our hearts. This 
might lead in some cases to extremes of conduct, and we 
might be judged as extremists by the world. But the 
world is not our judge. The world has no "exceeding 
great and precious promises" before them. They are a 
different class from us altogether. We are not to take 
our instructions from them, nor to allow them to shape 
our view of the matter, but we are to use the spirit of a 
sound mind in all things. 

DEATH OF THE FLESH ESSENTIAL 

The Apostle says that we are to be dead with Christ, 
to suffer with Him. The Master invites us to take up our 
cross and follow Him. This means the complete subjection 
of the flesh— the death of the flesh. If we fail to gain 
the victory over the flesh, we shall fail to gain the great 
prize. The ones who are to gain the prize of the High 
Calling are those who will crucify the flesh, who will put 
it to death. We are to be "more than conquerors." 

This is what the Apostle means: But I keep my body 
under and bring it into subjection; lest that by any means, 
when I have preached to others, I myself should be a 
castaway. All the preaching to others will not get me into 
the Kingdom. I must keep my body under and bring it 
into subjection, using all diligence. Whatever I would 
get out of it, my pampering it in any way would be to my 

R5221 :page 119 

disadvantage. I am to be on the lookout to accomplish 
the victory, lest I should be a castaway. 

KNOWLEDGE OF THE NEW WILL CONDITIONAL 

Elsewhere the Apostle has told us that the Church is 



a New Creation of God; and that to those begotten again 
of the Holy Spirit old things pass away and all things 
become new. (2 Corinthians 5:17.) Addressing the same 
class, he says, "Ye have put off the old man with his 
deeds." We have put off the old man, the natural, fallen 
man, with his privileges as the successor of Adam, in the 
same sense that we put off the old will and have received a 
new mind, in Christ. Instead, therefore, of belonging to 
the human family, we have stepped into membership in the 
Body of Christ— out of the old into the new. 

The Body of Christ is not human, but spiritual. We 
have made this transfer from one family, with its hopes 
and interests, into the other. The old man is in a fallen 
and dilapidated condition in every way; and we realize 
that its deeds were far from satisfactory to ourselves, and 
especially unsatisfactory in God's sight. We, therefore, 
by our wills, stepped out of this condition, under guidance 
from on High. We have made a full consecration of all 
the old rights and interests, which we had in the old 
nature, in order that we may be in the New Man, Christ. 

As we have come into membership in the New Man, 
Christ, of which Jesus is the Head, we have under this 
Head an increase of knowledge. "We are renewed in 
knowledge after the image of Him that created us." The 
New Creature comes to a more and more clear knowledge 
of the new will in proportion as he seeks to put down the 
human will and to be directed by the Holy Spirit. 

It would seem, therefore, that we put off the old man, 
Adam, and the human nature in general, in order that we 
may put on Christ and be found in Him, as members of 
His Body, and may receive with Him a share in the 
exceeding glory, and ultimately be accounted worthy of 
a place in the Kingdom of God. In proportion as we grow 
in grace, in knowledge, our appreciation of the Heavenly 
things increases. Thus our renewing progresses. 

The new will recognized by God in the begetting of 
the Holy Spirit is the New Creature which thus puts off 
the old and puts on the new. Its existence depends on 
this transformation. Failure means Second Death. 
Barely to overcome would mean a lower place on the 
spirit plane— in the "Great Company." Only the "more 
than conquerors" will get joint-heirship with their Lord— 
with exceeding glory and the divine nature. 



R5221 :page 120 

CROSS-BEARING A PRIVILEGE 

"And as they led Him away, they laid hold upon one Simon, 
...and on him they laid the cross, that he might bear it 
after Jesus."— Luke 23:26. 

THIS TEXT brings before our minds the whole 
scene of our Master's shame, ignominy— His 



condemnation by the Roman Governor at the 

solicitation of the chief priests and scribes 

and Pharisees— men of His own nation. 

Those who led Him away were the centurion 

and soldiers appointed by Pilate— not willingly, 

but by reason of the stress laid on him 

by the Jewish nation. The chief priests had 

threatened to report him as unfaithful to 

the interests of the Roman Empire, if he did not condemn 

Jesus. And then how would the Emperor treat him who 

allowed this humble Nazarene to make the claim of being 

king in territory under Roman jurisdiction? 

We remember that the Jewish Sanhedrin tried the Lord 
under a different charge altogether. Their charge against 
Him was blasphemy, the penalty of which, under the Law, 
would have been stoning to death. Possibly they were 
not allowed to do stoning at that time; or possibly they 
feared the people. 

It was not Divinely intended that our Lord should be 
stoned, but that He should be treated as a cursed one- 
hanged upon a tree. (Deuteronomy 21:22,23.) "As 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must 
the Son of Man be lifted up." (John 3:14,15.) So 
through fear of the multitude or from lack of authority 
from the Roman Governor, the Jews failed to stone Jesus. 

Since they could not bring the charge of blasphemy 
before a Roman Court, they were obliged to bring a 
different charge— that, while they were loyal to the Roman 
Emperor, Jesus was disloyal to the Roman interests. Pilate 
washed his hands of the affair. He wished to be free 
from any guilt. But under stress of the Jews, and willing to 
keep peace, he caused the charge to be made that our Lord 
was crucified because of claiming to be King of the Jews. 

The narrative seems to imply that Jesus bore His own 
cross on the way to Calvary, and that He fell beneath 
its weight. There might have been various reasons for 
this. He was weak from undergoing very rigorous 
physical and mental strain. He had suffered from the 
bloody sweat in the Garden of Gethsemane, and had endured 
different trials— before the Sanhedrin, before Pilate, 
and before Herod. After this He was flogged! We can 
imagine that a person who had undergone so much would 
be scarcely able to walk, let alone carry a burden. 

THE PROBABLE WEIGHT OF THE CROSS 

When we think of our Lord as a perfect man, we 
would not think of Him as being the strongest of men. 
The imperfections of our race have manifested themselves 
in various ways. We have no reason to suppose that the 
first specimen of our race, Adam, was of surpassing 
strength, which might denote coarseness. We see this 
principle illustrated in fruits and vegetables. When we 
find an overgrown apple, we learn that it is not so tender 
as one of average size. So with a man of great physical 
stature— a giant. He might be coarse. We are to think of 



our Lord, not as extremely rugged, nor as weak, but as 
of great delicacy, and of reasonable strength and fiber. 

When we think of the cross, too, we believe that it was 
of no light weight. We know of no light woods in the 
vicinity of Jerusalem. The most common tree there is 
the olive, which is an extremely heavy wood and of remarkable 
density. If we should suppose the cross to have 
been three feet in the ground and of reasonable height, 
it must have been at least twelve to fourteen feet long, 
and the cross-beam must have been at least five feet. 
Allowing a reasonable thickness for strength and for 
keeping it from bending under its load, we would think 
that the cross must have weighed from one hundred and 
fifty to two hundred pounds. This gives us the thought 
that it was no light weight. 

R5222 : page 120 

LESSONS FROM THE INCIDENT 

We have every reason to sympathize greatly with the 
tradition that the Lord fell under the weight of the cross. 
It was at this juncture that Simon, evidently a strong 
and rugged countryman who was passing by, was stopped 
by the centurion and his band, and compelled to assist 
Jesus in carrying the cross. Apparently, even then, its 
weight was on Jesus. 

There are lessons for us in this incident. One is that 
the disciples of Jesus, the faithful eleven, missed an opportunity 
of cross-bearing. At first we might be inclined 
to censure them severely. We must reflect, however, that 
they feared for their lives. We may sympathize with 
them, and at the same time learn a lesson of greater 
courage in everything connected with the Master. 

It is true that the multitude might have been as anxious 
to cry for the death of the disciples as for the Lord's. 
But one of them had said that he was ready to die for 
the Lord, and so said they all. How strange that in the 
moment of testing they did not display the courage! It 
is much easier to attest great loyalty, great faithfulness, 
than it is to manifest these traits when the test comes. 
With the opportune moment, come the difficulties, and the 
fearful sights and sounds, carrying terror with them. 

We, of course, have no opportunity of doing anything 
of this kind for the Master Himself. But we realize that 
He is still with us in the brethren. What a precious 
privilege this affords us of still helping to bear the Master's 
cross! How advantageous to know that He still 
recognizes that whatsoever is done unto the least of these 
His brethren is done unto Him! 

CROSS-BEARING PRECEDES CROWNING 

Another thought that we have in this connection is 
that Simon, under the necessity of cross-bearing, would 
receive the burden either willingly or unwillingly. We 



have no record of what his experiences were. There is a 
tradition which declares that he afterwards became one 
of the Master's disciples. So in the Lord's providence, 
sometimes there is responsibility laid upon us. And if the 
Lord lays a cross upon us, will it be borne with gladness 
or with murmuring? If the former, we shall have a 
blessing, even though we had not sought the cross, even 
if it had been forced upon us. 

When trials and difficulties come, and crosses are 
forced upon us, happy are we if we appreciate the opportunity 
of cross-bearing, recognizing that this is closely 
connected with the crowning. Simon represented in this 
case all of the Lord's faithful ones who help to bear the 
cross, following His example, walking in His steps. The 
cross will not be too heavy for us. The Lord will bear the 
heavy end of it; and our experiences will be only such 
as will be for our good and will work out for our blessing. 



R5218 : page 120 

"I know not the way that's before me, 

The joys or the griefs it may bring; 
What clouds are o'erhanging the future, 

What flowers by the wayside may spring. 
But there's One who will journey beside me, 

Nor in weal nor in woe will forsake; 
And this is my solace and comfort, 

'He knoweth the way that I take.'" 



R5223 : page 121 

CROSS-BEARING THE WAY OF GROWTH 

"Whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come 
after Me, cannot be My disciple."— Luke 14:27. 

A DISCIPLE is a pupil, one who follows a 
teacher or leader. The Lord has promised 
His disciples certain great blessings. If 
they are obedient, they shall be greatly 
blessed with everlasting life, shall sit with 
Him in His Throne, and be with Him 
where He is. 

It becomes, therefore, an important question 
as to what is involved in discipleship. 
Is it an easy or a difficult matter? How 
can we enter the School of Christ? The Lord here and 
elsewhere tells us the terms. In another text He says, 
"If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, 
take up his cross, and follow Me." "Whosoever doth not 
bear his cross, and come after Me, cannot be My disciple." 
-Matthew 16:24; Luke 14:27. 



There is, therefore, evidently a process in the matter. 
First of all, one must see what discipleship is and what 
the cross is. Some may perceive more or less distinctly 
than others. To some it might be a very severe ordeal 
to take up the cross. Some people judge the weight of a 
thing through perception; others through experience. 

Our Lord said that it would be better not to take up 
the cross unless we have the determination to go on unto 
the end. He illustrates this in saying, "No man, having put 
his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the 
Kingdom of God."— Luke 9:62. 

The Lord very distinctly told what the cross would 
imply to those who become His disciples. He said that 
whosoever would be His disciple would suffer persecution. 
He warned us that carrying the cross would be a serious 
matter. If, therefore, you determine that you would like 
to be His disciple, sit down and count the cost. If you 
take up the cross, it is to be not merely lifted, but carried 
faithfully unto death. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES CROSS-BEARING? 

The taking up of the cross, then, is done after we 
come to a knowledge of the Truth. The world are not 
bearing the cross at all; neither are those who are having 
their own wills crossed continually. Many a man will 
say, "Since I married, I have my cross with my wife"; 
and many a wife will say that she has her cross with her 
husband. But neither of these is the cross of Christ— 
the difficulty is that there was misjudgment in the marriage. 
The couples are mismated. 

Nevertheless such a thing might become cross-bearing. 
If, for instance, the opposition of husband or wife were 
engendered by faithfulness to the Lord, the bearing of this 
would be cross-bearing, because of being endured for 
Christ's sake, for the Truth's sake. Endurance of opposition 
by business competitors because of our faithfulness 
to Christ would be part of the cross-bearing. Probably 
it is good for us that we do not see all the time what 
the cross means. 

"We know not what awaits us, 
God kindly veils our eyes, 
And o'er each step of our onward way 
He makes new scenes to rise." 

We cannot take up the cross until we have seen what 
the cross is, and have engaged to take up that cross and 
become Christ's disciple. After we have taken up that 
cross, it has to be borne, our Lord tells us. Bearing it 
does not mean our running away from it, or getting 
alarmed at it. Bearing the cross means enduring it. We 
are to follow our instructions along this line. 

Our Lord says, "When they persecute you in one city, 
flee to another." Whosoever is faithful will suffer persecution. 
Therefore, to be without opposition is proof, 
not that we are being favored of God, but that He is not 
dealing with us as sons. Only those whom He deals with 



as sons will become of the Royal Priesthood and participate 
in His glorious Kingdom. Whoever thinks to run 
away from the difficulties that come, makes a mistake. 

THE PURPOSE ACCOMPLISHED BY TRIALS 

What, then, would be the basis on which we could 
relieve ourselves from trials? We should not seek to 
release ourselves unless we realize that by endurance we 
are accomplishing no service for the Truth. Then we 
might seek to see whether the Lord would open some 
other door. If, for instance, one finds himself where he 
is simply suffering and doing no good, let him look about 
and ask the Lord in prayer to show him what to do. 
Perhaps the Lord may open a way of escape. We shall 
not get rid of our trials and imperfections, however, until 
we get rid of the mortal flesh; for the course of the world 
is out of line with righteousness. The whole world is out 
of the way through ignorance, superstition, blindness; and 
amidst them we are to strive to show forth the praises 
of Him who called us from darkness into marvelous light. 

So, then, the following after the Lord is apparently 
the thing that is especially emphasized in our text. The 
bearing of the cross is the way of growth in character 
for the consecrated child of God. If no trials or difficulties 
come to us, if our appetites or desires are never 
interfered with in our service to the Lord and the Truth, 
we may be sure that we are making some mistake. We 
have not become His disciples. 

But if we should have these trials, the Apostle says 
that we are to consider them only as light afflictions and 
but for a moment; and that these are working out "for 
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." 
We are looking at the present time, not for the things that 
are seen— the earthly applause and glory— but for the 
Heavenly Glory— for the things that the Lord has promised 
to those that love Him.— 2 Corinthians 4:17,18. 



R5221 :page 121 

"WHAT SHALL I RENDER UNTO THE LORD?" 

(Psalm 116:12-14) 

What shall I render, Lord, to Thee 
For all Thy benefits toward me? 
For life and every earthly good, 
For raiment, shelter, daily food; 
For light and Truth, for peace and love, 
For heavenly wisdom from above?— 
How great Thy bounties unto me! 
What have I that is not from Thee? 

For all these benefits toward me, 



What shall I render, Lord, to Thee? 
The Cup Thy hand of Love hath poured, 
I'll humbly take, most gracious Lord, 
And call upon Thy holy name 
To help me Thy great Plan proclaim; 
I'll spend my days in ceaseless praise, 
And tell abroad Thy wondrous ways! 

"Salvation's Cup"— of suffering, too— 
Of suffering with God's chosen few, 
Dear Lord, I'll drink of this, Thy Cup, 
And smiling through my tears, look up— 
A mingled Cup of grief and joy, 
Of blessedness without alloy, 
Of Love and fellowship Divine, 
A foretaste of the Kingdom-wine! 

That all, dear Lord, may know and see 

Thy countless benefits toward me, 

Before Thy congregation, now, 

I'll pay my consecration Vow; 

And in Thy strength, supplied each day, 

I'll strive to walk the narrow way 

That leads to rest and God and Thee, 

And blissful immortality! GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5222 : page 122 

RE CHRIST'S RESURRECTION 

"Christ... being put to death indeed in flesh, 

but made alive in spirit."— 1 Peter 3:18. Rotherham. 

For forty days after His resurrection our Lord was 
with His disciples before His ascension. Yet He revealed 
Himself to them, according to the Records, not more 
than eleven times in all— and some of these instances are 
probably duplications. His interviews with the disciples 
lasted only a few minutes each, except on the walk to 
Emmaus. These manifestations were attended by circumstances 
and conditions which spoke in thunder tones 
of a great change which had occurred to Him. Evidently 
He was no longer the same being, although He had the 
same loving interest in them as before. He was still 
their Lord and Master, the same Jesus, though no longer 
Jesus in the flesh. He was now "the Lord, that Spirit," 
"a quickening Spirit." 

There is no Scriptural statement to the effect that 
Jesus arose in the flesh. We have noted the Scriptures 
very carefully, and find none of them to say that Jesus 
arose in the flesh. On the contrary, we find, as the 
Apostle declares, "Now the Lord is that Spirit." (2 Corinthians 3:17.) 
St. Paul in telling us how he saw 
the Lord Jesus, says that he saw the Lord, not in the flesh, 



but shining "above the brightness of the sun" "at noonday." 
-Acts 26:13-15. 

The Apostle tells us that the Church is to be a spirit 
body: "It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption: 
it is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory: it is sown 
in weakness; it is raised in power: it is sown a natural 
body; it is raised a spiritual body." (I Corinthians 15:42-44.) 
He tells us that our experiences in the resurrection 
must be similar to those of our Lord. In our 
Lord's case there was a sowing in dishonor and raising in 
glory; a sowing an animal body and a raising a spirit 
body. St. Peter calls attention to this fact when he says, 
"Christ... being put to death indeed in flesh, but made 
alive in spirit."— I Peter 3:18. Rotherham. 

The question, then, arises, How could the Lord be 
raised a spirit body? We can merely give you the Word 
of the Lord for it. He was raised so. The new nature 
began when our Lord was begotten of the Holy Spirit at 
the time of His baptism, and was completed when he was 
perfected as a spirit being at His Resurrection. 

The various Scriptures which are cited about Jesus' appearance 
in bodies of flesh do not prove that Jesus had a 
body of flesh; for angels have appeared among mankind 
in fleshly bodies. And when Jesus rose from the dead, 
He appeared, or materialized, in the same way that He had 
appeared to Abraham in olden times. (Genesis 18:1,2; 15:4,5.) 
One of His manifestations after His resurrection 
was when He took a walk with two of His disciples to 
Emmaus and sat down with them to supper. When He 
broke bread, He became known to them and vanished out 
of their sight! -Luke 24:30,31. 

A MATERIALIZED BODY 

In the case when He appeared to His disciples, it is 
stated that He came into the room where they were, 
"when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled 
for fear of the Jews." We read further along, 
that eight days later He again appeared in the same room, 
in the same manner, "the doors being shut." (John 20:19,26.) 
These things were evidently to show the 
disciples that He was no longer a flesh being, but a spirit 
being. During the forty days after His resurrection He 
appeared, probably, not more than three hours in all. He 
remained with them to establish their faith, so that they 
might be able to receive the Holy Spirit at the proper time. 

In answer to a question about Philip's vanishing from 
the sight of the eunuch, and being found at Azotus, we 
reply that God was able to take him away. But there 
was nothing said about his being made a spirit being. 
Philip will, no doubt, in due time share with the Lord the 
change of nature in the First Resurrection— "in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye"; for "Flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God."— I Corinthians 15:52,50. 

When Jesus appeared in Jerusalem in the midst of His 
disciples and they were affrighted, He said, "Behold My 



hands and My feet, that it is I Myself: handle Me and 
see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see Me 
have." (Luke 24:39.) He was there impressing upon 
them that they were not SEEING a spirit being, a spirit 
body. They saw a materialized body. The Lord was a 
Spirit all the time, however, and the flesh and bones were 
merely agents of appearance. So our Lord appeared in 
flesh and bones, and He also appeared in clothing. 

BODY AND CLOTHING CREATED FOR THE OCCASION 

Where did the flesh and bones come from? The same 
place that the clothing came from. The human body of 
flesh and bones, etc., and its clothing, which appeared suddenly 
while the doors were shut, did not go out of the door, 
but simply disappeared, or dissolved, into the same elements 
from which He had created them a few moments 
before. "He vanished [Greek, ginomai aphantos, became 
non-manifest, i.e., invisible. Strong's Exhaustive Concordance.] 
out of their sight" (Luke 24:3 1), and was no 
longer seen of them when the flesh and bones and clothing 
in which He had manifested Himself were dissolved, 
though doubtless He was still with them— invisibly 
present; so also much of the time during those forty days. 

The power manifested by our Lord, to create and dissolve 
the clothing in which He appeared, was just as 
superhuman as the creating and dissolving of His assumed 
human body; and the body was no more His glorious 
spirit body than were the clothes He wore. It will be 
remembered that the seamless robe and other clothing 
which our Redeemer wore before His crucifixion had 
been divided among the Roman soldiers, and that the 
grave clothes were left folded away in the sepulcher (John 19:23,24,40; 
20:5-7), so that the clothing in which He 
appeared on the different occasions mentioned must have 
been specially created. 

Our thought is that our Lord was perfect in the flesh 
when He was a man, and that He gave Himself an Offering, 
as a Ransom-price for Adam. "We see Jesus, who 
was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering 
of death, crowned with glory and honor." "A body hast 
Thou prepared Me." (Hebrews 2:9; 10:5.) That earthly, 
human body of flesh suffered death; and God would not 

R5223 : page 122 

again make Him flesh, but He raised our Lord from the 
dead a New Creature of the Divine nature. After His 
resurrection our Lord said to His Apostles, "All power is 
given unto Me in Heaven and in earth."— Matthew 28:18. 

All this indicates to us the great change that came to 
our Lord at the time of His resurrection. If He is now 
merely a man, He is still "lower than the angels." And 
to think of our Lord as a man and lower than the angels 
is contrary to the Lord's Word that He is exalted far above 
angels to the Divine nature. "And being found in fashion 



as a man, He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto 
death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also 
hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is 
above every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee 
should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and 
things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the 
Father."— Philippians 2:8-11. 



R5223 : page 123 

THE GIFTS OF WHITSUNTIDE 

-MAY 11. -I CORINTHIANS 12:1-11.- 

"There are diversities of gifts, 
but the same Spirit."— Verse 4. 

WHITSUNTIDE, or Pentecost, marks a very 
special period in God's great Program respecting 
mankind. It stands next in importance 
to the great events connected with our 
Lord Jesus; viz., His baptism at Jordan and 
the anointing of the Holy Spirit there, His 
finishing of His vow of consecration at Calvary, 
His resurrection from the dead on the 
third day— His glorious spirit-birth, as partaker 
of the Divine nature. 

All that Jesus did necessarily preceded the acceptance 
of any members of the human family to joint-heirship 
with Him, or to any recognition of God as His children. 
God acknowledged Adam as His son on the human plane, 
"a little lower than the angels," so long as he remained 
obedient and loyal; but when he disobeyed and came under 
the Divine sentence of death, he broke the covenant between 
God and himself. (Hosea 6:7, margin.) From 
that time onward, God had no sons amongst men until 
Jesus' time, because all were imperfect, sharing in Father 
Adam's imperfection by laws of heredity. 

Then God sent forth His Son, born of a woman, with 
a life uncontaminated, a life that was not derived from 
Father Adam and was therefore not involved in his sentence. 
This One, "holy, harmless, undefiled and separate 
from sinners," God recognized as His Son. When He 
made consecration of His life at Jordan and symbolized 
it in His water baptism, God accepted the sacrifice and 
bestowed upon Him the Holy Spirit in begetting power. 

Thenceforth He was the Son of God in two senses- 
first, according to the flesh; and second, according to the 
Spirit. But in God's order the spirit-begotten One was 
to triumph by fully offering up the fleshly one. This work 
of Jesus was accomplished at Calvary, where He laid down 
His life on behalf of the sins of the whole world. 



R5224 : page 123 

But still God could not recognize the world. They 
were all sinners, and continued so to be until Jesus 
ascended on High, appeared in the Father's presence, 
and made satisfaction for sins. Be it noted, however, that 
He did not make satisfaction for all sins then, but merely 
for the sins of the Church— for the sins of those who 
would be called of the Father, and who would accept the 
call and walk in the footsteps of Jesus. As for the world, 
their sins are still on them. 

The only way to obtain forgiveness of sins during this 
Age, therefore, is to become a disciple of Jesus. Thus, as 
the Apostle says, we, Jesus' followers, have escaped the 
condemnation that is still on the world. The Scriptures 
show us that God has a different way of dealing with the 
world, and a different time. He will deal with the world 
through Christ's Millennial Kingdom, for a thousand 
years, to scatter their darkness, to forgive their sins and 
lift them up to human perfection. Meantime, God deals 
with the Church only; and it is the Church class that the 
Apostle discusses in today's lesson. 

This Church class began its existence at Pentecost- 
Whitsuntide. Hence, we say that this marks a most important 
era in the affairs of the Church. It is true that 
Jesus called His disciples and told them various things 
during His ministry; but when He left them, He instructed 
them to tarry and not to begin their work at all until they 
should be duly authorized by the Father, duly anointed 
with the Holy Spirit. This anointing which they would 
receive would be their authority, and would give them the 
necessary qualification to be the mouthpieces and ambassadors 
of the Father and of the Son. 

The Father could not recognize them sooner than 
Pentecost; for until Christ's presentation of His merit on 
their behalf, they were like the remainder of the world- 
still sinners, still condemned. When the Pentecostal blessing 
came, it manifested the fact that Jesus had ascended 
to the Father's presence; and that the Father had graciously 
received Him, had appreciated His great work of 
sacrifice, and had accepted it as satisfactory for the sins of 
the Church— the Household of Faith. It was on the basis 
of this forgiveness of sins, as well as on the basis of the 
consecration of the disciples to God and His service, that 
the spirit-begetting of Pentecost came upon them. 

THE GIFTS OF THE SPIRIT 

We are to distinguish between the gifts of the Spirit 
and the fruits of the Spirit. The fruits of the Holy Spirit 
are developments of the heart and character, which come 
more or less slowly, according to the personality and the 
environment of each of the spirit-begotten ones. These 
fruits of the Spirit, the Apostle tells us, can be seen; they 
are manifest— "Meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly-kindness, love." 



These fruits must be developed in our hearts; and this 
will mean more or less of a manifestation of them in our 
words and deeds, as well as in our thoughts. The riper 
the Christian, the riper these fruits; and if no fruits, then 
no Christian; for as the Apostle says, "If any man have 
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." But this 
Spirit of Christ, these fruits of the Spirit, may be more 
or less overshadowed by weaknesses of the flesh; and all 
may not be able to see to what extent the brother who is 
weak in the flesh is really fighting a good fight against the 
spirit of the world, the spirit of the Adversary, and the 
mind of his own flesh. 

God alone knoweth the heart; therefore, we are to 
judge nothing as respects the degree of faithfulness. We 
may, however, and should judge as to whether or not we 
see good fruits or bad fruits in ourselves, or in others who 
profess to be followers of Jesus. The Master said, "By 
their fruits ye shall know them. Do men gather grapes 
of thorns, or figs of thistles?" Surely not! The thorns 
and the thistles are bad fruits, belonging to the evil nature, 
and not fruits of the Spirit, of the Lord, appertaining to 
the New Creature. 

But when Pentecost came, those disciples who had 
already accepted Jesus were not prepared to manifest immediately 
rich, ripe fruitage of the Holy Spirit. It requires 
days, weeks, months, years, for such development. 
Up to this time they were natural men. Only a few days 
before Jesus had said to them, "Except ye become as little 
children, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom." He 
perceived that there was strife amongst themselves as to 
which should be greatest; and that this was entirely contrary 
to the proper spirit which they must have if they 
would finally be accounted worthy of participation in His 
Kingdom. We see then why the brethren waiting at 
Pentecost in the upper room could not have a manifestation 
of the fruits of the Spirit at that time. But it was 
very necessary to them and to us that they should have 
some manifestation of God's favor; that there should be 
some way in which God would show that Jesus had accomplished 
the Father's work, and that His sacrifice had been 
acceptable to the Father on our behalf. God manifested 
this acceptance by the bestowment of certain gifts, which 
were not fruits of the Spirit, in any sense of the word. 

R5224 : page 124 

Those gifts were widely distributed in the early 
Church, and were miraculous. Some who had received the 
gift of the Spirit spoke one language and some another, 
of which they had previously no knowledge; some had the 
gift of interpreting the foreign languages which the others 
spoke; some received the gift of healing; and some had 
power to work other miracles. 

These gifts served a three-fold purpose: (1) They 
proved God's favor, and that it had come through Christ, 
and therefore proved that He had ascended, and that His 



entire work of redemption had been satisfactory to the 
Father. (2) They were proofs to the public that God 
was with these people. This would lead lovers of God to 
investigate the Message they bore. (3) They were an 
assurance to the disciples themselves that they were following 
in the right way, and that God was blessing them 
and leading them. 

All these experiences, indispensable for the establishment 
of the early Church, came at a time when such manifestation 
was most necessary. The early Church could not 
walk by faith as we do. They needed the assistance of 
sight, to the extent that was there granted; for they had 
no Bibles. They had no instruction from God except such 
as came through these channels. 

St. Paul explains the matter in today's lesson. When 
they came together, one would speak in an unknown 
tongue. Another would arise in another part of the audience, 
and with a power not his own give an interpretation 
of the foreign language used by the speaker with 
"tongues." This drew the brethren together every day, 
especially on the first day of the week. They wanted to 
have fellowship and instruction; and in this way they obtained 
it, God guiding in respect to the messages delivered 
in unknown tongues and to the interpretations. 

Thus God taught them in almost the only way they 
could have received instruction at that time, but very differently 
from the way in which He now instructs His people, 
or has ever instructed them since the Apostles' day. 
Such instruction is no longer necessary, and is therefore 
no longer given. Instead, we have something much better. 
We have the Gospels, recording our Lord's words, parables, 
dark sayings, etc.; we have the Epistles of the New 
Testament, comments of the inspired Apostles on the Old 
Testament writings; and we have the prophecies of the 
Old Testament, to which St. Peter declares, "We do well 
to take heed, as unto a light which shineth in a dark place, 
until the Day dawn."— 2 Peter 1:19. 

OURS A BETTER EXPERIENCE 

With these Divinely provided helps, the man of God, 
as St. Paul declares, "may be thoroughly furnished unto 
every good work." Through these channels the Holy 
Spirit is instructing the Church. But the gifts of the 
Spirit were necessary at Pentecost. Instead of those 
gifts, we now have the fruits of the Spirit, as testifying 
God's favor, and our own progress in the good way. With 
our further enlightenment the Lord requires of us more 
than was required of the early Church— that we walk by 
faith and not by sight. 

St. Paul points out that all these variations in the manifestations 
of the Spirit meant, not different spirits, but 
the one Spirit, working in the entire Church, with the one 
purpose of building them all up as various members in the 
one Body of Christ. He says, "There are diversities of 
operations, but it is the same God that worketh all in all. 



To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another, 
the word of knowledge; to another, faith; to another, 
gifts of healing; to another, miracles; to another, 
prophecy; to another, discerning of spirits; to another, 
diversity of tongues and interpretations." 

"YE ARE ALL ONE BODY" 

The oneness of the Church with each other and with 
their Lord, the Head, St. Paul repeatedly sets forth, and 
particularly in today's lesson. He shows that the different 
gifts enabled the different members of the Body to co-operate 
for their mutual welfare, edification and upbuilding, 
in preparation for the glories of service in the coming 
Kingdom. He says that as the human body is one, 
but has many members, all under the control of the head, 
so also is the Body of Christ. The Church is one Body, 
but composed of many members, all under the control of 
the Head, Jesus, operating through the Spirit of Truth, 
by the Word of Truth and by Divine providences. 

The object of the organization of the Church is not 
the conversion of the world, but it is the upbuilding of 
herself and preparation for a future service. That future 
service is to be the blessing of the world. But before that 
service for the world can be properly begun, the Church 
herself must be developed, proven, approved of God, and 

R5225 : page 124 

glorified by a share in the First Resurrection. 

A MORE EXCELLENT WAY 

St. Paul, further on in the chapter, tells how the various 
members of the Body should co-operate with each 
other, offsetting each other's imperfections, compensating 
for each other's shortcomings and weaknesses, and seeking 
only the welfare of the Body as a whole. There 
should be no schisms, no division, no sectarianism in the 
Body of Christ, the Church, and all the members should 
have the same love one for another. Sectarian love and 
sectarian pride should be unknown. Likewise, if any of the 
members suffer, all should feel a sympathy. He points out 
that God set the different members in this Body: first, the 
Apostles; and secondarily, prophets, or orators; and 
thirdly, teachers; after that, miracles, gifts, helps, diversities 
of tongues. All have not the same office given them 
of the Lord, but each should seek faithfully to use the 
talents which he possesses; and while using these gifts they 
should seek the best they are capable of exercising. 

Then the Apostle adds, "Yet shew I unto you a more 
excellent way," still better than any of these gifts. Following 
along (chapter 13), he declares that one might 
have these gifts, and yet make shipwreck entirely; and 
that it was necessary, even with the gifts, to cultivate the 
fruits of the Spirit. For though we should have the gift 



of prophecy, understanding all mysteries and knowledge, 
and have all faith, but have not love— the great fruit of 
the Spirit— we would be nothing. Moreover, he declares 
that the gifts would vanish away, but that the fruits would 
last eternally. 

It is important, then, in our consideration of Whitsuntide 
blessings, that we remember that without the fruits 
of the Spirit we would be nothing, and would have no 
share in the glorious Messianic Kingdom, for which we 
are waiting and praying, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will 
be done on earth as in Heaven." 



R5225 : page 125 

THE SOWING AND THE REAPING 

-MAY 18.-GENESIS 42.- 

"Whatsoever a man soweth, that 
shall he also reap."— Galatians 6:7. 

THE STORY of Joseph and his brethren continues. 

Today's lesson illustrates how the 

remembrance of their cruelty toward their 

brother Joseph, inspired by envy, continued 

to harass the evil-doers many long years 

after. Our Golden Text seems to lay down 

a general principle, applicable not only to 

the consecrated people of God, but to mankind 

in general. Whatsoever anybody sows 

wilfully, intelligently, will bring a harvest, a reaping, of 

similarly good or evil kind. 

The famine was general throughout that region of the 
world. It included Palestine as well as Egypt. The word 
spread that there was no lack of food in Egypt, that there 
was corn there, sold at moderate prices, and that it belonged 
to the old stock. Jacob directed his sons, who 
were men of families themselves, to go down to Egypt 
and make purchases of wheat. 

As strangers, they were directed to Joseph, who doubtless 
was on the lookout for them. He spoke to them 
through an interpreter, asking if they were not spies, coming 
to see how much wheat was in Egypt, that they might 
bring an army to steal it. They explained their situation 
truthfully. Joseph then inquired about his father and his 
younger brother Benjamin. Finally he put one of them 
into prison, and sent all the others home with corn, with 
the understanding that they would need more corn and 
might have plenty of it, as long as the famine lasted, provided 
that they should prove that they were not spies by 
bringing their youngest brother along with them. Meantime, 
Simeon would be held as hostage. 

The guilty consciences of the brethren began to connect 
up these various experiences with their own wrong 



course in the past. They said one to another, "We are 
verily guilty concerning our brother, when we saw the 
anguish of his soul, when he besought us and we would 
not hear: therefore is this distress come upon us." They 
knew not that Joseph understood them, but he withdrew 
and wept. His heart was not hard. He was merely giving 
them a lesson that would be profitable for them in 
coming years. 

The Scriptures represent that when the Messianic 
Kingdom will begin to shed its blessings abroad, the antitypical 
Joseph, Messiah, will likewise speak roughly to 
the people in a time of trouble, and cause them great 
vexation and worry as to what the outcome will be. But 
all the while the Lord's heart will be full of love and 
sympathy for the poor groaning creation, for whom 
He already has died, and in whose interest His Kingdom 
will be established. The time of trouble upon the world 
in the beginning of Messiah's reign will evidently be for 
the very purpose of preparing the hearts of mankind for 
the blessings which the Lord is so willing to bestow. 

MANY STRIPES AND FEW STRIPES 

When Jacob's ten sons arrived with their wheat, they 
told the whole story of their experience to their father. 
They explained why Simeon was not with them— that he 
was kept as a hostage. Moreover, they were perplexed 
to find that no money had been charged them for the 
wheat. The money they had paid for it was returned in 
each sack. Everything seemed strange to them, and the 
minds of the brethren continually adverted to the crime 
of years ago, in connection with their brother Joseph. 
Many times during those intervening years they had 
reaped crops of sorrow and fearful surmisings respecting 
what the providence of a just God might ultimately exact 
from them in the nature of trouble, similar to that which 
they had brought upon their brother. 

How advantageous it would be to the whole world if 
this principle were generally recognized— if all realized the 
truthfulness of God's Word that every trespass must receive 
a just recompense of reward! We have lost such 
an appreciation of justice, and such a looking for a 
righteous retribution, in the fog of a very false doctrine, 
which has become prevalent. That false doctrine ascribes 
only the one punishment for every sin, and that an unthinkable 
one; viz., everlasting torture. In the first place, 
how few there are that really believe that doctrine or are 
really influenced by it! Its monstrosity makes it unbelievable, 
and turns the mind away from the proper view 
of the real punishments which God has foretold. 

Added to this first inconsistency and its evil effect, we 
mention another, which associates itself thus: Our Catholic 
friends claim that by membership in the church they will 
escape eternal torment and get some lesser torment. And 
that theory seems so much more logical than the Protestant 
one that many accept it as the lesser evil of the two. 



Then comes our Protestant theory that a man or a woman, 

the moment before death, may say, "God forgive me!" 

and immediately pass into Paradise, and escape all punishment 

for sins. These theories, we claim, are all injurious, 

as well as inconsistent. The Scriptural theory, we are 

sure, would be found the more effective, if it were 

preached, if it were believed. 

That Scriptural theory is expressed in our Golden 
Text: "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." 
If he sows a desire for cruelty, words of deceit, injustice, 
selfishness, evil speaking, slander, he will surely have a 
reaping time, and will gather rewards in harmony with 
his desire. 

It is impossible for humanity to improve upon the 
Divine arrangement. Hence all Christian people should 
begin afresh to tell the world both of the Justice and the 
Love of God— that God's just penalty against sin is death, 
but that He has made provision through Christ for a release 
from that penalty, during Christ's Messianic reign of 
a thousand years. Then every member of Adam's race 
will be granted a full opportunity of reconciliation with 
God and of restoration to the image and likeness of God, 
lost for all by Father Adam's sin. 

But meantime, each individual has a responsibility in 
respect to his every word and act and thought. To whatever 
extent he sins against light, knowledge and the 
Golden Rule, to the same extent he degrades his character, 
and thus makes his opportunity for return to the image 
and likeness of God the more difficult. He whose conscience 
becomes the most degraded will find the way for 
retracing his course the most difficult and steep. 

According to this Divine rule, the Millennium may 
find heathen people more ready to go up on the Highway 
of Holiness than people of so-called Christian lands. The 
latter, having had more light, more privilege, more opportunity 
and sinning against greater knowledge, have 
seared their consciences more deeply. Of some such Jesus 
exclaimed, "How can ye escape the condemnation of 
Gehenna!"— the Second Death. 

JACOB'S GRAY HAIRS FOR SHEOL 

When poor old Jacob heard that Benjamin would be 
required to go on the next expedition for wheat, he demurred 
and declared that it must never be. Joseph was 

R5226 : page 126 

gone, and if now he should lose his youngest son, Benjamin, 
the grief would bring down his gray hairs quickly 
to Sheol— the tomb— the state of death. 

In our common version English Bible this word Sheol 
is repeatedly translated Hell, Pit, and Grave. In olden 
times, these three English words were synonymous in 
meaning. As for instance, a man, speaking of burying 
so many bushels of potatoes in a pit, would call it helling 



the potatoes. And when this term was used in respect to 
humanity, sometimes the word grave was used. Altogether, 
the word Sheol occurs sixty-six times, and more than 
one-half of these times it is translated pit and grave. 

When the Revised Version was in preparation, the 
learned men charged with that work refused any longer 
to translate the word Sheol by the word Hell, because in 
the intervening centuries that word had gradually lost its 
original meaning and had come to have the significance 
of a place of fire and of torture. Since no such meaning 
attaches to the word Sheol in the Hebrew, these scholars 
refused to so translate it into English. To these facts 
they all agreed, but then came a dispute as to how it 
should be translated. Some would not agree to translate 
Sheol uniformly by the English word grave, or tomb, 
fearing that this would appear very radical to some Christian 
people. 

Finally, as a compromise to settle the question, it was 
concluded that in all places where Sheol and the corresponding 
Greek word Hades had been translated Hell in 
our Common Version, the Hebrew word Sheol or the 
Greek word Hades should be substituted, and left without 
translation. If any of the people found out their meaning, 
it would be all right. If they did not find out, they might 
remain in ignorance, and still think of Hades and Sheol as 
signifying a place of torture. Our Baptist friends have 
recently met with a similar difficulty and have given the 
translation of Sheol and Hades as "the Underworld." Of 
course the grave, the tomb, the state of death, may be 
thus indicated, and no one can find fault. 

It is needless to say that when Jacob spoke of his gray 
hairs as going down to Sheol, he did not mean his sons to 
understand that he expected to go to eternal torment. 
What he did mean is evident. He meant, "My sons, I 
am now old and gray-headed, and to lose this youngest 
son would hasten my death"— "bring down my gray hairs 
to Sheol, to the tomb." No one need question where 
Jacob's gray hairs would go. They did go to Sheol 
eventually, but not because of grief. Jacob's old age was 
made very happy by the fellowship of his sons, and by 
the realization that God had highly exalted Joseph to the 
rulership of Egypt. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT LESSON 

Although St. Paul, as we have seen, made a general 
observation to the effect that whatsoever any man sows, 
that shall he also reap, nevertheless, he evidently used 
these words with particular reference to the experiences 
of the Church. The context makes such an application. 
The context applies these words directly to the consecrated 
people of God, assuring them that a consecration 
to be dead with Christ is not sufficient. On the contrary, 
God cannot be mocked, cannot be deceived, cannot be 
trifled with. If God has entered into a covenant with us, 
nothing else than our agreement will stand. 



Then the Apostle recites the agreement which Christians 
covenant with the Lord. They covenant to sacrifice 
all earthly interests, aims, hopes, that thereby they may 
be pleasing and acceptable to God, and become heirs with 
Jesus of the incorruptible things to be attained on the 
other side the veil, as spirit beings, as New Creatures in 
Christ. He says, "He that soweth to the flesh, shall of 
the flesh reap corruption." By this he means that if any 
Christian who has entered into this covenant with God 
to become dead to the will of the flesh and alive to the will 
of God, shall live after the flesh— according to its desires, 
its promptings, its leadings, its appetites— the end of that 
man's way will be death— the Second Death, symbolized 
by the Gehenna fire, which destroyed the offal outside the 
City of Jerusalem. 

On the other hand, if any man sow to the spirit, if he 
live according to the New Creature, by living in harmony 
with his covenant of consecration— not merely making a 
start in the right direction— this would decide the matter 
in his favor. Some of the best people who have ever 
lived have made more or less serious blunders, under the 
temptations of the flesh. But stumbling into sin would 
not be living after the flesh— it would merely be a start 
to so live. The soul, rightly exercised by his sin, by the 
weakness, may recover itself, and come back to the Throne 
of Heavenly Grace, and in the name of Jesus obtain 
mercy and find grace to help for further time of need. 
But if these opportunities and privileges were not used, 
and if the course of living after the flesh were pursued, 
the result would be death. 

So, on the other hand, to make a start to live a 
righteous, self-sacrificing life would not be sufficient; and 
to return to a righteous course, after having been overtaken 
in a fault and shedding some tears of penitence, 
would not be sufficient to recover him. But if we live 
after the Spirit, if we through the Spirit do mortify the 
deeds of the body, then we shall gain the eternal life on 
the spirit plane which God has promised to all the faithful. 
But this matter of living after the Spirit is a great contract, 
and one that needs continual watchfulness and 
prayer, lest we be overtaken in a fault— lest we let these 
precious things of God's promise slip from us— lest we 
become overcharged with the cares of this life and the 
deceitfulness of riches— lest our faith become weak and 
we faint by the way. 

We need to have this thought definitely before our 
minds: While each act and word and thought has its 
bearing upon the ultimate results in every Christian's life, 
nevertheless no one thought, no one word, and no one 
deed carries the deciding weight, either for good or for 
evil. The more loyal we are, the more faithful we are, 
the fewer slips we shall make, the more like our Redeemer 
we shall be, and the brighter will be our reward, for as 
the Apostle declares, "As star differeth from star in glory, 
so also is The Resurrection of the Dead." 

Those, then, who are of the world may know that 



every good and every evil act of theirs will have a weight 
and influence in respect to their trial for life or death 
under the Messianic Kingdom arrangements. And every 
Christian who has entered into a covenant to become dead 
with Christ that he may also live with Him, to suffer with 
Christ that he may also reign with Him— all such should 
know that every word, every thought, every act, has a 
bearing upon the great results. Hence, as the Apostle 
says, all such should walk through life circumspectly, 
wisely, seeking to know and to do the things pleasing to 
God, and to attain the highest reward. 



R5226 : page 127 

THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT AND THE NEW COVENANT 

THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT is not the 
New Covenant, even as it is not the Law 
Covenant. The New Covenant is the name 
of that arrangement which God will make 
with Israel and all mankind who, during 
the period of Messiah's reign, desire to become 
"Israelites indeed." That New Covenant 
will be inaugurated as a measure for 
carrying out the blessings purposed in the 
Abrahamic Covenant. 

The Abrahamic Covenant relates especially to the Seed 
of Abraham, which is to be made glorious and powerful, 
with a view to the blessing of the world. The New Covenant 
relates to the arrangement by which the antitypical 
Seed of Abraham, when glorified, will accomplish the 
honorable work assigned to it in the Abrahamic Covenant. 

The fulfilment of the Abrahamic Covenant began in 
the person of our Lord Jesus, not when He left the 
Heavenly glory, nor when He was born a babe at Bethlehem, 
but when God accepted His consecration and begat 
Him to a new nature at the time of His baptism, perfecting 
Him in the new nature at His resurrection. The 
Man Jesus, before being begotten of the Holy Spirit, was 
not the Seed of Abraham according to promise, capable 
of blessing mankind; for so long as Jesus was in the 
flesh, even though perfect, the blessing of the world 
through Him was impossible. The world lay under a 
death sentence and could not be blessed until provision 
should be made for the lifting of that death sentence. 

The provision of the Ransom, therefore, was necessary 
for the world. Jesus in the flesh, in providing the 
Ransom-price, would have had no life for Himself that 
He might become the King of Glory and Priest after the 
order of Melchizedek (Psa. 110:4; Heb. 5:10) unless 
God had begotten and quickened and raised Him to the 
higher, spirit nature. Hence, although Jesus, through 
His mother, was of the seed of Abraham according to the 
flesh, He did not inherit this Abrahamic Covenant according 



to the flesh, but as the New Creature. 

In order, therefore, to attain this higher nature, in 
order to be the Spiritual Seed of Abraham and bless all 
the families of the earth, it was necessary for Jesus to 
enter into a special covenant of sacrifice. The Church, 
members of His Body, must share all His experiences and 
lay down the earthly life also; for whether Jews or 
Gentiles it would still be true that flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom. Hence the privilege of the Church 
is to enter into the covenant of sacrifice with Jesus. Thus 
we read, "Gather My saints together unto Me; those that 
have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice."— Psa. 50:5. 

It has required the entire Gospel Age for the gathering 
of these saints and the making of their sacrifices. 
Those sacrifices must be accomplished before they can 
attain to the Heavenly nature— before they can be members 
of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham and heirs according 
to the promise. Thus the Apostle declares, "Israel hath 

R5227 : page 127 

not obtained that which he seeketh for [to be the Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham]; but the Election hath obtained it, 
and the rest were blinded."— Rom. 11:7. 

The Election obtained this blessed state through the 
covenant of sacrifice, in which Jesus acted as their Advocate. 
The first members were accepted at Pentecost. 
The last members, we trust, will soon finish their course 
with joy. Then the Spiritual Seed of Abraham will be 
complete and ready to serve the world as the great antitypical 
Mediator— of the New Covenant. 

The Abrahamic Covenant was God's own Covenant, 
or promise. Because it was unconditional, it has no mediator 
(Gal. 3:19,20), neither did it need to be sealed with 
blood. Rather, we might say that God sealed it with 
His oath. (Heb. 6:16-18.) The Law Covenant needed 
the blood of bulls and goats as an offset to the sins of 
the people, who were to be blessed typically. The New 
Covenant needs the blood of better sacrifices as satisfaction 
for the sins of the people, who are to be blessed 
actually. These two Covenants could not go into effect 
without the shedding of blood and the remission of 
sins.-Heb. 9:18-22. 

But the Abrahamic Covenant centers itself in the 
New Creatures. From the first, God meant primarily the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, the New Creation, which has 
never known sin. Jesus Himself was holy, harmless, undefiled 
and separate from sinners, and needed not any 
atonement for sin in order to enter into that Covenant 
relationship and become Abraham's Spiritual Seed and 
Heir. Those accepted as His members would have 
had no such standing or worthiness except as He adopted 
them as His members, imputed His own merit to them 
and offered them sacrificially as His own flesh. 

Hence, strictly speaking, we cannot say that the Abrahamic 
Covenant has ever been sealed with blood, or 



that it will ever be so sealed. This does not alter the 
fact, however, that not without blood (death) could Jesus 
have become the great antitypical Prophet, Priest and 
King; and not without blood (death) could we, His members, 
be accepted through Him. Only in this indirect way 
can it be said that the Abrahamic Covenant is sealed with 
blood. St. Paul intimates that it was sealed by the oath 
of Jehovah.-Heb. 6:13-18. 



R5227 : page 127 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION 

Question.— Is there any way of determining our standing 
before God? 

Answer.— The Apostle John says that "If our hearts 
condemn us not, then we have confidence toward God." 
(I John 3:21.) In order that we may begin to measure 
ourselves and our progress, to know whether or not we 
are pleasing God in the affairs of life, we must know first 
of all whether we have taken steps to come into His 
family. Have we made a full consecration of ourselves 
to do the Divine will? If we know that we have made a 
full consecration of ourselves, the next question should 
be, To what extent do I know God's will, and to what extent 
am I seeking to do it? Do I use my time, strength, 
influence and all that I have, sacrificially, to the best of 
my ability, not counting my life dear unto myself? If 
we find that in a general way this is the course we are 
following, then there is every reason for us to have great 
satisfaction. 

Then we find that the thing to be expected is that all 
those who will "live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) If we find that we have not 
this witness of the Spirit, if we have no persecution, 
then we have not been letting our light shine out. This 
should not lead us into anything foolish, but we should examine 
ourselves to see whether we are laying down our 
lives in His service. If we find no suffering in the present 
time, it should be a cause of perplexity to us. 

If we find persecutions, then we should make sure that 
our persecutions are not from any wrong which we have 
done ourselves, nor from busybodying in other men's 
matters, but that we are suffering for the Truth's sake, 
for the brethren's sake. If we have these evidences that 
we have come into God's family, if we are studying to 
know and to do His will, if we are having trials and difficulties 
in the pathway and are being rightly exercised 
thereby, we may count ourselves as His faithful people. 



page 129 
