Announcements
DECLARING OUR HOPE UNWAVERINGLY IN MEETINGS—Heb. 10:23-25, NW.
Do not waver in the declaration of your hope! Be steadfast and constant. Proclaim and express on every occasion the precious hope that you have so others too can learn of God’s provisions for obedient mankind. And how can this best be done? From house to house, as did the early disciples. That is why Jehovah’s witnesses not only will continue work in their regularly assigned territory, offering three late books and booklets on a $1.50 contribution, but will also go to remote villages and isolated territories and present the special offer set forth in the booklet Unassigned Territory in the United States. All who love God’s service are invited to share in this happy work of unwaveringly declaring to others the purposes of God.
THREE FAITHFUL FRIENDS
A worthwhile book is like a faithful friend—it is stimulating, helpful, constant. The Bible, as a book, is more than a friend. It is the life-giving Word of God. If a book of Bible doctrine is not stable, instructive, faith-inspiring, and if it does not faithfully represent the One for whom it speaks, then it is not a friend. A true friend is tried and proved over the years. You have three such friends in the books “The Kingdom Is at Hand”, “This Means Everlasting Life” and “Let God Be True”. Over a period of twelve years they have found their combined way into the homes of over fifteen million people. Literally thousands of these people not only have become acquainted with the Creator and his purposes but are now dedicated ministers in the service of the Most High God—owing, at least in part, to the active assistance of these three. Accept them into your home. Make them permanent members. Benefit the entire family by studying them carefully with your Bible. Send only $1.50 and you will receive three smaller publications as well.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
August 5: What Dedication Means to Me. Page 396.
August 12: Why One Must Be Baptized. Page 402.

