Necessary Arrangements for a Baptismal Service
AT ASSEMBLIES baptismal programs must be handled in an orderly manner because of the very serious nature of the occasion. Therefore the first day of an assembly the one in charge should check with the brother handling the music and arrange for a song, say number 57 of the book Songs to Jehovah’s Praise, “Take Sides with Jehovah!” to be used at the conclusion of the talk, a song that will nicely tie in with the closing remarks. Before the talk song number 74, “Dedication,” may well be used.
Also, the one in charge should check ahead of time with the attendant department and those arranging for transportation to the immersion pool, so that proper announcements can be made for the guidance of all concerned.
Attendants assigned to assist the candidates should be fully informed the night before, so each understands which exits will be used and how the candidates will file out of the assembly place.
On the occasion of the baptismal talk, five minutes before the hour the speaker and the chairman should be on the platform and the chairman should invite all present to seat themselves. Candidates should sit in a reserved section directly in front of the platform. Then two minutes before the hour let the chairman call the assembly to order by announcing the singing of song number 74. If it is in the morning, the chairman or some other chosen brother can offer a short opening prayer asking for Jehovah’s blessing on the day’s program and activities, whereupon the chairman will introduce the speaker.
At the conclusion of the talk the speaker himself should offer an appropriate prayer particularly in behalf of the candidates. Following the concluding prayer, the chairman can say: “Let us sing song number 57, ‘Take Sides with Jehovah!’ and as we sing the candidates to be baptized, together with those accompanying them, can leave for the pool. The rest of us will remain for the next part of our program.”
It may be necessary in large assemblies to point out clearly which exits candidates are to use, or to instruct whether those in the front or back rows are to leave first, etc., making all such instructions brief and clear.
Have in mind that when candidates are asked by the speaker to stand they will remain standing until he finishes his remarks to them and prayer is offered and they file out. This impressive conclusion of the talk will benefit the whole assembly, as the closing remarks are being specially directed to the candidates.

