From Our Readers
Young People Ask . . .
I am 10 years old and want to thank you for your articles “Young People Ask . . . ” They have taught me to be balanced when it comes to watching TV, doing my homework and housework, and how to earn respect from my parents by obeying them.
M. F., Ohio
I’m a mother of four and really do appreciate your articles “Young People Ask . . . ” These help bring up regular talking points to communicate with all our kids, from the 14-year-old down to the 3-year-old. I thank you for that help we parents need.
L. W., Iowa
Finding Happiness
Your issue on “Happiness” (March 22, 1985) prompted me to write and say “Thank You!” These articles put into words just how I felt before knowing Bible truths. I was not unhappy but realized that life should have more meaning. I had always loved the creation but had never come into contact with the Creator, and I realize that was what was missing. Now I appreciate my relationship with the Creator, Jehovah God, and feel so happy about this.
C. R., England
Giving Up Fame
In reviewing my “Awake!” magazines for 1984, I was deeply impressed by the wealth of information contained in them. I especially found interesting the experiences of the Lebanese basketball player (February 22, 1984, “Eleven Years to Find True Treasure”) and the Uruguayan concert guitarist (December 8, 1984, “My Guitar, My Music and My God”) who, after having ‘gained the whole world,’ were able to conquer it and, like Moses of old, preferred to be a part of God’s humble people rather than enjoy “the treasures of Egypt.” (Matthew 16:26; Hebrews 11:25, 26) May God bless and strengthen such persons who put aside fame and seek first the Kingdom.
S. R. Z., Brazil
Job Interviews
Recently I signed a job contract to work as an apprentice. Already last fall I began writing requests for a position. In several instances I was turned down immediately, in others after an interview had taken place. Then I remembered the article in “Awake!” entitled “Young People Ask . . . How Do I Handle a Job Interview?” (February 8, 1983) I followed the suggestions offered, and imagine my joy when I was invited for an interview! It turned out very positive. I also noticed that, in general, people pay little attention to their appearance, for I was the only one out of four girls who was wearing a skirt. I tried to apply everything listed on page 25, including the last point, that a short thank-you letter be sent after the interview. I think that contributed to my getting one of the two available apprenticeship positions.
S. R., Federal Republic of Germany
Family Communication
I really enjoyed the article on “Family Communication​—Why the Breakdown?” (January 8, 1985) Especially the point on how TV, videotape recorders, and video games are pushing out time for us to communicate with our family members. Knowing this makes me leave the television set off when we are all gathered together, for example, when having a meal.
C. O., England

