From Our Readers
Happy Stepfamilies
We want to thank you for the articles under “Young People Ask . . . ” on building up stepfamilies. (April 8, April 22, May 8, 1985) Two years ago my mom remarried, and I felt apprehensive about it at first. Your articles helped me to analyze my feelings and to see what is necessary for me to contribute to my stepfamily’s unity. I’ve come to know that a stepfamily can be just as solid as a real one.
B. A. (age 11), Colorado
Vocational Guidance
Recently, as a school superintendent, I was invited by the director of a provincial college of secondary education to take part in a series of prevocational talks that professionals in the region are giving to 40 youngsters who will begin the basic course in November and who are now in the difficult period for selecting a career. For my talk, which was for a little more than an hour, I obtained all the information from four issues of Awake!, particularly the articles “Go to College or Learn a Trade?” (October 22, 1984) and “Young People Ask . . . How Do I Choose a Career?” (March 22, 1985) I was congratulated by the teachers and the college director because of the clear exposition and because the message was practical. However, I feel the credit goes to your magazine, which really edifies and teaches.
J. E. C., Honduras
Working Couples
As a working wife, I want to say that the article “Working Couples​—The Key to Success” (February 8, 1985) was just marvelous. I never could understand just why it is so difficult for some men to help with domestic chores. The article helped me to understand better how certain things that are not natural for one can pass unnoticed. For example, something as obvious as a sink full of dirty dishes while I am washing clothes. I feel that the fact that my husband and I read the article together enabled us to talk (not argue) about an arrangement that would improve the situation. Many thanks from us both.
V. S. P., Brazil
Primary Colors
In your fine article “Keeping Small Hands Busy” (May 8, 1985) the statement is made that the primary colors are red, yellow, and blue. To be precise, the primary colors are red, green, and blue. I am aware that most artists consider red, yellow, and blue the primary colors, but in actuality these are the subtractive primaries, as opposed to the additive primaries of red, green, and blue.
B. C. S., California
According to “The Concise Columbia Encyclopedia,” when producing the color effect of light, “beams of light are combined ‘additively,’ and red, blue, and green are typically chosen as primaries. Pigments, however, combine by a ‘subtractive’ process, i.e. by absorbing wavelengths, and artists generally choose red, blue, and yellow as their primaries.” In producing various colors for coloring bread dough, one needs to combine the primary pigments of red, blue, and yellow.​—ED.

