Rock Stardom Was Not Enough
EIGHTEEN years ago I was a rock-music star and my popularity was soaring. “How lucky you are, Bruce!” my friends would say as they enviously eyed the things I had that they could only dream about. “I would love to be in your position. You’ve got good looks; you’re popular with women; you have money; you’re single and free! Nearly everywhere you go people recognize you. Do you realize how lucky you are?”
‘If all these things I am enjoying are the criteria for happiness,’ I wondered, ‘then why don’t I have inner peace and satisfaction?’ Later I discovered that those who are looking for true happiness by reaching out for that type of life are on the wrong track.
Let me explain what happened.
My singing career began in the 1960’s. I was attending school in the French-Canadian province of Quebec and singing at school concerts when I met a guitar-playing student. We formed a little musical group that won not only local popularity but publicity as well.
A school-dance organizer got wind of my talents and offered me five dollars a song if I’d sing with a popular band at his dance. I agreed. When I arrived at the dance hall, I found a packed-out house, filled with eager dancers. But when the band started to play and I began to sing, the crowd of youths forgot about dancing and began swarming around the front of the stage. The dance had turned into a show!
The musicians wanted me to join their group as the singer. I agreed and we became known as The Sultans. In 1965 our manager entered us in a much-publicized rock-band contest. First prize was a weekly show on one of the largest television networks in Quebec. Out of 28 bands from across the province, we won first prize! That began our debut on TV.
Our music on 45 rpm records skyrocketed to the top of the hit-parade charts, and our television program was picked up by other stations. In a short time we became the number one group in Quebec, with record sales numbering over half a million. Eventually I left The Sultans and went solo. Before parting, however, we had a farewell tour. Montreal in 1968 was the scene of our last concert. A crowd of 8,000 people came to bid us adieu. We were impressed. That crowd was larger than the crowds the Rolling Stones, Johnny Hallyday, and Adamo (international stars) could muster at that time.
Being a solo artist gave me more freedom, and it goes without saying, much more money. This newfound freedom allowed me to have a ten-week vacation in Europe, which gave me a chance to analyze my life as a rock star from a more realistic viewpoint. What I saw bothered me. I was now 21 years old, becoming more ambitious with each passing day, and rivalry was common in order to get ahead.
Returning to Quebec, I soon had two records that reached the top of the hit parade. Then, at La Gala des Artistes in 1969, I was named Male Artist of the Year. In spite of the spotlights and glitter of the evening, I still did not feel satisfied inwardly. The corruption in the system and the way young people in the music business are treated disgusted me. Nevertheless, here I was trapped in it myself. Certain questions kept returning to my mind, such as: ‘Where is life leading?’ ‘Why am I pursuing this profession?’
In 1969 rock idol Brian Jones of the Rolling Stones, at the age of 26, was found dead in his swimming pool. In late 1970 popular blues and rock performer Jimi Hendrix and America’s leading female rock singer, Janis Joplin, both died at age 27 due to drugs or drug-related causes. Ten months later another big rock star, Jim Morrison, lead singer of The Doors, was dead at 27 years of age. All died at the height of their careers! I saw myself also involved in an immoral life-style and in using drugs. I became convinced that following the beaten path of these rock superheroes was not for me.
But the question still remained: ‘What is the real purpose of life?’
I could see my mother, a woman who had had her share of problems in bringing up two boys without her husband, getting older. She had taken care of her responsibilities courageously but for what purpose? To continue gradually getting older, weakening, getting sick, and dying? Was this the purpose of life? These unanswered questions frustrated me.
Over the years, I had lost all faith in and respect for my church and its teachings. I strongly doubted the existence of God. I had experimented with new and different drugs, but they had left me depressed and even paranoid at times.
Thinking that a radical change in my life would do me a lot of good, I looked for work outside the music business. I was hired by a structural steel company on a seven-month contract in 1975. During those months in steel construction, I was intrigued by an older worker who, in contrast to the others, seemed to be so calm and peaceful. He told me he read the Bible, so I decided to buy one to see if it would help me find inner peace.
When that contract ended and I was laid off, I concluded that I could earn my living honorably as an author-composer. This way I could get away from being in the spotlight and still have the satisfaction of working with music, for my love of singing was still strong. I would also read a chapter of the Bible every morning.
I was often in my apartment during the day, so I was visited from time to time by the Mormons, a parish priest, and Jehovah’s Witnesses. I easily got into discussions with them about the purpose of life. Rather quickly I realized that Jehovah’s Witnesses were different. They were humble and showed a sincere interest in me and, above all, based their answers strictly on the Bible, something that the other religious representatives did not do.
Despite my skeptical nature, I consented to studying the Bible with Roger, a Witness of my own age. Often I would try to squirm my way out of the week’s Bible lesson, but Roger persisted​—for which I am deeply thankful today. He helped me find the answers to the questions that had frustrated me for so long.
The first meeting I attended at the Kingdom Hall truly touched my heart. Here again I found humble people with a genuine concern for their neighbors. And the information presented was straightforward and from the Bible. For the first time, I came to understand God’s purpose for man. I became less affected by the injustices of this old system, knowing that soon God will act, bringing a paradise of peace to this earth under Christ’s Kingdom rule as promised in Psalm 37:29 and Daniel 2:44.
From then on the practical counsel from the Bible helped me ‘set things straight’ in my life. (2 Timothy 3:16, 17) I married the girl I loved and with whom I had been living, Danièle. And soon after, I dedicated my life to serve Jehovah. My wife agreed to study the Bible, and in time she too dedicated herself to Jehovah.
“It wasn’t easy to make changes in my life,” confesses Danièle. “Yet with Jehovah’s help and Bruce’s support and example, I was able to find true happiness in the Bible’s righteous principles.” We were both baptized in 1978.
Although I appreciate my work for a customs broker at Montreal’s International Airport, my heart is in my main activity as a minister. In fact, it brings me a great deal of joy to help others through a study of the Bible, just as I was helped. In this kind of giving there surely is ‘more happiness than in receiving.’​—Acts 20:35.
And as a ministerial servant in the local congregation, I experience a lot of joy and satisfaction from helping others. My life is very busy and full, but I can honestly say that now I am experiencing the inner peace I was looking for and real joy in living. Though my career in show business may have come to an end, I am indeed grateful to Jehovah God that a whole new “real life” has been opened up to me.​—1 Timothy 6:19.
Yes, I still love music! I particularly enjoy classical, folk-rock, and some jazz, but I have now become more selective in the kind I listen to. Some of the modern songs have immoral and drug-oriented messages. That brand of music doesn’t help me bring my life and thinking into accord with God’s will. Now I sing for the simple fun of it. That’s why today I find a lot of pleasure in getting together with my wife and friends at small social gatherings where we all have opportunities to sing.
As I look back on my singing career, I can see how my happiness diminished as my popularity increased. But now that I have left show business and have become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, my popularity may have diminished, but my happiness hasn’t stopped increasing.
People who don’t know this international organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses think that I have been drowned in discouragement or am hanging on to the Bible as a crutch. A radio announcer, after playing one of my records, said about my life: “Unfortunately, things didn’t go too well for Bruce. He’s become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” The only thing I say in return is this: “See for yourself what the Bible can do for you. For me, it was the best thing that ever happened.”
“Indeed,” agrees Danièle, “by coming to a knowledge of Bible truth, Bruce and I were able to add real purpose to our lives.”​—As told by Bruce Huard.
[Blurb on page 19]
I soon had two records that reached the top of the hit parade
[Blurb on page 20]
The corruption in the system disgusted me
[Blurb on page 21]
The practical counsel from the Bible helped me ‘set things straight’ in my life
[Blurb on page 21]
In giving, there surely is ‘more happiness than in receiving’
[Picture on page 20]
Preaching and study have a share in making Danièle’s and my life happy and fulfilled

