Your Child’s Education and You
“Your child’s ideas about education and its significance begin with you. You must be a living example of what you expect your children to honor and to emulate.”​—The National Commission on Excellence in Education.
WHAT are the schools like in your locality? Whether they are outstanding or inadequate, your child likely spends a great deal of time there. What types of influences is he exposed to? The only way to know for sure is to make regular visits to your child’s school and become acquainted with the teachers. Also keep the lines of communication with your children open. Be alert to any problems or anxieties they may be having in connection with school.
True, many parents are themselves educationally handicapped. But as one principal of a New York City elementary school told Awake!: “Even an illiterate parent can be very positive in his approach to his child’s education. He can encourage his child to go to school. He can make sure that the child does his homework and that the child has the proper environment in which to study. He can reinforce what is taught in school by asking, ‘What did you learn in school today?’”
Remember, too, that the most important education a parent can give is in “the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.” (Ephesians 6:4) A child so taught has strong motivation to master educational skills. (Compare Deuteronomy 17:18, 19; 1 Timothy 4:13 and 1Ti 5:8.) That child will also gain a balanced view of achievement and avoid cutthroat competition, thus being better able to cope with the stresses and strains of school.a​—Ecclesiastes 4:4; Galatians 5:26.
Failing schools are just a part of the mounting evidence that human rule is inadequate. (Jeremiah 10:23) World events prove beyond doubt that soon God will take over earth’s management. (Luke 21:10-28) There will be no literacy gap or schulangst under his reign. For all earth’s inhabitants “will be persons taught by Jehovah.” (Isaiah 54:13) And “the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.”​—Isaiah 11:9.
In the meantime, though, take an interest in your child’s education. Then, even if schools fail the test, your child can come off a success.
[Footnotes]
The “Young People Ask . . . ” articles appearing in the 1/8/84, 1/22/84, 2/22/84, 3/8/84, 3/22/84, 7/22/84, and 8/8/84 issues of Awake! contain some helpful suggestions.

