Youth Wants to Know
IN MOST lands, formal religious practice is declining. Church attendance is down. More and more people, young as well as old, are rejecting the traditional ways of worship. Along with this, growing numbers are even abandoning belief in God.
Of course, for decades Communist societies have been attacking religion, considering it ‘the opium of the people.’ In those lands atheism is promoted. But in the heart of Christendom, too, atheistic and agnostic types of beliefs are gaining force.
Part of the problem is that for centuries the unreasonable beliefs and the hurtful actions of this world’s religions have invited ridicule. It is no strange thing, therefore, that many thinking people see no use in the ceremonies and formalistic ways of the churches and other non-Christian religions.
An example of this was noted in the West German magazine Stern, published in Hamburg. It contained a negative article entitled “The Marketing of the Virgin Mary.” The account was about Altötting, the Bavarian village of pilgrimages. The issue sold a million copies.
The Bavarian Ministry for Education and Culture noted such opposition to religious practices and said: “They are successful in putting religion in a bad light, in stripping piety, prayer and worship and stamping the devout as clowns.”
Are the Young Interested?
The Bavarian Ministry, in its publication School and We, of December 1975, also stated: “Daily we read, hear, see piety derided as stupidity, the Ten Commandments sent to the rear bench. Is it any wonder that God and Christianity have become words without meaning, syllables without sense, empty spots in life for many nowadays? When many families painstakingly avoid a religious discussion, is it not reasonable that, as a school subject, religion is in bad straits?”
Certainly, as adults abandon religion, or keep it in name only, their young ones are bound to be affected. They, too, are now often found to have as little, or even less, respect for formalistic religion and its ceremonies as do their parents.
However, is this because young people are not at all interested in questions that relate to the existence of God, the meaning of life, or what happens after death? On the contrary, often young people are more willing to discuss such subjects than are adults.
But what the young are rejecting in growing numbers is formalistic religion, for which they can see no use. They also have observed the bad practices of this world’s religions. That includes the political meddling by the churches, their support of wars, their hypocrisy and unreasonable doctrines, as well as the immorality and “high” living on the part of many clergymen and other religious people. All of this has “turned off” the youth as regards formalistic religion.
A Revealing Survey
In Munich a young scientist named Werner Prawdzik decided to find out whether the young were interested in matters pertaining to God. He questioned 800 of the 2,000 boys and girls in the ninth grade of Munich’s schools.
The results caused many to reappraise their views. Why? They had felt that due to the disinterest of adults in matters related to God, the young would show the same disinterest. But it did not altogether turn out that way.
His survey did show that the greater number of these young people in Munich were surrounded by an atmosphere that ignored God. As an example, only 16 percent of the students said that their fathers took religion seriously. Only 24 percent of the students reported that their mothers took religion seriously. Two thirds of the students said that their parents were so disinterested that they did not even care if their children participated in religious instruction or not.
It was also noted that 83 percent of the fathers and 74 percent of the mothers seldom, if ever, attended church. And in this area, the children reflected their parents’ habits. But that was to be expected. Children usually imitate their parents in their formal way of worship.
But what was unexpected to many was another aspect of the scientist’s investigation. The publication School and We put it this way:
“A result with which no one had reckoned: In these religiously apathetic surroundings, branded by apostasy from family piety, youths are growing up who in this case are not an image of grownups. Urban youth stated:
“‘I often concern myself with the question of God’s existence’ (59 percent).
“‘I have often thought about the meaning of life’ (64 percent).
“‘I am interested in knowing what happens after death’ (57 percent).”
The report added: “Many young people who live in this anti-religious climate, whose parents are the exact opposite of faithful Christians, nevertheless occupy themselves with the big religious questions such as: From where, where to and the meaning of life.”
Only one fourth of the students said that they considered matters of religion to be an unimportant or unpopular subject. Another poll taken of schoolchildren in the city of Düsseldorf showed about the same results on all these questions.
Natural Curiosity of Youth
The Bavarian Ministry for Education and Culture reached this conclusion: “Football, television and motorbikes​—anyone thinking that these are the important things around which the world of 15-year-olds revolves, doesn’t see everything, doesn’t look deep enough. The research done in connection with the Munich urban children leaves no doubt: The big, permanent themes of religious instruction, such as fear, grace, guilt, hope, sorrow, trust, appreciativeness, forgiveness are still in demand and sought for.”
It is erroneous to think that youths do not want to believe in God and related matters. The fact is that they are led to disbelieve by what their parents, and clergymen, teach or do not teach, and by the example that these set in their everyday lives. That is a reason why the Bavarian Ministry recommended that ‘parents end their cowardliness about having family discussions on religion.’
Hence, it is apparent that interest in things pertaining to God is not dead among young people. It is something that seems to be inherent in them. They are naturally curious about life and would like to know the answers to the serious questions about it. But when they do not get the answers, or get them in the distorted way that such matters are often presented by the conflicting religions of this world, that natural inclination toward worship of one’s Maker can be smothered. The conscience can be seared in these matters.
What a grave responsibility rests with parents, and also with those who are supposed to give religious instruction! Nor can parents try to shift totally the responsibility from themselves to clergymen. Regardless of what the clergy do, it is the parents who are given the prime responsibility of teaching their children about God. God’s Word, the Holy Bible, says: “You fathers, again, must not goad your children to resentment, but give them the instruction, and the correction, which belong to a Christian upbringing.”​—Eph. 6:4, New English Bible.
That such instruction was to include the vital matters about God is clearly seen by similar instruction recorded in the Bible at Deuteronomy 6:5-7: “And you must love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul and all your vital force. And these words that I am commanding you today must prove to be on your heart; and you must inculcate them in your son and speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.” In this way, the natural curiosity of children will be satisfied.
But have the churches equipped parents to do this kind of teaching at home? No. And that is a prime reason for the “cowardliness” of parents, their reluctance to have religious discussions in the home. People generally do not like to discuss things that expose their incompetence.
Who is to blame for this inability to teach at home? The blame rests in two areas. First, on the parents themselves, since they should make it a point to find out where they can get such direction. The other part rests on the church systems and their clergy for failing to train parents, adults and young people properly.
Successful Teaching
When children are properly taught the right things about God, the response is gratifying. That is what God’s Word says would be the result. Proverbs 22:6 states: “Train up a boy according to the way for him; even when he grows old he will not turn aside from it.”
That training must begin at home. Parents need to teach the truth about God to their children. And parents need to live lives in harmony with godly principles.
In the first century, Christians did train their children in this way. Not only did the young know the truth about God and his purposes, but when they grew up and had families of their own, they were equipped to teach their children too.
The apostle Paul wrote this to the young man Timothy: “From infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation through the faith in connection with Christ Jesus. All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.”​—2 Tim. 3:15-17.
Are there parents who can do this kind of teaching and training of their children in our time? Are there children who know “from infancy” the holy writings that were inspired by God as a guide for us? Yes, there are such people​—over two million of them, in fact, in over 200 lands, of all nationalities. They participate in a regular arrangement for teaching and training adults and children about God. Such instruction is an integral part of the way of life of Jehovah’s Witnesses everywhere in the world.
Today, young people who have been trained by God-fearing parents know what they believe. They can prove to themselves from their own Bible what the right view is of God and of Christian living. They have a firm foundation for life now, and a grand hope for life ahead in the future.
One grammar school child said that she knows what the truth is about the important matters of life because, as she stated, “Mom read to me from when I was a baby.” That instruction came directly from the Bible and Bible study aids. She was like Timothy, who had ‘known the holy writings from infancy,’ which knowledge equipped him properly for life.
Another child was able to tell her schoolmates about such things as where the dead are, what hell is, what the future holds in store, and so forth. When another child asked how she knew all of this, she explained that her parents had instructed her for years from the Bible. They had also used Bible handbooks that explained Bible doctrine as well as its practical and beneficial principles of living.
She mentioned learning much from the fine handbook especially designed for young children, entitled “Listening to the Great Teacher.” This informs young ones about God and gives them practical instruction for dealing with everyday living.
Appreciating the Instruction
As young people get older, they can look back and really appreciate the right kind of training. They realize that it did indeed set their minds straight, ordering their lives properly so that they could avoid many of the pitfalls common to youth.
One young person wrote this to her parents after graduating from high school: “I want to tell you both how much I love you and appreciate all that you have done for me. It is only because of your help that I have reached this time in my life. Whenever I needed it, you gave me such fine counsel and encouragement, always with kindness and love.”
This graduate added: “You have given me something else for which I shall be forever grateful. By teaching me about Jehovah God and his Bible principles, you have given me a purpose in life that has made me very happy. You have also given me a wonderful hope for the future and taught me to rely on Jehovah and his promises. Now as I strive to serve him more fully, I hope that you will be happy because you have given me the most precious things in life. Again, thank you both very much. No amount of words can really express how much I appreciate you both, but I know you will understand.”
What a fine reward for years of sincere, loving effort by the parents of that young person! Such appreciation is common among the children of parents who have learned what God’s laws, principles and purposes are, and then have equipped themselves to teach their children. And this does not mean that parents have to be perfect, or intellectuals, or have rare abilities. Any parent who is sincerely interested in teaching his children can learn to do it.
You can see for yourself that these procedures work, that they are practical, and get successful results. Visit the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses nearest you, or attend one of their large assemblies. You will no doubt be impressed by the large number of young people in attendance. No, those children are not perfect. But they do want to know what life is all about and what the future holds for them. They are finding out. Their natural curiosity about these matters is being cared for.
True, not all children respond. But most of them do. And if you are a parent, you can imagine the joy that comes to parents whose efforts have been rewarded. It is as God’s Word says: “The father of a righteous one will without fail be joyful; the one becoming father to a wise one will also rejoice in him. Your father and your mother will rejoice, and she that gave birth to you will be joyful.”​—Prov. 23:24, 25.

