Come to the “Faith in God’s Word” District Convention!
MANY millions will be present at hundreds of locations throughout the world. In the United States alone, 193 conventions are scheduled. The first will be May 23-25 and the last, September 12-14. Likely one of these three-day gatherings—Friday through Sunday—will be at a city not far from your home.
You will benefit from a wealth of practical Bible instruction. In most places the program will begin each morning with music at 9:30. Friday morning features 25 minutes of interviews with people whose lives have been deeply affected by their faith in God’s Word. That first session will conclude with the keynote address, “Walking by Faith, Not by Sight.”
The first talk Friday afternoon will consider the vital part youths have in the Christian congregation. The following three-part symposium discusses Bible standards as they relate to Christian conduct in speech, manners, and personal appearance. Next the talks “Beware of a Lack of Faith” and “The Word of God Is Alive” focus on the fine admonition in Hebrews chapters 3 and 4. Friday’s program will conclude with the discourse “A Book for All People.”
The first talk Saturday morning is “Faith Without Works Is Dead.” Another important discourse that morning, “Become Rooted and Stabilized in the Truth,” describes how spiritual growth can be realized. The session will conclude with a regular convention feature, “Faith in God’s Word Leads to Baptism,” after which there will be provision for new disciples to be baptized.
The opening talk Saturday afternoon, “Put Up a Hard Fight for the Faith,” discusses admonition of the Bible book of Jude. An hour-long symposium entitled “To the House of Jehovah Let Us Go” will consider the benefits of Christian meetings. The program that day concludes with the discourse “The Quality of Your Faith—Tested Now.”
Sunday’s morning program features a three-part symposium that will discuss the Bible book of Joel, including its application to our day. Then follows a Bible drama entitled “Keep Your Eye Simple.” A highlight of the convention is the afternoon public address, “Faith and Your Future.”
Surely you will be enriched spiritually by being present. You will be cordially welcomed at every session. Make plans now to attend. For the location nearest your home, contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses or write the publishers of this magazine. You can also find the addresses of convention locations in the United States, Canada, Britain, and Ireland in the June 8 issue of Awake!

