From Our Readers
Vacation Woes  I really enjoyed the article “How You Can Avoid Vacation Woes.” (June 22, 1998) I learned a lot. For example, I never knew that your risk of getting a blood clot is increased when you sit in cramped areas for long periods of time.
L. G., United States
Humans—Just Higher Animals?  I would like to express my great appreciation for the series of articles “Humans—Just Higher Animals?” (June 22, 1998) These articles are well conceived and very well written. Actual quotations of well-known authorities make them suitable reading for experts. In the end it is simply impossible not to agree—we are God’s creation.
A. D., Slovakia
These articles were fascinating. Awake! certainly understands how to condense deep and complicated truths into simple, irrefutable sentences.
C. L. D., Germany
The cover photo for the articles was very eloquent, and the contents were no less so. Your constant efforts to defend Biblical truth against insidious theories are appreciated. In the preaching work, this issue of Awake! aroused great interest among young people; many open-minded people accepted it.
M. M., Italy
A Robot Explores Mars  Just after I finished reading the series of articles that outline the huge gulf that separates man from the animals, I turned to the article in that same issue entitled “A Robot Explores Mars.” (June 22, 1998) How succinctly and indisputably that article capped off the matter of the intellectual gulf between man and animals!
G. D. M., United States
What if He Doesn’t Return My Love?  Today I received the June 22 issue of Awake!, and when I saw the article “Young People Ask . . . What if He Doesn’t Return My Love?,” I immediately thanked Jehovah for answering my prayers. I am determined to consider this article with my mom and to apply the counsel in my life. The “Young People Ask . . .” series really is a loving provision from Jehovah God.
K. M., Kenya
I am a 22-year-old woman, and I enjoy each issue of your magazine; but this was the first time an article has touched my heart so deeply. When I started to read it, I had tears in my eyes. Some time ago I had exactly the feelings you described, and I had many questions regarding them. This article helped me to see things more clearly.
R. B., Lithuania
When I read this article, my reaction was, ‘How did someone understand the way I feel?’ I was so glad to know that Jehovah kindly understands everything. The magazine came today, and even though it’s midnight, I wanted to write at once.
A. N., Japan
Although the article was prepared with women in mind, I found it very helpful. Just a week earlier, I had been given a firm rejection, and it hurt. Your article helped me to put my feelings in order. It comforted me and, more important, showed me that when choosing a wife, I should think about giving, not getting.
P. H. S., Brazil
Korean society puts great emphasis on a girl’s marrying as soon as she is of age. It is quite a challenge for a young Christian woman to wait until she is “past the bloom of youth” before marrying. (1 Corinthians 7:36) Thanks for the excellent counsel.
S. C., Korea

