The Divine Name Through the Ages
JEHOVAH God wants man to know and use his name. This is evident from the fact that He revealed His name to the very first two persons on earth. We know that Adam and Eve were familiar with God’s name because after Eve gave birth to Cain, according to the original Hebrew text, she said: “I have produced a man with the aid of Jehovah.”​—Genesis 4:1.
Later we read that faithful men like Enoch and Noah “walked with the true God.” (Genesis 5:24; 6:9) They also, then, must have known God’s name. The name survived the great Flood with the righteous man Noah and his family. In spite of the great rebellion some time later at Babel, true servants of God kept on using his name. It appears hundreds of times in the laws that God gave to Israel. In the book of Deuteronomy alone, it appears 551 times.
In the days of the judges, the Israelites evidently did not shy away from using God’s name. They even used it in greeting one another. We read (in the original Hebrew) of Boaz greeting his harvesters: “Jehovah be with you.” They returned his greeting by saying: “Jehovah bless you.”​—Ruth 2:4.
Throughout the history of the Israelites right up until the time that they returned to Judah after their captivity in Babylon, Jehovah’s name continued in common usage. King David, a man agreeable to God’s own heart, used the divine name extensively​—it appears hundreds of times in the psalms that he wrote. (Acts 13:22) God’s name was also incorporated in many Israelite personal names. Thus we read of Adonijah (“My Lord Is Jah”​—“Jah” is a shortened form of Jehovah), Isaiah (“Salvation of Jehovah”), Jonathan (“Jehovah Has Given”), Micah (“Who is like Jah?”) and Joshua (“Jehovah Is Salvation”).
Outside the Bible
There is also evidence from sources outside the Bible of the extensive use of the divine name in ancient times. In 1961 an ancient burial cave was uncovered a short distance to the southwest of Jerusalem, according to a report in the Israel Exploration Journal (Volume 13, No. 2). On its walls were Hebrew inscriptions that appear to date from the second half of the eighth century B.C.E. The inscriptions contain statements such as “Jehovah is the God of the whole earth.”
In 1966 a report was published in the Israel Exploration Journal (Volume 16, No. 1) about pottery fragments with Hebrew writing on them that were found in Arad, in southern Israel. These were written in the second half of the seventh century B.C.E. One of them was a private letter to a man named Eliashib. The letter begins: “To my lord Eliashib: May Jehovah ask for your peace.” And it ends: “He dwells in the house of Jehovah.”
In 1975 and 1976, archaeologists working in the Negeb uncovered a collection of Hebrew and Phoenician inscriptions on plaster walls, large storage jars and stone vessels. The inscriptions included the Hebrew word for God, as well as God’s name, YHWH, in Hebrew letters. In Jerusalem itself, there was recently discovered a small, rolled-up strip of silver, apparently dating from before the Babylonian exile. Researchers say that when it was unrolled, the name of Jehovah in Hebrew was found to be written on it.​—Biblical Archaeology Review, March/​April 1983, page 18.
Another example of the use of God’s name is found in the so-called Lachish Letters. These letters, written on potsherds, were found between the years 1935 and 1938 in the ruins of Lachish, a fortified city that figured prominently in Israel’s history. They appear to have been written by an officer at a Judean outpost to his superior, named Yaosh, at Lachish, apparently during the war between Israel and Babylon toward the end of the seventh century B.C.E.
Of the eight legible shards, seven begin their message with a salutation such as: “May Jehovah cause my lord to see this season in good health!” Altogether, God’s name appears 11 times in the seven messages, clearly indicating that the name of Jehovah enjoyed everyday usage toward the end of the seventh century B.C.E.
Even pagan rulers knew and used the divine name when referring to the God of the Israelites. Thus, on the Moabite Stone, King Mesha of Moab boasts of his military exploits against Israel and, among other things, states: “Chemosh said to me, ‘Go, take Nebo from Israel!’ So I went by night and fought against it from the break of dawn until noon, taking it and slaying all . . . And I took from there the [vessels] of Jehovah, dragging them before Chemosh.”
In reference to these non-Biblical uses of the name of God, the Theologisches Wörterbuch zum Alten Testament (Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament), in Volume 3, column 538, says: “Thus some 19 documentary evidences of the Tetragrammaton in the form jhwh testify in this regard to the reliability of the M[asoretic] T[ext]; more can be expected, above all from the Arad-Archives.”​—Translated from German.
God’s Name Not Forgotten
This familiarity with and use of God’s name continued right up to the days of Malachi, who lived about 400 years before Jesus’ time. In the Bible book bearing his name, Malachi gives great prominence to the divine name, using it altogether 48 times.
As time went on, many Jews came to live far from the land of Israel, and some could no longer read the Bible in the Hebrew language. Hence, in the third century B.C.E., a start was made in translating the part of the Bible that existed then (the “Old Testament”) into Greek, the new international language. But the name of God was not neglected. The translators retained it, writing it in its Hebrew form. Ancient copies of the Greek Septuagint that have been preserved to our day testify to that.
What, though, was the situation when Jesus walked the earth? How can we know whether he and his apostles used God’s name?
[Picture on page 12]
In this letter, written on a fragment of pottery in the second half of the seventh century B.C.E., God’s name appears twice.
[Credit Line]
(Picture by courtesy of the Israel Department of Antiquities and Museums)
[Pictures on page 13]
God’s name is also found in the Lachish Letters and on the Moabite Stone

