From Our Readers
How to Get Some Sleep
Thank you for your article on how to get some sleep. I was one of those persons who just couldn’t fall asleep, and it happened every night! I always thought about going to see a doctor, but I dread the sleeping pills that they sometimes give their patients. But here was an article that was exactly what I needed. Since following the counsel I sleep at set times and after a good warm bath I fall asleep right away. It’s really unbelievable how such simple advice keeps me in better health.
A. N., Canada
The Art of Conversation
Thank you very much for the article on developing the art of conversation. I am shy and too concerned about how I sound to others and how they will take what I say. This article has helped me to understand why I have this problem and how to overcome it.
L. B., Louisiana
Thanks for the article “But What Do I Say?” I needed it. Sometimes we don’t want to face up to certain problems we have with ourselves. The article has helped me to face up to the problem I have sometimes when talking to people.
Anonymous, Maryland
Oats and Cholesterol
I recently had an opportunity to read one of your magazines. Many of the articles were interesting. However, I was quite concerned about your article relating to a researcher in Kentucky on his work with oats and cholesterol level. The article stated that the researcher had lowered cholesterol levels with oats. Merely eating oats is not enough. Many changes must be made in a person’s life-style before cholesterol levels are lowered! The best information you can give your readers is to follow the seven U.S. dietary guidelines established by the Department of Agriculture and Health and Human Services. These are: (1) Eat a Variety of Foods; (2) Maintain Ideal Weight; (3) Avoid Too Much Fat, Saturated Fat and Cholesterol; (4) Eat Foods with Adequate Starch and Fiber; (5) Avoid Too Much Sugar; (6) Avoid Too Much Sodium; (7) If You Drink Alcohol, Do So in Moderation.
E. B., Health Educator
Actually our reference was not an article, otherwise we would have given a more comprehensive treatment of the subject. It was merely a news item in our “Watching the World” feature. We thought it well to draw attention to the fact that it had been demonstrated that oats are a food that can lower blood cholesterol. We agree that one’s entire life-style is involved in this matter.​—ED.
Keeping Homes Clean
Thank you for the precious cartoon in the article “We Keep Our Homes Clean Despite the Neighborhood!” The message comes alive especially for young minds. It helps me to impress on my three-year-old boy the importance of keeping our home “happy,” not “sad” or “sick.” He’s learning to bring in his playthings and tidy up his toys.
J. P., Canada

