Do Not Hold Back!
 1. In what way do we “not hold back good”?
1 By actively participating in proclaiming the good news of God’s Kingdom, we do not “hold back good” from those in our assigned territories. (Prov. 3:27) There is no better message to be shared with mankind than that of the better times to come under God’s rule. Although you may generously share the Kingdom hope by witnessing informally or placing literature, why not make it your goal to conduct a Bible study, if you are not yet doing so?
 2. What may hold us back from starting a Bible study?
2 At times, one of the biggest obstacles to conducting a Bible study is the way we feel about the matter. Some hold back from conducting a Bible study because of feeling inadequate or because of their hectic schedule. The following suggestions may be helpful to you in not holding back from having a share in the Bible study work.​—Matt. 28:19; Acts 20:20.
 3. Why are we qualified to teach the Bible?
3 Lack of Confidence: Perhaps you have limited secular education or for some other reason lack confidence in your ability to conduct a Bible study. Effective Christian ministers in the first century were “unlettered and ordinary.” What enabled them to teach others the truth? “They used to be with Jesus.” (Acts 4:13) They learned from the Great Teacher, Jesus, whose teachings and methods have been preserved for us in the Scriptures. Even if your secular education is limited, you are receiving spiritual education that is unsurpassed.​—Isa. 50:4; 2 Cor. 3:5.
 4. What can we learn from the example of Amos?
4 Jehovah sometimes used prophets to reprove erring rulers or others in high station. Some, such as Amos, had a humble background. Amos admitted: “I was not a prophet, neither was I the son of a prophet; but I was a herdsman and a nipper of figs of sycamore trees.” (Amos 7:14) Nevertheless, Amos did not hold back from delivering Jehovah’s judgment message to the calf-worshipping priest Amaziah. (Amos 7:16, 17) We must always remember that we are performing God’s work and he will adequately qualify us for the work at hand.​—2 Tim. 3:17.
 5. Why should we endeavor to start a Bible study even if we have a busy schedule?
5 Busy Schedule: Even if you have a busy schedule, you have likely already set aside time to share in the ministry regularly. Conducting a Bible study can be one of the most enjoyable aspects of the ministry. It is a privilege to see Jehovah’s Word at work in a person’s life. (Heb. 4:12) Jehovah is pleased when we make personal sacrifices in order to assist someone to “come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) Even the angels experience joy when someone repents of his former course and makes spiritual progress.​—Luke 15:10.
 6. What privilege do we have in carrying out God’s will?
6 God’s “will is that all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) What a privileged role we have to work in harmony with God’s will, not holding back from conducting Bible studies!

