Walk as Wise Persons
1 When Jesus asked four fishermen to be his followers, they did not put their decision off but “at once . . . they followed him.” (Matt. 4:18-22) When Saul of Tarsus was converted and then regained his sight, he likewise did not procrastinate but “immediately in the synagogues he began to preach Jesus.” (Acts 9:20) Time constantly moves forward; once it passes, it is gone forever. That is why it is important for us to ‘walk as wise persons’ with regard to how we use our time.​—Eph. 5:15, 16.
2 Unforeseen Occurrence: Opportunities we have today to serve Jehovah may be gone tomorrow. (Jas. 4:14) No one is exempt from “unforeseen occurrence.” (Eccl. 9:11) Additionally, we are all getting older, and the “calamitous days” that accompany advancing age and that limit what we are able to do in Jehovah’s service are inescapable in this present system of things. (Eccl. 12:1) Therefore, it is not wise to put off making a dedication to God or to wait for ideal circumstances before expanding our ministry to the extent presently possible. (Luke 9:59-62) Abraham found peace and serenity in his later years, dying “old and satisfied” because he had used his life wisely, entirely devoted to Jehovah.​—Gen. 25:8.
3 Time Is Reduced: We also want to spend our time wisely because “the time left is reduced.” (1 Cor. 7:29-31) Very soon now this old system of things will end. Opportunities to participate in the great ingathering of sheeplike ones during the “harvest of the earth” will end. (Rev. 14:15) We must be careful not to allow life’s anxieties and distractions to rob us of time that would be better spent in the ministry. (Luke 21:34, 35) How satisfying it will be to look back knowing that we had a full share in the harvest!
4 We must be watchful constantly so as not to miss out on joyous privileges of service that might come our way. Let us be determined to do all that we can to serve Jehovah “as long as it may be called ‘Today.’” (Heb. 3:13) By doing so, we will show ourselves to be truly wise, because “he that does the will of God remains forever.”​—1 John 2:17.

