We Share Our Kingdom Hope
1 During these critical last days, many in the world are without hope. (Eph. 2:12) Others have unwisely put their confidence in material riches, human rulers, modern science, and so forth. How happy we are to have a real hope for the future, a hope that is “an anchor for the soul, both sure and firm”!​—Heb. 6:19.
2 Under God’s Kingdom rule, the earth will be transformed into a paradise. Dead loved ones will be resurrected. (Acts 24:15) Poverty, injustice, sickness, old age, and death will be no more. (Ps. 9:18; Matt. 12:20, 21; Rev. 21:3, 4) These are some of Jehovah’s promises soon to be fulfilled. Which aspect of our hope do you especially look forward to?
3 Declare Good News: We must not keep the Kingdom hope to ourselves. Love for God and neighbor moves us to imitate Jesus and “to declare good news to the poor, . . . to preach a release to the captives and a recovery of sight to the blind, to send the crushed ones away with a release.” (Luke 4:18) The apostle Paul shared the good news in the marketplace and wherever people were found. He occupied himself intensely with the ministry. (Acts 18:5) Following his example of sharing zealously in the ministry will prevent “the anxieties of this system of things and the deceptive power of riches” from dimming our Christian hope.​—Mark 4:19.
4 Our Kingdom hope does not fade when we meet people who show indifference, who lightly esteem the Kingdom message, or who outwardly oppose us. We “hold fast the public declaration of our hope without wavering.” (Heb. 10:23) We are not “ashamed of the good news.” (Rom. 1:16) It may be that our evident conviction and perseverance will eventually move some to listen.
5 Though we properly call attention to deteriorating world conditions that fulfill Bible prophecy, we are not preachers of doom. Rather, our ministry is focused on our Kingdom hope​—the good news of God’s Kingdom. May we preach this good news with conviction and zeal “so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end.”​—Heb. 6:11.

