From Our Readers
Learning Problems
Thank you so much for the articles on “Does Your Child Have Learning Problems?” (May 8, 1983) They came at a time of great need and we benefitted greatly. As parents of a boy like Marty, we were as if trapped, not knowing what to do next in order to help our boy to become stable. Due to the scarcity of such mentioned professionals in some countries, we look forward to getting more advice and help through your outstanding publication.
S. K. M., Uganda
“Awake!” does not presume to replace the need for qualified professional guidance with a do-it-yourself approach. But we endeavor to present the various aspects of such problems along with the recommendations of experienced persons of several different viewpoints. We are pleased that our efforts can be of help.​—ED.
Breast-Feeding
I certainly agree with the decision to breast-feed a baby (June 8, 1983), but I don’t agree with feeding “on demand” rather than adhering to a time schedule. If the baby is trained in the first ten days when his eating time will be, he will get used to it and you will know what other obligations you can fulfill in between.
O. D., California
I wish to clarify that supplemental bottle feedings of formula to the baby can be extremely helpful to a busy, tired and active mother. They give Dad a chance to feed the baby on occasion, also.
C. K., Connecticut
I agree that breast-feeding is a superior way of feeding your baby. The article, though, was discouraging for those who cannot breast-feed and must resort to formula. You needed some information to reassure parents that bottle-fed babies may also experience a close, loving relationship with their parents as well as good health.
C. L., Wisconsin
We agree that each couple will need to decide as to what will be most beneficial for the baby in accord with their circumstances. These points are touched on in a letter to “The New York Times” by Katherine Christoffel, M.D., Children’s Memorial Hospital, Chicago. She states: “Although breast-feeding is certainly desirable, mothers must not be made to feel guilty if their attempts to juggle working and nursing sometimes mean the end of nursing. Breast-feeding is only one of many factors involved in every family’s life style and health status, so there is much to do and enjoy even if nursing doesn’t work out optimally.”​—ED.
TV and Fire Hazard
Further information as to the inadvisability of leaving a TV set on as a burglary prevention while one is away from home is found in a news item in the “Daily News” (New York) of June 29, 1983. It tells of a 13-year-old boy who was fatally injured in a fire triggered by a TV set in his bedroom. The set was described as an instant-picture model that is energized by an electric current even when switched off. One fireman stated: “We’re seeing more and more fires caused by these types of sets. Just turning off the set doesn’t seem to work. The best thing to do is to unplug it.” See “From Our Readers” in issue of July 8, 1983.​—ED.

