Shall We Ever Be Rid of Disease?
CLEARLY, despite all its advances, medical science is a long way from ridding the human race of disease. Does this mean that the end of disease is not in sight? By no means. It just means that we have to look elsewhere.
When Jesus was on earth he showed another approach to the problem of disease. He was not a medical doctor, yet the record says: “He received them kindly and began to speak to them about the kingdom of God, and he healed those needing a cure.”​—Luke 9:11.
How was Jesus able to heal people? By God’s power. “Jehovah’s power was there for him to do healing.” (Luke 5:17) That same power gives us the hope of seeing the end of all disease.
How Will It Happen?
God has purposed to bring in a new spiritual authority, a “new heavens,” as well as a cleansed, earthly society, “a new earth.” (2 Peter 3:13) This spiritual authority is the “kingdom of God” that Jesus told people about. By God’s power, that Kingdom will eventually cure all man’s sicknesses, just as Jesus cured the sick of his day. Thus, “no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’ The people that are dwelling in the land will be those pardoned for their error.”​—Isaiah 33:24.
When, and for Whom?
When will that be? Soon. At the moment, we still have to look to medical science for some relief from our sicknesses. But Jesus gave a series of prophecies about things that would mark the last generation of this old, disease-ridden society. (Luke 21:10, 11, 25, 26) All those prophecies have come true in this century. Hence, his further words are also true now: “When you see these things occurring, know that the kingdom of God is near. Truly I say to you, This generation will by no means pass away until all things occur.”​—Luke 21:31, 32.
Who will enjoy this disease-free world under God’s Kingdom? Those who subject themselves to that Kingdom now. Hence, we are advised: “What sort of persons ought you to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion, awaiting and keeping close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah.”​—2 Peter 3:11, 12.
Meantime, what can we do to survive as the old order with its diseases and other problems draws to a close? Jesus counseled: “Pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life, and suddenly that day be instantly upon you as a snare. For it will come in upon all those dwelling upon the face of all the earth. Keep awake, then, all the time making supplication that you may succeed in escaping all these things that are destined to occur, and in standing before the Son of man.”​—Luke 21:34-36.
For those who thus “keep awake,” the end of all disease really is in sight.

