A Provision for Christian Ministers
 1. What new arrangement began in 1938, and for what purpose?
1 In 1938, Jehovah’s organization began a new arrangement. Groups of congregations were invited to attend zone assemblies, now called circuit assemblies. For what purpose? The January 1939 issue of the Informant (now Our Kingdom Ministry) answered: “These assemblies are a part of Jehovah’s Theocratic Organization for the conduct of his Kingdom service. The instruction provided there is essential for each one in order to properly do the work assigned.” When we consider the increase in Kingdom proclaimers from only 58,000 in 1938 to over 7,000,000 in 2009, it is obvious that circuit assemblies are accomplishing their purpose to help ministers “do the work assigned”!
 2. What information will be presented at our circuit assembly for the new service year?
2 Theme for Coming Year: We look forward to the program beginning in September and the encouragement it will provide. The theme “You Are No Part of the World” is taken from John 15:19. What are some of the talks that will surely benefit Christian ministers? On Saturday we will hear the talk “Full-Time Service Protects Us—How?” We will also enjoy a three-part symposium “Do Not Be Contaminated by . . .” “The Wild Beast,” “The Great Harlot,” and “The Traveling Merchants.” On Sunday we will hear a symposium with the theme “Love Jehovah, Not the World.” Other talks include “Continue as ‘Aliens and Temporary Residents’” and “Take Courage! You Can Conquer the World.”
 3. What benefits can we receive from being in attendance at the circuit assembly?
3 After attending a recent circuit assembly, one sister who had slowed down in the ministry wrote that the program caused her to reevaluate her circumstances and to be determined to “get out in service and stop making excuses!” No doubt the circuit assembly program for the new service year will help all of us love Jehovah rather than the world. (1 John 2:15-17) Make sure you are present and attentive so as to benefit fully from this loving provision for Christian ministers!

