You Can Witness Informally!
 1. (a) What is informal witnessing? (b) How many present at this meeting first came into contact with the truth through informal witnessing?
1 How many in your congregation first came into contact with the truth through informal witnessing? You might be surprised by the answer. Informal witnessing involves sharing the good news with people whom we meet in our daily activities—when traveling, visiting relatives or neighbors, or shopping, as well as at school, at work, and so forth. In one group of over 200 baptized Witnesses, 40 percent were first contacted through informal witnessing! Therefore, this method of preaching is very effective.
 2. What examples of informal witnessing do we find in the Scriptures?
2 Evangelizers in the first century often witnessed informally. For example, while traveling through Samaria, Jesus witnessed to a woman who was drawing water at Jacob’s fountain. (John 4:6-26) Philip started a conversation with an Ethiopian court official who was reading from the book of Isaiah by asking: “Do you actually know what you are reading?” (Acts 8:26-38) When imprisoned in Philippi, the apostle Paul witnessed to a jailer. (Acts 16:23-34) Later, while under house arrest, Paul “would kindly receive all those who came in to him, preaching the kingdom of God to them and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ.” (Acts 28:30, 31) You too can witness informally, even if you are shy. How?
 3. What can help us to overcome shyness?
3 Getting Started: Many of us find it difficult to start conversations with strangers. Even with regard to acquaintances, bringing up the truth may seem a bit awkward. We will be motivated to speak up, however, if we meditate on Jehovah’s goodness, the spiritual treasures he has given his servants, and the dire condition of people in the world. (Jonah 4:11; Ps. 40:5; Matt. 13:52) In addition, we can ask Jehovah to help us ‘muster up boldness.’ (1 Thess. 2:2) One Gilead student said: “I have often found that prayer helps when it is difficult for me to talk to people.” If you are hesitant to speak, say a brief, silent prayer.—Neh. 2:4.
 4. What goal might we initially set for ourselves, and why?
4 As the name suggests, informal witnessing does not require that we begin the conversation with a formal introduction or a scripture. We may find it helpful to have the goal of simply starting a conversation without feeling that we must give a witness right away. Many publishers report that accomplishing this step gives them the confidence they need to introduce the good news eventually. If the person does not wish to converse, there is no need to force the issue. Politely conclude the conversation and move on.
 5. What helps one shy sister to witness informally?
5 While shopping at the market, one shy sister first makes eye contact and offers a friendly smile. If the person smiles back, she makes a brief comment. If the person responds favorably, this gives her the confidence to converse further. She listens carefully and tries to discern which aspect of the good news would appeal to the person. Using this approach, she has placed much literature and even started a Bible study.
 6. How might we start a conversation in an informal setting?
6 Initiating Conversations: What can we say to initiate a conversation? When Jesus conversed with the woman at the well, he started by simply requesting that she give him a drink. (John 4:7) So perhaps we can start a conversation with a friendly greeting or question. As you talk you may find an opportunity to introduce a Scriptural thought and perhaps plant a seed of truth. (Eccl. 11:6) Some have found success by making an intriguing statement that arouses curiosity and prompts an inquiry. For example, while waiting to see the doctor, you may spark a conversation by saying, “I’ll be glad when I won’t get sick anymore.”
 7. How will being observant help us to witness informally?
7 Being observant will also help us to strike up conversations. If we observe a parent with well-behaved children, we might commend the parent and ask, “What has helped you to be a successful parent?” One sister takes note of the subjects discussed by others at work and then shares specific information based on what her coworkers are interested in. When she learned that a woman at her job was planning to get married, she gave her an Awake! that discussed how to plan a wedding. This led to further Bible discussions.
 8. How can we use our literature to start conversations?
8 Another way to start conversations is by reading our literature where others can see us. One brother opens The Watchtower or Awake! to an article with an intriguing title and quietly begins to read it. If he notices someone nearby looking at his magazine, he asks a question or makes a brief comment on the article. This often leads to a conversation and a witness. Simply leaving one of our publications where it is visible may arouse the curiosity of workmates or classmates and prompt them to inquire about it.
9, 10. (a) How can we create opportunities to witness informally? (b) How have you been able to do this?
9 Creating Opportunities: In view of the urgency of the preaching work, we should not view informal witnessing as something that can be left merely to chance. Rather, we should seek to create opportunities to give a witness as we go about our daily activities. Think ahead about the people you are likely to meet, and consider how you might start a friendly conversation. Keep a Bible handy as well as literature that you can share with those who show interest.—1 Pet. 3:15.
10 By being resourceful, many publishers have found ways to create opportunities to witness informally. A sister who lives in a high-security apartment building uses the facility’s recreation area to put together jigsaw puzzles of beautiful nature scenes. When people stop and comment on the beauty of the scene, she uses that opportunity to start a conversation and tell them about the Bible’s promise of “a new heaven and a new earth.” (Rev. 21:1-4) Can you think of ways that you could create opportunities to witness informally?
11. How may we follow up the interest we find when witnessing informally?
11 Following Up Interest: If you find a listening ear, try to follow up the interest. If appropriate, you might say to the person: “I have thoroughly enjoyed talking with you. Where can I reach you so that we can talk again?” Some publishers just hand their address and phone number to the person and say: “I enjoyed our conversation. If you would like to know more about what we discussed, here is how you can contact me.” If you cannot personally follow up the interest, arrange for the appropriate congregation to do so by promptly submitting a Please Follow Up (S-43) form to your congregation secretary.
12. (a) Why keep track of and report the time we spend witnessing informally? (b) What results have been obtained through informal witnessing? (See the box “Informal Witnessing Gets Results!”)
12 The time we spend doing informal witnessing should be reported. Therefore, be sure to keep a record of it, even if it is only a few minutes a day. Consider this: If every publisher witnessed informally for five minutes each day, that would add up to more than 17 million hours each month!
13. What should motivate us to witness informally?
13 We have the noblest reasons to witness informally—love for God and neighbor. (Matt. 22:37-39) Hearts filled with appreciation for Jehovah’s qualities and purposes impel us to speak about “the glory of the splendor of his kingship.” (Ps. 145:7, 10-12) Genuine concern for our neighbors moves us to take advantage of every appropriate opportunity to share the good news while there is still time. (Rom. 10:13, 14) With a little forethought and preparation, all of us can witness informally and perhaps experience the joy of introducing the truth to someone of honest heart.
[Blurb on page 4]
You may find it helpful to have the goal of simply meeting people and starting conversations
[Blurb on page 5]
By being resourceful, many publishers have found ways to create opportunities to witness informally
[Box on page 5]
Suggestions for Starting Conversations
▪ Pray for help to get started
▪ Choose those who seem friendly and unhurried
▪ Establish eye contact, smile, and comment on something of mutual interest
▪ Be a good listener
[Box on page 6]
Informal Witnessing Gets Results!
• While at a garage waiting for his car to be repaired, a brother witnessed to those around him and gave them handbills inviting them to the public talk. At a convention a year later, a brother he did not recognize greeted him warmly. It was one of the men to whom he had given a handbill at the garage the year before! The man had gone to hear the public talk and had turned in his name for a Bible study. Both he and his wife had been baptized.
• A sister who learned the truth through informal witnessing considers her special territory to be the people she meets through her three children. Her territory includes neighbors and parents she meets at school and at meetings for parents. Whenever she introduces herself, she makes a simple but heartfelt statement that the Bible is a valuable aid to her in rearing her children, and then she moves on to some other topic. But having broken the ice, she finds it much easier to bring the Bible into subsequent discussions. By using this method, she has helped 12 persons to baptism.
• When a sister was visited by an insurance salesman, she took the opportunity to give a witness. She asked him if he would like to be guaranteed good health, happiness, and everlasting life. He said yes and asked her which insurance policy she was talking about. She showed him the Bible’s promises and offered one of our publications, which he read in one evening. A Bible study was arranged. He began attending meetings and was later baptized.
• While traveling by plane, a sister began talking with the woman seated beside her and was able to give a witness. At the conclusion of the flight, the sister gave the woman her address and phone number and encouraged the woman to ask for a Bible study the next time that Jehovah’s Witnesses visited. The very next day, two Witnesses called at the woman’s door. The woman started studying the Bible, made rapid progress, got baptized, and was soon conducting three Bible studies of her own.
• A 100-year-old blind brother who lives in a nursing home often says, “We need the Kingdom.” This has led to questions from nurses and patients that enable him to explain what the Kingdom is. One of the women who works there asked him what he will do in the Paradise. He replied, “I will see and walk again and burn my wheelchair.” Since he is blind, he asks her to read the magazines to him. When the brother’s daughter visited, the worker asked the daughter for permission to take the magazines home. A nurse told the daughter, “Our new theme in the nursing home is: ‘We need the Kingdom.’”
• A sister waiting in line at a restaurant overheard a group of elderly men sitting nearby who were discussing political issues. One man stated that the government cannot solve our problems. The sister told herself, ‘This is my chance.’ She said a brief prayer and approached them. After introducing herself, she told them about a government that will solve mankind’s problems, God’s Kingdom, and offered them a brochure that she had with her. Just then the manager approached. The sister thought he was going to ask her to leave. Instead, he told her that he had been listening and would like a brochure too. An employee who was also listening approached with tears rolling down her face. She was a former Bible student who wanted to resume her study.

