“Food at the Proper Time”
 1. How did the current special assembly day program help you and others?
1 After attending our special assembly day, we often say, “That was just what we needed!” One circuit overseer reported that after hearing the current program, some in his circuit expressed the desire to increase their share in the ministry. One traveling overseer said, “It helped us to think clearly about where we are in the stream of time as we review our choices in life.” Another said, “A number of publishers expressed the thought that this was a wake-up call for them to make sure that they are focusing on what is most important, the ministry.” How did the special assembly day help you?
 2. What will be considered on the program during the next service year?
2 The program for the coming service year will also be just what we need. The theme is “Take Refuge in Jehovah,” taken from Psalm 118:8, 9. Here are some of the subjects to be discussed: “How Jehovah Is a Fortress in Times of Distress,” “Help Others Find Refuge Under Jehovah’s Wings,” “Imitate Jehovah in Providing Refuge,” “Young People, Make Jehovah Your Confidence!” and “Our Spiritual Paradise—Jehovah’s Provision for Refuge.”
 3. How can we benefit fully from being in attendance?
3 In Order to Benefit: Once the date is announced, make definite plans to attend, and invite your Bible students to join you. In order for us to “bear fruit with endurance,” we must retain what we hear. (Luke 8:15) So listen carefully to the program, and take brief notes on the main points as well as instruction that you plan to apply in your life and ministry. Take time after the assembly to discuss the program as a family, and consider specific ways that you and your family can apply the information.
 4. Why should we look forward to our upcoming special assembly day?
4 Like a tasty and nourishing meal, this year’s special assembly day has been prepared with much love and forethought. May Jehovah bless your efforts to attend and to benefit from this “food at the proper time” to spiritually nourish Christian ministers.—Matt. 24:45.

