From Our Readers
“Tasty” Article
I want to express my appreciation for “Cooking Vegetables​—Chinese Style.” (May 8, 1988) I prepared a meal following the suggestions in the article and was praised by my family for it. I hope you will continue preparing such “tasty” articles.
R. G. O., Brazil
Running Away
In “Is Running Away the Answer?” (March 22, 1988), you did not deviate from your tradition of using advanced societies as a focus. When shall a less fortunate society like Africa begin to get your attention? To me, your suggestion to the solution was myopic and discriminatory. You failed to point out that this predicament originates from the materialistic tendencies and ambitions of some parents today. This writer is a victim. A few years ago when my pocket was buoyant, I became the pet child of my parent, but when circumstances turned it impecunious, I was disdained. In short, it was my mum who ruined my fortune. You should unequivocally condemn the materialistic attitude of some parents nowadays.
T. T., Nigeria
This article was second in a series on runaways. The first article (February 22, 1988) acknowledged that unreasonable conditions do exist and that, at times, parents are to blame. “Awake!” makes an effort to maintain an international flavor. Our cover topics of March 8, 1987, and June 22, 1988, dealt specifically with African concerns from African sources. Many individual articles have also done so.​—ED.
I hope every young person reads your “Young People Ask . . ” articles. I especially appreciated “Should I Run Away From Home?” (February 22, 1988) I was thinking about it, and I have changed my mind.
C. H., United States
Awake! Appreciated
As a regular reader of Awake!, I greatly admire your excellent way of presenting problems so that everyone can understand. This is quite uncommon in so-called intellectual circles. I also admire your generosity, your desire to contribute to man’s happiness without any profit to yourselves, for your publications are distributed with practically no margin, and you do not take collections as many others do.
J. B., M.D., France
I am 16 years old, and I am a Muslim. However, I enjoy the interesting articles for kids and their parents. I wish more kids my age would take a look at things you have to say. Your books make a lonely night a bit more bearable. Thanks for including us kids.
F. R., United States
I appreciate the deep insight you give to all sorts of problems that arise in life, along with the fine counsel. All other religions have inconsistencies, but the teachings in your publications never conflict. They are logical and, above all, accurate. What makes me most happy is that little by little I feel my life becoming more enjoyable as I change from the empty way of life I have led until now to one that is worthwhile.
M. O., Japan

