From Our Readers
Rosary  I am writing regarding your article on the rosary. (“The Bible’s Viewpoint,” June 8, 1990) Based on the one-sided views of two “ex-nuns,” you conclude that God does not want us to come to Him through his Mother, Mary. The Catholic doctrine that Mary is an intercessor of Christ is one of long standing and well established. Someone who tries to dispute this fact without researching all information available is making a grave error. Get the facts!
M. E. M., United States
We can well appreciate why some Catholic readers might feel this way. Nevertheless, our article was thoroughly researched, using respected sources, including the “New Catholic Encyclopedia.” And while the comments of the ex-nuns quoted were of interest, the article based its conclusions upon the testimony of the Bible itself. Centuries of church tradition do not change the fact that the Bible simply does not assign Mary the role of “intercessor.” On the contrary, Jesus himself said: “No one can come to the Father except through me.” (John 14:6, Catholic “Jerusalem Bible”)​—ED.
Telescope  The March 8, 1990, issue featured an article entitled “Unusual Telescope Reveals Sun’s Mysteries.” I showed it to my science teacher, and he was delighted with it. Two days later the teacher gave photocopies of the article to everyone in the class, and we went over the entire article. He intends to use the article with all his science classes.
A. V. A., United States
Makeup  Almost all the girls in my class at school wear makeup, although some of them are only 13 years old. I wanted to try wearing it, but my parents did not like the idea. Having read your article (May 22, 1990), I now understand that you can look nice even without makeup. I think it is really super that you publish articles especially designed for youths.
D. C., Germany
Thanks for your article on using makeup properly. (June 22, 1990) I’m not allowed to wear makeup because I’m only 11. But I learned from your article that when I am allowed to wear it, I will use only a little, and as I grow older and need more makeup, that’s when I’ll apply more.
S. D., United States
Human Rule  Your series “Human Rule Weighed in the Balances” confuses me. What good is dissecting and judging various forms of human government when all forms of government have suffered from Satan’s nonstop interference? How can one tell where Satan’s puppet strings end and man’s incompetence begins?
A. P., United States
Satanic interference has no doubt contributed to man’s failure to govern himself. Nevertheless, human rule independent of God would fail even without Satan’s meddling. Says Jeremiah 10:23: “It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” Our series serves to dramatize the truth of these words.​—ED.
Crack Addiction  Thanks for your true-to-life articles on crack. (July 22, 1990) I have dealt every drug known except heroin, and I was a drug user for 11 years. My wife was a user and drug dealer as well. While serving 27 months in prison, she began studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses and was baptized. By studying the Bible, and with Jehovah’s help, I too have quit drugs completely.
C. V., Colombia
Quitting addictive drugs is difficult, and some have needed professional help to do so. Learning the Bible’s truths, however, can be a powerful help in freeing oneself from addictions.​—ED.

