Offering Ourselves Willingly
1 The psalmist David prophesied that Jehovah’s people “will offer themselves willingly”; that is, as “prompt volunteers.” (Ps. 110:3, footnote) This certainly is being fulfilled among our worldwide association of brothers. During each of the past four service years, Jehovah’s people have devoted more than a billion hours to spreading the good news of the Kingdom. And there are many ways, in addition to the preaching and disciple-making work, in which we can offer ourselves willingly to help others.
2 Ways We Can Show Our Willingness: Some in the congregation might need help to get to the meetings. Why not volunteer to take them with you? Others may be sick, infirm, or hospitalized. Could you take the initiative to visit them or be of assistance in some way? There may be an individual or a family that needs encouragement. Have you thought of extending an invitation to such ones to sit in on your family study occasionally? A pioneer or a publisher may need a companion in the ministry. Why not offer to work together in the service? These are some of the ways in which we can voluntarily work what is good toward those related to us in the faith.—Gal. 6:10.
3 Brothers can show their willingness to be used in Jehovah’s organization by striving to measure up to the qualifications for elders and ministerial servants. (1 Tim. 3:2-10, 12, 13; Titus 1:5-9) As we continue to grow in number, there is a need for qualified brothers who are willing to take the lead in preaching and teaching and in shepherding the congregations.—1 Tim. 3:1.
4 Perhaps some of us can make ourselves available for Jehovah’s service to a greater extent by enrolling as auxiliary pioneers from time to time. Then again, with a few reasonable adjustments in our schedule, we might be able to do so continuously or even take up the regular pioneer service. Are our circumstances such that we could move to an area where there is a greater need for help? Could we make ourselves available to serve at Bethel and thus directly contribute toward the progress of the worldwide work? Much is also being done in the construction of Kingdom Halls, Assembly Halls, and branch facilities around the world, where willingness to work is very much in demand. Those who have offered themselves for these fine works are greatly appreciated, and they have been richly blessed!—Luke 6:38.
5 These are thrilling times. Jehovah, by means of his spirit, is accomplishing a marvelous work on earth with his willing people! Whenever Jehovah, through his organization, extends an invitation to share in increased Kingdom activity, we do well to ask ourselves, ‘Am I still offering myself willingly?’ Then we should prayerfully examine our heart and circumstances. Our godly devotion will prompt us to do all we can in sacred service, thus making Jehovah’s heart very glad!—Zeph. 3:17.

