Service Meetings for December
Week Starting December 2
Song 134
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Who Will Listen to Our Message?” Questions and answers. Include points from the March 22, 1987, Awake!, page 5, on why our message is appealing.
20 min: “God’s Word Provides Guidance.” (Paragraphs 1-6) Introduce part with paragraphs 1-2. (Include Reasoning book, pages 58-60, briefly outlining four “Reasons for considering the Bible.”) Have capable publishers demonstrate suggested presentations in paragraphs 3-6. Invite audience to comment on (1) how the questions raised helped to stimulate interest, (2) how the scriptures used fit the subject being discussed, (3) how the matter of donations was mentioned, (4) how the return visit naturally followed up the initial discussion, and (5) how an offer of a study was made.
Song 75 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 9
Song 100
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Helping Older Ones to Share in Service. Many faithful older publishers have a keen desire to share in preaching with the congregation, but they have physical limitations that are due to age and poor health. There are ways we can show them consideration so as to include them in the service group: Offer to provide transportation; arrange for them to work homes where there are fewer stairs to climb; keep the car close by so that they can rest when they get tired; offer to take them on their return visits; let them know you will take them home when they feel they cannot continue. Older ones are thankful for the help that is offered to them. Mention other ways you show such consideration locally. Review main points in the article “We Appreciate the Older Ones!” found in the February 1, 1986, Watchtower, pages 28-9.
20 min: “God’s Word Provides Guidance.” (Paragraphs 7-9) Comment on “A Need for Guidance” in the May 1, 1993, Watchtower, page 3. Explain why our presentations should stress the importance of seeking help from a higher source—God. Have publisher demonstrate presentations in paragraphs 7-8. Emphasize that our goal should be eventually to start a Bible study in the Knowledge book.
Song 197 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 16
Song 209
10 min: Local announcements. Offer some suggestions on how to respond tactfully to holiday greetings. Outline special field service arrangements for December 25.
15 min: “Offering Ourselves Willingly.” Questions and answers. Include comments from the May 1, 1984, Watchtower, page 22.
20 min: “Rejoicing With the Increase That God Gives.” Enthusiastic talk by elder. Cite experiences or evidence of increase in countries represented, as given in recent Yearbooks.
Song 41 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 23
Song 93
10 min: Local announcements. Point out some talking points in the current magazines that can be used in service this week. Outline special field service arrangements for January 1.
15 min: Local needs. Or an elder gives a talk on “Retirement—An Open Door to Theocratic Activity?” from the July 15, 1996, Watchtower, pages 24-5.—See Insight, Volume 2, page 794, paragraphs 2-3.
20 min: “Theocratic Ministry School Enrollment.” Talk by school overseer. Give local enrollment statistics, and encourage all who can to enroll. Review instructions for student assignments provided in “Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1997.”
Song 166 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 30
Song 223
10 min: Local announcements. If your congregation is due to rotate meeting times for the new year, give kind encouragement urging all to maintain regular attendance with the congregation at its new times. Briefly review literature offer for January.
10 min: “Help at the Right Time.” Draw attention to article, and point out valuable highlights from each of the new publications.
25 min: Prepare to Attend 1997 District Convention. Secretary handles question-and-answer coverage of convention information in January 1997 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. First, read December 15, 1996, convention assignment letter. Then, after considering paragraph 5 of article, read opening and closing paragraphs of Recommended Lodging List. As noted in the article, emphasize the Scriptural principles for following the Society’s direction in rooming matters. Commend the brothers for cooperating with the Society’s rooming arrangement.
Song 137 and concluding prayer.

