Theocratic Ministry School Enrollment
1 The Theocratic Ministry School has been instrumental in the training of millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses as ministers of the good news. Many of us remember how apprehensive and inadequate we felt when we first enrolled in this school, and now we gratefully acknowledge its role in our spiritual development as speakers and teachers of God’s Word. (Compare Acts 4:13.) Have you enrolled in this remarkable school?
2 Who may enroll? Page 73 of Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry answers: “All who are actively associated with the congregation may enroll, including people newly attending the meetings, as long as they are not leading a life that is out of line with Christian principles.” We invite all who qualify—men, women, and children—to approach the school overseer and ask to be enrolled.
3 School Program for 1997: The Theocratic Ministry School program for 1997 covers a wide variety of Bible teachings and characters, as well as the history of the organization. In addition to developing our speaking and teaching abilities, we learn from the many spiritual gems that are found in its curriculum each week. (Prov. 9:9) If we prepare for the school, which includes doing the weekly Bible reading, and are in regular attendance, we can derive great spiritual benefit from the program.
4 For 1997 most of the Bible readings for Assignment No. 2 are shorter than in past years. When preparing for this assignment, the student should time his reading carefully and then determine how much of the five minutes allotted for his part can be used for the introduction and the conclusion. This will allow the student to utilize his time fully and to develop both his reading ability and the art of speaking extemporaneously.—1 Tim. 4:13.
5 Informal witnessing has been added as a possible setting for presentations in Assignment No. 3, which are based on the Knowledge book. Hence, a sister may choose either a return visit, a home Bible study, or informal witnessing as the setting for this assignment. Of course, the main emphasis should continue to be placed on effective teaching and not on the setting.
6 Whether you have the privilege of giving the instruction talk, Bible highlights, or a student assignment, you can show your appreciation for the Theocratic Ministry School by preparing and rehearsing your part well, by presenting it with conviction and enthusiasm, by not going overtime, by listening to and applying the counsel of the school overseer, and by always endeavoring to fulfill your assignment faithfully. Thus your enrollment in the school will prove to be a blessing both for you and for all who are in attendance.

