Who Will Listen to Our Message?
1 As never before in human history, people are deluged with information, much of which is frivolous and even misleading. As a result, many feel overwhelmed, and it becomes a challenge for us to get them to listen to the message about God’s Kingdom. They do not appreciate what a positive effect their listening to God’s Word can have on them.—Luke 11:28.
2 We rejoice that in many parts of the world, tens of thousands of people are listening to that message and are accepting our offer of home Bible studies. In other territories, however, the response is not nearly so great. Many of the calls we make in the ministry are without positive results, and we may wonder who will listen to our message.
3 We must guard against becoming discouraged. Paul explained: “‘Everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.’ However, how will they call on him . . . of whom they have not heard? How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach? . . . Just as it is written: ‘How comely are the feet of those who declare good news of good things!’” (Rom. 10:13-15) If we diligently sow Kingdom seed, God will make it grow within those of honest heart.—1 Cor. 3:6.
4 The Key Is to Make Regular Return Visits: In territories where it seems that few people listen to our message, we need to concentrate on developing whatever interest we do find, whether we place literature or not. Why be quick to conclude that nothing will be accomplished? When we sow seed, we do not know where it will have success. (Eccl. 11:6) If we return prepared to share something from the Scriptures, even if only briefly, we may be able to reach the person’s heart. We can leave a tract or offer current magazines. Eventually, we may be able to demonstrate a Bible study. We will be pleasantly surprised to see how much Jehovah blesses our efforts.—Ps. 126:5, 6.
5 A tract was left with a woman who manifested some interest. She was not found at home again until two months later, and then she was too busy to talk. The same tract was left with her again. Despite the publisher’s persistent efforts to reach her at home, it took another three months to contact her, only to find that she was sick. The sister called again the next week, and a brief conversation ensued about the tract. When the sister returned the following week, the woman expressed genuine interest in the Kingdom message. A change of circumstances in her life made her conscious of her spiritual need. A Bible study was started, and she enthusiastically studied every week thereafter.
6 As with anything that we want to see grow, whether flowers, vegetables, or interest in the Kingdom message, cultivation is needed. That takes time, exertion, a caring attitude, and determination not to give up. Last year, more than a third of a million people in whom Kingdom seed had taken root were baptized! If we keep on preaching, we will be sure to find many more who will listen to our message.—Compare Galatians 6:9.

