A Volunteer Spirit Brings Blessings
 1. How did David and Nehemiah demonstrate a volunteer spirit?
1 When Goliath taunted the battle lines of Israel, any of the soldiers could have fought him. But it was a shepherd boy, untrained in warfare, who volunteered. (1 Sam. 17:32) When the exiled Jews went back to Jerusalem but failed to rebuild the walls, it was a cupbearer to the king of Persia who volunteered to leave his privileged position in the palace and to travel to Jerusalem in order to organize the work. (Neh. 2:5) Jehovah blessed both of these men, David and Nehemiah, for the spirit they showed.​—1 Sam. 17:45, 50; Neh. 6:15, 16.
 2. Why should Christians demonstrate a volunteer spirit?
2 Today, the volunteer spirit is lacking in the world. In these “last days,” people lead very busy lives, and many are “lovers of themselves.” (2 Tim. 3:1, 2) It is easy for a person to become so absorbed in personal interests that he overlooks opportunities to volunteer his services when there is a need to help others. However, as Christians, we desire to imitate Jesus, who took the initiative to help others. (John 5:5-9; 13:12-15; 1 Pet. 2:21) How can we demonstrate a volunteer spirit, and what blessings will we receive?
 3. How does the volunteer spirit contribute to congregation meetings?
3 In Behalf of Our Brothers: We can impart a “spiritual gift” to others by volunteering to comment when meeting parts call for audience participation. (Rom. 1:11) Commenting honors Jehovah, impresses the truth more firmly on our mind and heart, and adds to our enjoyment of the meetings. (Ps. 26:12) We can also volunteer to give a talk in the Theocratic Ministry School when a substitute is needed. This will help us to improve our teaching ability.
 4. What are some other ways that we can demonstrate the volunteer spirit?
4 Brothers can demonstrate the volunteer spirit by reaching out to care for responsibilities in the congregation. (Isa. 32:2; 1 Tim. 3:1) All can help to keep assemblies and conventions running smoothly by volunteering to work in the various departments. When we volunteer to work with the traveling overseer in the ministry or to provide a meal for him, this results in “an interchange of encouragement.” (Rom. 1:12) When we offer to provide practical assistance to fatherless boys, widows, the sick and infirm, mothers with young children, and others in the congregation, we experience joy and Jehovah’s favor.​—Prov. 19:17; Acts 20:35.
 5. What matters involving the Kingdom Hall require willing volunteers?
5 Another way for us to volunteer our time and effort is to assist in cleaning and maintaining the Kingdom Hall. In addition, because many people are coming into the truth, there is a growing need for new Kingdom Halls and volunteers to build them. One couple made themselves available to assist the local Regional Building Committee even though the couple were unskilled in the building trades. Over time, the couple were given training and now assist in laying bricks. The wife remarked: “Working side by side with others has resulted in very close friendships. At the end of the day, we are physically tired but spiritually refreshed.”
 6. Why is the ministry the most important volunteer work we can perform?
6 By Preaching: The most important volunteer work that we can perform today is the Kingdom-preaching work. As people are helped to understand and apply the Bible’s counsel, they gain a purpose in life and the strength to overcome harmful habits. They learn the Bible’s uplifting hope for the future. By providing Bible education, we perform a joyful volunteer service with long-lasting benefits. (John 17:3; 1 Tim. 4:16) Perhaps our circumstances might allow us to have a greater share in this work by auxiliary or regular pioneering, by moving to where the need is greater, or by learning another language.
 7. Why is volunteering especially important today?
7 King David prophesied that at the time the Messiah would begin his rulership, God’s people would “offer themselves willingly.” (Ps. 110:3, ftn.) With Jehovah speeding up the final spiritual harvest, there is much work for which to volunteer. (Isa. 60:22) Have you said: “Here I am! Send me”? (Isa. 6:8) Truly, by our demonstrating the volunteer spirit, we please Jehovah and reap rich rewards.

