Call Back on All Who Show a Measure of Interest
1 Many of us are in the truth today because someone took note of our favorable response to the Kingdom message and patiently returned​—perhaps a number of times—​to cultivate that interest. We likewise should conscientiously call back on all who show a measure of interest. Really, making return visits is included in our commission to “make disciples.”​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
2 Discern Interest: Even if an individual does not accept literature, his facial expression, tone of voice, or choice of words may reveal a measure of appreciation for the Kingdom message. On that basis we may make a return visit. One brother made calls on an individual for five consecutive weeks without placing literature. On the sixth visit, the person accepted literature, and eventually a Bible study was started.
3 If you detect interest, return promptly, perhaps a few days later. Do not give “the wicked one” opportunity to snatch away what has been sown in the person’s heart. (Matt. 13:19) Be sure to keep your word if you made arrangements to go back at a specific time.​—Matt. 5:37.
4 In Street Work: Do you endeavor to follow up on the interest you find while in street work or when witnessing informally? At the end of your conversation, you could say: “I enjoyed our discussion. Where can I reach you so that we can talk again?” When appropriate, some publishers may choose to give the interested person their phone number or ask to exchange phone numbers. If people see you in street work at the same location on a regular basis, they may not be reluctant to give you their phone number or address. Even if they refuse to give you contact information, you can still try to further their interest the next time you meet them on the street.
5 When we see plants that we have watered and cultivated flourish, it brings us joy. Similarly, we can receive much joy by making return visits and helping individuals to progress spiritually. (1 Cor. 3:6) Make it your aim to call back on all who show a measure of interest.

