From Our Readers
Sarcasm  I appreciated your article “Young People Ask . . . What’s the Harm in Using Sarcasm?” (September 22, 1991) This is something I have been guilty of for many years. It has mostly been in the so-​called witty manner, but in retrospect I see that it has also been a kind of self-​defense mechanism, masking long-​standing feelings of inferiority. Having read the article, however, I intend to get rid of this bad and sometimes hurtful habit.
C. T., England
Heeding Body Warnings  Last year I was hospitalized for three months because of ovary disorders. For years I had had warning signals, but I didn’t take much notice. Finally I went to a hospital and learned that immediate surgery was necessary. Had I had your article “Heeding the Body’s Warnings” (October 8, 1991) back then, I might have had the courage to go to a doctor earlier.
M. U., Japan
Air-​Conditioning  The article “Do You Need Air-​Conditioning?” (June 22, 1991) appealed to me, as I have worked at servicing air conditioners for over 35 years. Back in the 1950’s, when I first learned my trade, we had to study the topic of Btu’s for several days. You explained this matter in a very simple and understandable way in just one paragraph! I wish I had had this article back then.
A. D., United States
Blood Controversy  I have just read the article about Wyndham Cook, entitled “This Evening You Will Be Dead.” (August 22, 1991) Never has an article touched my heart quite the way this one did. I pray that Jehovah will watch over his parents and that we may all follow the example of strong faith set by this young man.
J. T., United States
As a 15-​year-​old myself, it is encouraging to know that young Christians have shown such devotion to God. It brought tears to my eyes to read about Wyndham Cook’s fine fight for the faith. I pray that in a similar situation, I could prove as faithful.
D. L., United States
Clutter  Thank you for your article “When Clutter Gets Out Of Control.” (August 8, 1991) I’ve been fighting this battle most of my 44 years of life, and I can use any help I can get. Thank you for your most practical suggestions.
C. R., United States
My husband read the article first and insinuated that our home was cluttered! We had recently finished our spring cleaning, and I thought our home had never looked better. Then came my turn to soak up the article. How I laughed when I realized the real condition of my home! Your article helped me to move mountains of clutter. Thank you.
S. C., United States
Unemployment  I want to thank you from the heart for the series of articles on “How to Cope When You Lose Your Job.” (August 8, 1991) A year ago my husband suddenly lost his job, and he has not yet succeeded in getting another one like it. This has been a real challenge for us. Thank you for always giving us a comforting word.
R. S., Brazil
International Construction  We were delighted to receive the article “You Just Have to Do It.” (April 22, 1991) It arrived just one week before my wife and I left to serve as volunteers at a Watch Tower construction project in Colombia, South America. The article gave us a ‘sneak preview’ of what to expect. We were also able to place many copies with family, employers, interested ones, and Bible students before we left. It helped them to have a better understanding of the work in which we were privileged to share.
T. G., United States

