Chapter 3
A Transformed Messiah with Whom Politicians Must Cope
 1. Like political rulers of 33 C.E., the political rulers of today will have to decide in a final way what to do with whom?
IN THE near future the political rulers of all nations and peoples will have to decide in a final way what to do about the Messiah. Near the middle of the first century of our Common Era this Messiah, Jesus the Descendant of King David, had direct encounters with a couple of worldly political rulers. King Herod Antipas of Galilee discredited Jesus as being the Messiah and made fun of him in the courtroom and sent him back to the Roman governor of Judea, Pontius Pilate, for final trial. Governor Pilate, representing Emperor Tiberius of Rome, yielded to pressure from an anti-Messianic mob and sentenced Jesus to die by being nailed to a stake as a criminal slave. (Luke 23:1-25) But today the political rulers have a Messiah with whom to cope, far different from the self-sacrificing Messiah of the year 33 C.E.
 2. Why will political rulers be amazed at their confrontation with the Messiah shortly?
2 Political rulers, especially those of Christendom, are more or less familiar with the Gospel accounts of the earthly life of Jesus Christ. Likely the most familiar mental picture that they have of him is that presented by many religious artists, that of a Jesus with drawn facial features beneath a crown of thorns, nailed hand and foot to a cross. Little, or, rather, not at all, do the political rulers of today count on having a confrontation with Jesus Christ as a mighty heavenly King all equipped to fight with his earthly enemies. To their utter amazement, it will be a transformed Messiah whom they will have to confront shortly.
 3. Why is it timely and important now to examine the prophecy of Isaiah 52:13 through 53:12?
3 This amazing transformation of the Messiah in his position and also what he is commissioned to do officially were foretold in the prophecy of Isaiah 52:13 through 53:12. It is now timely to examine that particular prophecy and also the facts that show how the prophecy has worked out. This is of importance to us today.
 4, 5. Of whom does Isaiah 52:13-15 abruptly take up a consideration?
4 After Isaiah, chapter 52, tells of the release of the Jews from decades of exile in the foreign land of Babylon in the Mesopotamian valley, verse 13 makes an abrupt turn in what is considered. Note how the closing verses of the chapter read:
5 “Look! My servant will act with insight. He will be in high station and will certainly be elevated and exalted very much. To the extent that many have stared at him in amazement​—so much was the disfigurement as respects his appearance more than that of any other man and as respects his stately form more than that of the sons of mankind—​he will likewise startle many nations. At him kings will shut their mouth, because what had not been recounted to them they will actually see, and to what they had not heard they must turn their consideration.”​—Isaiah 52:13-15.
 6. What is the orthodox Jewish view of the one whom Jehovah calls “my servant,” as shown in a Jewish footnote thereon?
6 Who is it that Jehovah God here speaks of prophetically as “my servant”? Orthodox Jewish opinion is that it is not an individual. The footnote on this in the book of Isaiah, by Dr. I. W. Slotki, M.A., LITT.D., published by The Soncino Press in 1949, reads: “The servant is the ideal Israel or the faithful remnant. That he is not an individual is the opinion of all Jewish and most modern non-Jewish commentators. ‘Whatever causes may have tended to stimulate the advocacy of this form of interpretation (viz. the Christological), it is important for Christian exegetes to recognize that this path of Jewish exposition is in the main right, and that the path of Christian interpreters down to the time of Rosenmüller (i.e. 1820) has been in the main wrong.’ (Whitehouse).” But is such “path of Jewish exposition” right?
 7. After so long a time from Isaiah’s prophecy, what proof can Orthodox and Reform Jews offer of the existence of such an “ideal Israel” among Jewry of today?
7 In considering the above-expressed Jewish opinion as to the identity of “my servant,” we are obliged to ask, Who today or where today is what Dr. Slotki calls “the ideal Israel”? Is it to be found in this generation of natural Jews that has survived the regime of the Nazi dictator Hitler in Europe and Communist oppressions and that yet number some 14,443,925? Do we find the “ideal Israel” or that “servant” of the Most High God in the present-day Republic of Israel, particularly its Jewish population that controls the political government? What Jew, either of the Orthodox religious section or of the Reform religious section, sees in all Jewry or any part of Jewry today “the ideal Israel,” over 2,700 years after the giving of the prophecy of Isaiah? So they have no proof at all that the “servant” of Isaiah’s prophecy is the “ideal Israel” made up of natural Jews.
 8. Where can we find the inspired description of the true “ideal Israel,” and how is it there described?
8 If we desire to identify the true “ideal Israel,” we can find the inspired description of it in the Revelation that was received by the former Jewish fisherman on the Sea of Galilee, John the son of Zebedee, when John was suffering exile and imprisonment on the Roman penal isle of Patmos in the Aegean Sea. The evidence is that this Revelation was given to John after the destruction of Jerusalem and its temple by the Romans in the year 70 C.E. This was after the burning of Rome by Emperor Nero, which led to persecution of the falsely accused Christians. In one of the revelatory visions John saw and heard an angel say to the four angels that were holding back the stormy winds of the earth: “Do not harm the earth or the sea or the trees, until after we have sealed the slaves of our God in their foreheads.” (Revelation 7:1-3) Then John proceeds to write:
And I heard the number of those who were sealed, a hundred and forty-four thousand, sealed out of every tribe of the sons of Israel:
Out of the tribe of Judah twelve thousand sealed;
out of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand;
out of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand sealed.​—Revelation 7:4-8.
 9, 10. What is there about those sealed Israelites that makes them ideal?
9 The number of those sealed Israelites is certainly an ideal number, that is to say, twelve times twelve thousand, or one hundred and forty-four thousand, a perfectly balanced number. But what makes them an “ideal Israel” is not entirely their number, but, rather, their moral, religious qualities. In an inspired comment on those qualities, John writes:
10 “And I saw, and, look! the Lamb standing upon the Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand having his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads. And I heard a sound out of heaven as the sound of many waters and as the sound of loud thunder; and the sound that I heard was as of singers who accompany themselves on the harp playing on their harps. And they are singing as if a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders; and no one was able to master that song but the hundred and forty-four thousand, who have been bought from the earth. These are the ones that did not defile themselves with women; in fact, they are virgins. These are the ones that keep following the Lamb no matter where he goes. These were bought from among mankind as firstfruits to God and to the Lamb, and no falsehood was found in their mouths; they are without blemish.”​—Revelation 14:1-5.
11. (a) What kind of Israelites are these, and what kind of circumcision have they undergone? (b) When did Jesus Christ himself become a spiritual Israelite?
11 These are spiritual Israelites, those who have done what the prophet Moses told the ancient nation of Israel to do: “You must circumcise the foreskin of your hearts and not harden your necks any longer.” Also: “Jehovah your God will have to circumcise your heart and the heart of your offspring, that you may love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul for the sake of your life.” (Deuteronomy 10:16; 30:6) Even if some of these spiritual Israelites were Jews naturally, they must have the circumcision of the heart and be Jews inwardly like all the rest of spiritual Israel. (Romans 2:28, 29) Even the one whom they follow, “the Lamb,” Jesus Christ, became a spiritual Israelite, when he was anointed with God’s spirit right after being baptized in the Jordan River by John the Baptist.​—Matthew 3:13-17.
12, 13. (a) How does Revelation 21:2, 9-14 identify the “ideal Israel” with “the Lamb’s wife”? (b) In what way are the “foundation stones” of this heavenly city significant in identifying the “ideal Israel”?
12 That the “ideal Israel” is, in fact, the spiritual Israel is illustrated further in Revelation 21:2, 9-14. There the twelve tribes of Israel, composed of the 144,000 sealed “slaves of our God,” are likened to the New Jerusalem, “the bride, the Lamb’s wife.” Concerning this heavenly, spiritual New Jerusalem, it is written: “He showed me the holy city Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God and having the glory of God. Its radiance was like a most precious stone, as a jasper stone shining crystal-clear. It had a great and lofty wall and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names were inscribed which are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel. On the east were three gates, and on the north three gates, and on the south three gates, and on the west three gates. The wall of the city also had twelve foundation stones, and on them the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.”
13 Natural, fleshly Israel was founded upon the twelve sons of the patriarch Jacob, but it is the spiritual Israel, the Christian Israel, that is founded on the twelve apostles of the Lamb Jesus Christ. (Ephesians 2:20) So, without question, it is this spiritual Israel that is “the ideal Israel.” But that by no means proves that it is the “servant” described in chapter fifty-three of Isaiah’s prophecy.
INSPIRED IDENTIFICATION OF “MY SERVANT”
14. To what source do we look for a sure identification of the one whom God calls “my servant”?
14 So, then, who exactly is the one to whom God refers as “my servant,” not only in Isaiah 52:13 but also in Isaiah 53:11? Instead of taking the opinions of such men as Dr. I. W. Slotki of 1949 C.E. and of the German Orientalist Ernst F. K. Rosenmüller of 1820 C.E., we shall be left in no uncertainty by taking the identification of “my servant” as given in the inspired Holy Scriptures. This interpretation of God’s words, “my servant,” was given to a Jewish proselyte, an Ethiopian, who had gone up to Jerusalem of the first century C.E. to worship at the temple there. The inspired account of the incident reads:
15, 16. In regard to Isaiah’s prophecy, what conversation took place between Philip and an Ethiopian eunuch?
15 “Jehovah’s angel spoke to Philip, saying: ‘Rise and go to the south to the road that runs down from Jerusalem to Gaza.’ (This is a desert road.) With that he rose and went, and, look! an Ethiopian eunuch, a man in power under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, and who was over all her treasure. He had gone to Jerusalem to worship, but he was returning and was sitting in his chariot and reading aloud the prophet Isaiah. So the spirit said to Philip: ‘Approach and join yourself to this chariot.’ Philip ran alongside and heard him reading aloud Isaiah the prophet, and he said: ‘Do you actually know what you are reading?’ He said: ‘Really, how could I ever do so, unless someone guided me?’ And he entreated Philip to get on and sit down with him. Now the passage of Scripture that he was reading aloud was this: ‘As a sheep he was brought to the slaughter, and as a lamb that is voiceless before its shearer, so he does not open his mouth. During his humiliation the judgment was taken away from him. Who will tell the details of his generation? Because his life is taken away from the earth.’
16 “In answer the eunuch said to Philip: ‘I beg you, About whom does the prophet say this? About himself or about some other man?’ Philip opened his mouth and, starting with this Scripture, he declared to him the good news about Jesus. Now as they were going over the road, they came to a certain body of water, and the eunuch said: ‘Look! A body of water; what prevents me from getting baptized?’ With that he commanded the chariot to halt, and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him. When they had come up out of the water, Jehovah’s spirit quickly led Philip away, and the eunuch did not see him anymore, for he kept going on his way rejoicing. But Philip was found to be in Ashdod, and he went through the territory and kept on declaring the good news to all the cities until he got to Caesarea.”​—Acts 8:26-40.
17. (a) From what portion of Isaiah’s prophecy was the Ethiopian eunuch reading? (b) How did he learn the identification of the “servant” referred to in that prophecy?
17 The Scripture passage that the Ethiopian eunuch was reading aloud is today numbered as the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, verses seven and eight. This has reference to the one whom God calls “my servant,” in Isaiah 52:13; 53:11. The Jews in the temple at Jerusalem had not pointed out to this Ethiopian convert to Judaism just who that “servant” was. Who, then, was Scripturally qualified to identify that “servant” for the Ethiopian eunuch back there about 34 C.E. and for us today? Certainly it was Philip, “the evangelizer,” whom Jehovah’s angel had directed to the chariot of this Ethiopian Bible student. And who did this Philip say that the “servant” was? It must have been Jesus Christ, for Acts 8:35 says: “Starting with this Scripture, he [Philip] declared to him the good news about Jesus.” It is true that this Jesus is the heavenly Head of the spiritual Israel, but Philip did not apply the Isaian prophecy about Jehovah’s “servant” to the congregation of spiritual Israelites but applied it only to the Head, Jesus Christ.​—Acts 21:8; Colossians 1:18.
18. In what way are we helped by correct identification of the “servant” referred to in this prophecy?
18 Philip was not alone in making this application of the prophecy. Other inspired writers made the same application, as we shall see. With this correct identification of this particular “servant” of Jehovah, we can proceed to examine the prophecy in detail. This will help us to appreciate more the Messiah with whom worldly politicians will have to deal in the near future.
19, 20. (a) How does the wording of Isaiah 52:13-15 indicate that its fulfillment would affect twentieth-century politicians? (b) In the first century, how did Jesus “act with insight,” and since when has he come to be “in high station”?
19 If we omit that latter part of Isa 52 verse fourteen, which is between dashes because of being a parenthetical thought and comment, the prophecy opens up, saying: “Look! My servant will act with insight. He will be in high station and will certainly be elevated and exalted very much. To the extent that many have stared at him in amazement . . . he will likewise startle many nations. At him kings will shut their mouth, because what had not been recounted to them they will actually see, and to what they had not heard they must turn their consideration.”​—Isaiah 52:13-15.
20 Does that not sound as though the fulfillment of this prophecy would affect all the politicians of this twentieth century? There can be no question about that! A transformed Messiah is what the nations and their political rulers will have to deal with in the near future, a Messiah different in his position and commission from the Messiah with whom the Jewish Sanhedrin and the Gentile nations and King Herod Antipas and Roman Governor Pontius Pilate dealt in the year 33 C.E. Back there Jesus the Messiah did “act with insight” into the Bible prophecies that applied to him, to guide him into doing the will of Jehovah God. Since his resurrection from the dead and later his ascension to heaven, he has come to be “in high station.” Has he been “elevated and exalted very much”? As an answer we can take what the Christian apostle Peter said to thousands of Jews who were celebrating the festival day of Pentecost ten days after Peter saw Jesus Christ ascend heavenward:
21, 22. How do the Scriptures show that Jesus the Messiah has been “elevated and exalted very much”?
21 “Actually David did not ascend to the heavens, but he himself says, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand, until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”’ Therefore let all the house of Israel know for a certainty that God made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you impaled.”​—Acts 2:34-36.
22 Years later, in an inspired letter, Peter wrote: “He is at God’s right hand, for he went his way to heaven; and angels and authorities and powers were made subject to him.” (1 Peter 3:22) Concerning the highness of the elevation and exaltation of Jesus the Messiah, the apostle Paul wrote: “He humbled himself and became obedient as far as death, yes, death on a torture stake. For this very reason also God exalted him to a superior position and kindly gave him the name that is above every other name, so that in the name of Jesus every knee should bend of those in heaven and those on earth and those under the ground, and every tongue should openly acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.”​—Philippians 2:8-11.
23. What attitude toward the fact that it is in heaven that Jesus has been exalted would be a serious error on the part of political rulers?
23 What effect should all of this have upon the position of the politicians of this world? Not for a moment should anybody think that the elevating and exalting of Jehovah’s “Servant,” Jesus Christ, very high, in fulfillment of Isaiah 52:13, would be without effect upon earthly nations and their political rulers! The politicians should not shrug off the matter and say: ‘Jesus Christ has been exalted to heaven, has he? So what?’ They should not take the attitude that, ‘Now since he is in heaven, he is out of our way. And let him take care of things up in heaven, while we take care of things down here on earth; this is our responsibility. We are not going to hear from him again as to how we rule the earth!’
24. How does the governmental right that Jesus had at the time of his ascension back to heaven indicate that his exaltation will have serious consequences for political rulers?
24 A political attitude such as that is absolutely wrongly based. The elevating and exalting of Jehovah’s “Servant” very high will have the most serious consequences for them and their continuing in earthly office. They must remember that, when Jesus Christ ascended back to Jehovah God in heaven, he did so still in possession of the right and title to the royal government of King David over all the land in Palestine that was promised to his forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.​—Luke 1:31-33; 2 Samuel 7:11-16; 1 Chronicles 17:10-14; Luke 22:29, 30; Psalm 89:27-37.
25. In what way does the effect of Jesus’ ransom sacrifice indicate that politicians must account to Jesus Christ for the way they rule?
25 Moreover, he ascended firmly in possession of the value of his human sacrifice by means of which he could buy all the human family that descended from Adam and Eve. (1 Timothy 2:5, 6) Presenting the merit of his ransom sacrifice to God in heaven, he bought back the human family that had been sold under sin, condemnation and its penalty death. (Hebrews 9:24-28; Matthew 20:28) Consequently, the common people over whom all the politicians rule belong to Jehovah’s “Servant,” Jesus Christ, by right of purchase, and politicians do have to settle with him as to how they rule.
26. For what time period fixed by God were political rulers of the Gentile nations allowed to exercise control over the earth, but since when have man-made governments been in their “time of the end”?
26 Especially today, in this critical period of human history, let us not forget or discount that Jesus Christ the royal Descendant of David has certain established legal rights with respect to this earth. These were not to be set aside forever without being acted upon. National governments and their political rulers were to be granted only a fixed, limited period of time during which to exercise political control over the earth. A “time of the end” was fixed by Jehovah God for man-made governments and their kings, emperors, presidents, shahs, sheikhs and other governors. The 2,520 years that began counting from the first desolation of Jerusalem, in 607 B.C.E., and that are called “the times of the Gentiles” ran out in the autumn of 1914 C.E. Since that date the man-made governments on earth have been in their “time of the end.” Their end is now in sight.​—Luke 21:24; Daniel 12:4.
27. (a) For God’s “Servant,” Jesus Christ, what arrived in the autumn of 1914 C.E.? (b) What action foretold in Psalm 2:8, 9 was now due to take place?
27 In contrast with that, the time of waiting at God’s right hand in heaven ended for the “Servant,” Jesus Christ, in that autumn of 1914 C.E. (Psalm 110:1, 2; Hebrews 10:12, 13) For him the year 1914 marked the commencement of a ‘time of beginning’ in the active exercise of his kingly rights. Then, right on time, the Messianic kingdom of God was born in the heavens, too high above the feet of the Gentiles for them to trample upon in defiance of God. (Revelation 12:1-5; Luke 21:24; Ezekiel 21:25-27) The time then came for the newly enthroned King, Jesus the Messiah, to act upon the prophetic invitation contained in Psalm 2:8, 9: “Ask of me, that I may give nations as your inheritance and the ends of the earth as your own possession. You will break them with an iron scepter, as though a potter’s vessel you will dash them to pieces.”​—Revelation 2:27; 12:5; Daniel 2:44.
AMAZEMENT OF POLITICIANS
28. When the final confrontation takes place between Jesus Christ and all the politicians of earth, why will they ‘stare at him in amazement’?
28 In the light of those prophetic statements of Jehovah concerning his “Servant,” it will indeed be a transformed Messiah with whom all the politicians of earth will have to deal in the near future. The transformation will be so great as to amaze them. When the final confrontation between them and him comes shortly, they will ‘stare at him in amazement.’ Not that they will literally see him with the naked eye, but they will see the visible evidences of his power as a Battler for Jehovah God and they will know that these evidences are from this elevated, exalted Messiah. This will be far different from the way in which the clergy of Christendom have played Jesus Christ up.
29, 30. (a) What kind of representation of Jesus Christ have the clergy of Christendom presented to the political element of the world? (b) As foretold at Isaiah 52:14, how was there a “disfigurement” of the Messiah by what took place even in the first century?
29 By their crucifixes and their church Masses the clergy of Christendom have caused the political element of the world to view Jesus Christ as a bedraggled figure. They claim that at his ascending to heaven he even took along with him the human body in which he was nailed to the stake, still bearing the scratches of the crown of thorns in his forehead and the gory nail holes in his hands and feet and the spear gash in his side. True, Jesus Christ did suffer an excruciatingly painful and disgraceful death, for certain reasons. But before that, he was discredited, grossly misrepresented, accused of being a lawbreaker, a Sabbath violator, mad, possessed of a demon, a blasphemer, a false Christ, a deceiver, a menace to the Jewish nation, a seditionist against pagan Rome. Certainly his reputation was distorted, the image of him that was painted by his false accusers was altogether disfigured; and it is in this sense in particular that Isaiah 52:14 is to be understood:
30 “So much was the disfigurement as respects his appearance more than that of any other man and as respects his stately form more than that of the sons of mankind.”
31, 32. (a) How is Jesus Christ different today from when he was a man on earth? (b) How will Isaiah 52:15 soon be fulfilled upon the politicians?
31 The discrediting, maligning and misrepresenting of Jesus Christ in absentia has continued to this very day. But today, nineteen hundred years later, he is no longer a “baby Jesus” (bambino Gesù); he is no longer a ‘suffering Servant’ upon earth, nonresistant to his malicious enemies. He is now the elevated, exalted “Servant,” the accredited Messiah of God. Whatever the politicians under the misguidance of their religious clergy may have said against Jehovah’s “Servant” and in defiance of him, they will cease to be so loudmouthed in saying words of contempt when they confront the once-humiliated “servant” in the coming test of power over the question, Who shall rule the earth? For then the politicians will actually see the exhibition of what their religious clergy have not recounted to them; they will be forced to turn their consideration to what they had not heard in warning from their highly respected religious leaders. As Isaiah 52:15 says:
32 “He will likewise startle many nations. At him kings will shut their mouth, because what had not been recounted to them they will actually see, and to what they had not heard they must turn their consideration.”
33. Since the Christian witnesses of Jehovah have publicly recounted the truth about Jesus the Messiah, why is it that the politicians have “not heard” and so ‘stare at him in amazement’?
33 Not that the faithful Christian witnesses of Jehovah have not been recounting such things to the nations and their kings and trying to get nations and their political rulers to turn their consideration to such things. But these, for the most part, have turned a deaf ear and a blind eye to what these faithful followers of Jehovah’s “Servant” have proclaimed world wide and have delineated in descriptive language. To the contrary, the paid clergymen are the ones from whom the nations and their political rulers have not heard recounted the real facts about how Jehovah’s “Servant” will actually war against them in execution of Jehovah’s judgments. It is the paid religious leaders who have kept nations and kings blind as to what is in store for them when Jehovah, by his “Servant,” takes action against them to settle the issue, Who shall rule the earth and the people on it? Hence, they are bound to ‘stare at him in amazement’ and “shut their mouth” as they encounter something altogether different from what they had expected.
34. What warning does the second Psalm give to the political rulers, but why have they failed to act on it?
34 In this “time of the end” since 1914 C.E. it has not been the clergy of Christendom whom Jehovah God has used to transmit this warning: “And now, O kings, exercise insight; let yourselves be corrected, O judges of the earth. Serve Jehovah with fear and be joyful with trembling. Kiss the son, that He may not become incensed and you may not perish from the way, for his anger flares up easily. Happy are all those taking refuge in him.” (Psalm 2:7, 10-12) Because of depending upon their paid clergymen, the political rulers of Jewry and the political rulers of Christendom have not ‘kissed the Son.’ That is, they have not expressed any affection for Jehovah’s “Servant,” his heavenly Son Jesus the Messiah, whom He has seated upon the heavenly Mount Zion and to whom he has given ‘nations as an inheritance and the ends of the earth as a possession.’
35. (a) By means of whom has Jehovah transmitted this inspired warning to rulers and judges? (b) Because these witnesses themselves “kiss the son,” how are they viewed by men, and what is their position before God?
35 It has been His Christian witnesses by means of whom Jehovah has been transmitting this warning to political rulers and to judges of the law courts. These witnesses themselves “kiss the son,” and because of this they have become an object of hatred to all the nations and there has been a disfigurement of their appearance in the view of misinformed people. (Matthew 24:9) Jehovah will not become incensed against his faithful, obedient witnesses, nor will his anger flare up against them so that they perish in the midst of their course. He will not turn upon those who have taken refuge in Him, and so His witnesses are the happiest people on earth today, in spite of the world’s hatred and the malicious disfigurement of their reputation. With heightening interest they watch to see how the “kings” or political rulers of the nations will stare in amazement and shut their mouths at the awesome manifestation of a transformed Messiah, Jehovah’s exalted “Servant.”
[Picture on page 36]
Philip explains Isaiah’s prophecy to an Ethiopian eunuch
[Full-page picture on page 40]

