He Loved Kindness
MILTON G. HENSCHEL, a longtime member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, finished his earthly course on Saturday, March 22, 2003. He was 82 years old.
As a young man, Milton Henschel joined the headquarters staff of Jehovah’s Witnesses and served faithfully for well over 60 years. He quickly became known for his good judgment and sincere interest in the Kingdom-preaching work. In 1939 he became secretary to N. H. Knorr, who was then the overseer of the Brooklyn printery of Jehovah’s Witnesses. When Brother Knorr began to take the lead among the Witnesses worldwide in 1942, he kept Brother Henschel as his assistant. Brother Henschel married Lucille Bennett in 1956, and together they shared the joys and challenges of life.
Brother Henschel worked closely with Brother Knorr until Knorr’s death in 1977. Often at Brother Knorr’s side, Brother Henschel traveled to over 150 countries, visiting and encouraging Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world, especially missionaries and those in branch offices. Such travels were arduous at times, even dangerous. In 1963 when visiting a convention in Liberia, Brother Henschel was a victim of vicious persecution for refusing to take part in a patriotic ceremony.a Undaunted, Brother Henschel returned to Liberia just a few months later to meet with the president of the country and to seek greater freedom of worship for Jehovah’s Witnesses there.
In handling difficult problems and challenges, Brother Henschel had a reputation for being practical, flexible, and reasonable. His associates particularly valued his orderliness, his modesty, and his sense of humor. Blessed with a remarkable memory, he delighted many missionaries around the world with his ready knowledge of their names, a phrase or two in the local language, and a witty quip​—which he delivered with a twinkle in his eyes.
Micah 6:8 reminds us that Jehovah God wants us “to love kindness.” Milton Henschel will be remembered for setting an example in that regard. Despite his heavy load of responsibility, he remained approachable, gentle, and kind. He was fond of saying, “When in doubt, remember that the kind thing is the right thing.” While we grieve the loss of this beloved brother, we rejoice that he endured faithfully to the end, assured of receiving his reward, “the crown of life.”​—Revelation 2:10.
[Footnote]
See the 1977 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses, pages 171-7.
[Picture on page 31]
M. G. Henschel with N. H. Knorr
[Picture on page 31]
With his wife, Lucille

