Chapter Twenty-eight
A Light for the Nations
Isaiah 66:15-24
1, 2. Why is light vital, and what sort of darkness covers the earth today?
JEHOVAH is the Source of light, “the Giver of the sun for light by day, the statutes of the moon and the stars for light by night.” (Jeremiah 31:35) On this basis alone, he should be acknowledged as the Source of life, since light means life. If the earth were not constantly bathed in the warmth and light of the sun, life as we know it would be impossible. Our planet would be uninhabitable.
2 Hence, it is of utmost concern to us that Jehovah, looking forward to our day, foretold a time of darkness, not light. Under inspiration, Isaiah wrote: “Look! darkness itself will cover the earth, and thick gloom the national groups.” (Isaiah 60:2) Of course, these words had to do with spiritual, not physical, darkness, but their seriousness should not be underestimated. Life eventually becomes impossible for those without spiritual light, just as it does for those deprived of light from the sun.
 3. In these dark times, where can we turn for light?
3 During these dark times, we cannot afford to ignore the spiritual light that Jehovah makes available to us. It is essential that we look to God’s Word to light up our roadway, reading the Bible daily if possible. (Psalm 119:105) Christian meetings provide opportunities for us to encourage one another to remain on “the path of the righteous ones.” (Proverbs 4:18; Hebrews 10:23-25) The strength that we derive from diligent Bible study and wholesome Christian association helps us to avoid being swallowed up in the darkness of these “last days,” which will culminate in the great “day of Jehovah’s anger.” (2 Timothy 3:1; Zephaniah 2:3) That day is coming on apace! It will come as surely as a similar day came upon the inhabitants of ancient Jerusalem.
Jehovah ‘Takes Up the Controversy’
4, 5. (a) In what way does Jehovah come against Jerusalem? (b) Why may we conclude that only a relatively small number will survive the destruction of Jerusalem in 607 B.C.E.? (See footnote.)
4 In the concluding verses of Isaiah’s thrilling prophecy, Jehovah graphically describes events leading up to the day of his anger. We read: “Jehovah himself comes as a very fire, and his chariots are like a storm wind, in order to pay back his anger with sheer rage and his rebuke with flames of fire. For as fire Jehovah himself will for a fact take up the controversy, yes, with his sword, against all flesh; and the slain of Jehovah will certainly become many.”​—Isaiah 66:15, 16.
5 Those words should help Isaiah’s contemporaries realize the seriousness of their situation. The time is approaching when the Babylonians, as Jehovah’s executioners, will come against Jerusalem, their chariots stirring up clouds of dust just like a storm wind. What a fear-inspiring sight that will be! Jehovah will use the invaders to carry out his own fiery judgments against all unfaithful Jewish “flesh.” It will be as if Jehovah himself were fighting against his people. His “sheer rage” will not be turned back. Many Jews will fall as “the slain of Jehovah.” In 607 B.C.E., this prophecy is fulfilled.a
 6. What reprehensible practices take place in Judah?
6 Is Jehovah justified in ‘taking up the controversy’ against his people? Certainly! Many times in our discussion of the book of Isaiah, we have seen that the Jews, though supposedly dedicated to Jehovah, have been steeped in false worship​—and Jehovah has not been blind to their actions. We see this again in the following words of the prophecy: “‘Those sanctifying themselves and cleansing themselves for the gardens behind one in the center, eating the flesh of the pig and the loathsome thing, even the jumping rodent, they will all together reach their end,’ is the utterance of Jehovah.” (Isaiah 66:17) Are those Jews “sanctifying themselves and cleansing themselves” in order to prepare themselves for pure worship? Clearly not. Rather, they are engaging in pagan purification rites in special gardens. Thereafter, they greedily devour the flesh of the pig and of other creatures considered unclean under the Mosaic Law.​—Leviticus 11:7, 21-23.
 7. How does Christendom resemble idolatrous Judah?
7 What a disgusting situation for a nation in a covenant relationship with the only true God! But consider: A comparably disgusting situation exists today among the religions of Christendom. These similarly claim to serve God, and many of their leaders make a pretense of piety. Yet, they sully themselves with pagan teachings and traditions, proving themselves to be in spiritual darkness. How great that darkness is!​—Matthew 6:23; John 3:19, 20.
‘They Will Have to See My Glory’
 8. (a) What will befall both Judah and Christendom? (b) In what sense will the nations ‘see Jehovah’s glory’?
8 Does Jehovah take notice of Christendom’s reprehensible actions and false teachings? Read the following words of Jehovah, as recorded by Isaiah, and see what you conclude: “As regards their works and their thoughts, I am coming in order to collect all the nations and tongues together; and they will have to come and see my glory.” (Isaiah 66:18) Jehovah is aware of and prepared to judge not only the works but also the thoughts of those who profess to be his servants. Judah professes to believe in Jehovah, but her idolatrous works and pagan practices belie that claim. It is to no avail that her citizens “purify” themselves according to pagan rites. The nation will be cut down, and when that occurs, it will be in full view of her idol-worshiping neighbors. These will ‘see Jehovah’s glory’ in that they will witness the events and be forced to admit that Jehovah’s word has come true. How does all of this apply to Christendom? When she meets her end, many of her former friends and business partners will be forced to stand by and watch helplessly as Jehovah’s word is fulfilled.​—Jeremiah 25:31-33; Revelation 17:15-18; 18:9-19.
 9. What good news does Jehovah declare?
9 Does Jerusalem’s destruction in 607 B.C.E. mean that Jehovah will no longer have witnesses on earth? No. Outstanding integrity-keepers, such as Daniel and his three companions, will continue to serve Jehovah even as exiles in Babylon. (Daniel 1:6, 7) Yes, the chain of faithful witnesses of Jehovah will remain intact, and at the end of 70 years, faithful men and women will leave Babylon and return to Judah to restore pure worship there. That is what Jehovah alludes to next: “I will set among them a sign, and I will send some of those who are escaped to the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, those drawing the bow, Tubal and Javan, the faraway islands, who have not heard a report about me or seen my glory; and they will for certain tell about my glory among the nations.”​—Isaiah 66:19.
10. (a) In what sense will faithful Jews liberated from Babylon serve as a sign? (b) Who today serve as a sign?
10 The host of faithful men and women who return to Jerusalem in 537 B.C.E. will serve as an astonishing sign, evidence that Jehovah has delivered his people. Who would have dreamed that the captive Jews would one day be free to pursue pure worship at Jehovah’s temple? In a comparable way in the first century, the ones serving “as signs and as miracles” were anointed Christians, to whom meek ones wanting to serve Jehovah flocked. (Isaiah 8:18; Hebrews 2:13) Today anointed Christians, prospering in their restored land, serve as an astonishing sign in the earth. (Isaiah 66:8) They are living evidence of the power of Jehovah’s spirit, attracting meek ones whose hearts impel them to serve Jehovah.
11. (a) After the restoration, how will it be that those of the nations come to learn about Jehovah? (b) How was Zechariah 8:23 initially fulfilled?
11 How, though, after the restoration in 537 B.C.E., will men of the nations who have not heard a report about Jehovah come to know him? Well, not all faithful Jews will return to Jerusalem at the end of the Babylonian captivity. Some, like Daniel, will remain in Babylon. Others will scatter to the four corners of the earth. By the fifth century B.C.E., there were Jews living throughout the Persian Empire. (Esther 1:1; 3:8) No doubt some of them told their pagan neighbors about Jehovah, for many from those nations became Jewish proselytes. Such was evidently the case with the Ethiopian eunuch, to whom the Christian disciple Philip preached in the first century. (Acts 8:26-40) All of this took place as an initial fulfillment of the words of the prophet Zechariah: “It will be in those days that ten men out of all the languages of the nations will take hold, yes, they will actually take hold of the skirt of a man who is a Jew, saying: ‘We will go with you people, for we have heard that God is with you people.’” (Zechariah 8:23) Indeed, Jehovah sent out light to the nations!​—Psalm 43:3.
Bringing “a Gift to Jehovah”
12, 13. In what way will “brothers” be brought to Jerusalem beginning in 537 B.C.E.?
12 After Jerusalem is rebuilt, Jews who are scattered far beyond their homeland will look to the city along with its restored priesthood as the center of pure worship. Many of them will travel long distances to attend the annual festivals there. Under inspiration, Isaiah writes: “‘They will actually bring all your brothers out of all the nations as a gift to Jehovah, on horses and in chariots and in covered wagons and on mules and on swift she-camels, up to my holy mountain, Jerusalem,’ Jehovah has said, ‘just as when the sons of Israel bring the gift in a clean vessel into the house of Jehovah. And from them also I shall take some for the priests, for the Levites.’”​—Isaiah 66:20, 21.
13 Some of those “brothers out of all the nations” were present on the day of Pentecost when holy spirit was poured out on Jesus’ disciples. The account reads: “There were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, reverent men, from every nation of those under heaven.” (Acts 2:5) They came to Jerusalem to worship according to Jewish custom, but when they heard the good news about Jesus Christ, many exercised faith in him and were baptized.
14, 15. (a) How did anointed Christians gather more of their spiritual “brothers” after World War I, and how were these brought to Jehovah as a “gift in a clean vessel”? (b) In what way did Jehovah “take some for the priests”? (c) Who were some anointed Christians involved in the gathering of their spiritual brothers? (See box on this page.)
14 Does this prophecy have a modern-day fulfillment? Yes, indeed. Following World War I, Jehovah’s anointed servants discerned from the Scriptures that God’s Kingdom had been set up in heaven in 1914. Through careful Bible study, they learned that additional Kingdom heirs, or “brothers,” were to be gathered. Intrepid ministers traveled to “the most distant part of the earth,” using all manner of conveyance, in search of prospective members of the anointed remnant, most of whom came out of Christendom’s churches. When these were located, they were brought in as a gift to Jehovah.​—Acts 1:8.
15 The anointed ones who were gathered in the early years did not expect Jehovah to accept them as they were before coming to a knowledge of Bible truth. They took steps to cleanse themselves of spiritual and moral defilements so that they could be presented as a “gift in a clean vessel,” or as stated by the apostle Paul, “a chaste virgin to the Christ.” (2 Corinthians 11:2) In addition to rejecting doctrinal error, the anointed ones had to learn how to remain strictly neutral in the political affairs of this world. In 1931, when his servants had been cleansed to an appropriate degree, Jehovah graciously granted them the privilege of bearing his name as Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Isaiah 43:10-12) In what way, though, did Jehovah “take some for the priests”? As a group, these anointed ones became part of “a royal priesthood, a holy nation,” offering sacrifices of praise to God.​—1 Peter 2:9; Isaiah 54:1; Hebrews 13:15.
The Ingathering Continues
16, 17. Who are “the offspring of you people” after World War I?
16 The full number of that “royal priesthood” is 144,000, and in time, the gathering of them was completed. (Revelation 7:1-8; 14:1) Was that the end of the ingathering work? No. Isaiah’s prophecy continues: “‘Just as the new heavens and the new earth that I am making are standing before me,’ is the utterance of Jehovah, ‘so the offspring of you people and the name of you people will keep standing.’” (Isaiah 66:22) In the initial fulfillment of those words, Jews who return from Babylonian captivity will begin raising children. Thus, the restored Jewish remnant, “the new earth,” under the new Jewish administration, “the new heavens,” will become firmly established. However, the prophecy has had a most remarkable fulfillment in our day.
17 “The offspring” that the nation of spiritual brothers produces are the “great crowd,” who have the hope of everlasting life on earth. They come “out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues,” and they stand “before the throne and before the Lamb.” These ones “have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.” (Revelation 7:9-14; 22:17) Today the “great crowd” are turning from spiritual darkness to the light that Jehovah provides. They exercise faith in Jesus Christ, and like their anointed brothers and sisters, they strive to remain spiritually and morally clean. As a group they continue serving under Christ’s direction and will “keep standing” forever!​—Psalm 37:11, 29.
18. (a) How have members of the great crowd conducted themselves like their anointed brothers? (b) How do the anointed and their companions worship Jehovah “from new moon to new moon and from sabbath to sabbath”?
18 These hard-working men and women with an earthly hope know that while it is vital to remain morally and spiritually clean, more is involved in pleasing Jehovah. The ingathering work is in full swing, and they want to have a share in it. The book of Revelation prophesies concerning them: “They are before the throne of God; and they are rendering him sacred service day and night in his temple.” (Revelation 7:15) Those words remind us of the second-to-last verse in Isaiah’s prophecy: “‘It will certainly occur that from new moon to new moon and from sabbath to sabbath all flesh will come in to bow down before me,’ Jehovah has said.” (Isaiah 66:23) This is happening today. “From new moon to new moon and from sabbath to sabbath”​—that is, regularly, every week of every month—​anointed Christians and their companions, the great crowd, come together to worship Jehovah. They do this by, among other things, attending Christian meetings and engaging in the public ministry. Are you one of those who regularly ‘come and bow down before Jehovah’? Jehovah’s people find great joy in doing this, and those of the great crowd look forward to the time when “all flesh”​—all living humans—​will serve Jehovah “from new moon to new moon and from sabbath to sabbath” for all eternity.
The Final End of God’s Enemies
19, 20. What purpose did Gehenna serve in Bible times, and what does it symbolize?
19 One verse remains in our study of Isaiah’s prophecy. The book concludes with these words: “They will actually go forth and look upon the carcasses of the men that were transgressing against me; for the very worms upon them will not die and their fire itself will not be extinguished, and they must become something repulsive to all flesh.” (Isaiah 66:24) Jesus Christ likely had this prophecy in mind when he encouraged his disciples to simplify their lives and put Kingdom interests first. He said: “If your eye makes you stumble, throw it away; it is finer for you to enter one-eyed into the kingdom of God than with two eyes to be pitched into Gehenna, where their maggot does not die and the fire is not put out.”​—Mark 9:47, 48; Matthew 5:29, 30; 6:33.
20 What is this place called Gehenna? Centuries ago, the Jewish scholar David Kimhi wrote: “It is a place . . . adjoining Jerusalem, and it is a loathsome place, and they throw there unclean things and carcasses. Also there was a continual fire there to burn the unclean things and the bones of the carcasses. Hence, the judgment of the wicked ones is called parabolically Gehinnom.” If, as this Jewish scholar suggests, Gehenna was used for the disposal of refuse and carcasses of those deemed unworthy of burial, fire would be a suitable means of eliminating such refuse. What the fire did not consume, the maggots would. What a fitting picture of the final end of all of God’s enemies!b
21. For whom does the book of Isaiah conclude on a positive note, and why?
21 With such a reference to corpses, fire, and worms, is it not true that Isaiah’s thrilling prophecy concludes on a gruesome note? God’s avowed enemies would undoubtedly think so. But to God’s friends, Isaiah’s description of the everlasting destruction of the wicked is most heartening. Jehovah’s people need this assurance that their enemies will never again have the upper hand. Those enemies, who have caused God’s worshipers so much affliction and have brought so much reproach on his name, will be everlastingly destroyed. Then, “distress will not rise up a second time.”​—Nahum 1:9.
22, 23. (a) Explain some of the ways that you have benefited from your study of the book of Isaiah. (b) Having studied the book of Isaiah, what is your resolve, and what is your hope?
22 As we conclude our study of the book of Isaiah, we certainly appreciate that this Bible book is not dead history. On the contrary, it has a message for us today. When we reflect on the dark times in which Isaiah lived, we can see the similarities between that period and our day. Political unrest, religious hypocrisy, judicial corruption, and oppression of the faithful and the poor characterized Isaiah’s time, and it characterizes ours. Faithful Jews in the sixth century B.C.E. must have been grateful for Isaiah’s prophecy, and we today are comforted as we study it.
23 In these critical times when darkness covers the earth and gross darkness the national groups, all of us are deeply grateful that Jehovah, through Isaiah, has provided light for all mankind! That spiritual light means nothing less than everlasting life for all who wholeheartedly accept it, regardless of their national origin or ethnic background. (Acts 10:34, 35) May we, then, keep on walking in the light of God’s Word, reading it daily, meditating upon it, and cherishing its message. This will be to our own eternal blessing and to the praise of Jehovah’s holy name!
[Footnotes]
Regarding the situation after Jerusalem fell to the Babylonians, Jeremiah 52:15 speaks of “some of the lowly ones of the people and the rest of the people that were left remaining in the city.” Commenting on this, Insight on the Scriptures, Volume 1, page 415, states: “The expression ‘that were left remaining in the city’ apparently indicates that great numbers had died from famine, disease, or fire, or else they were slaughtered in the war.”
Since dead carcasses, not live people, are consumed in Gehenna, this place is not symbolic of eternal torment.
[Box on page 409]
Anointed Gifts for Jehovah From All Nations
  In 1920, Juan Muñiz left the United States for Spain and then journeyed on to Argentina, where he organized congregations of anointed ones. From 1923 on, the light of truth shone on honesthearted ones in West Africa when missionary William R. Brown (often called Bible Brown) set out to preach the Kingdom message in such places as Sierra Leone, Ghana, Liberia, The Gambia, and Nigeria. That same year Canadian George Young went down to Brazil and then traveled on to Argentina, Costa Rica, Panama, Venezuela, and even the Soviet Union. At about the same time, Edwin Skinner sailed from England to India, where he labored for many years in the harvest work.
[Picture on page 411]
Some Jews at Pentecost were ‘brothers brought out of all the nations’
[Full-page picture on page 413]

