Chapter Seven
Return to the Worship of Jehovah
Isaiah 46:1-13
 1. What are the names of two of Babylon’s principal gods, and what is foretold about them?
WHEN Israel is exiled in Babylon, she will be surrounded by false worship. During Isaiah’s time, Jehovah’s people are still in their own land, and they have the temple and the priesthood. Yet, many of God’s dedicated nation have succumbed to idolatry. It is vital, then, to prepare them in advance so that they will not be overawed by the false gods of Babylon or tempted to serve them. Hence, speaking prophetically of two of the main Babylonian gods, Isaiah says: “Bel has bent down, Nebo is stooping over; their idols have come to be for the wild beasts and for the domestic animals, their loads, pieces of luggage, a burden for the tired animals.” (Isaiah 46:1) Bel is the chief idol god among the Chaldeans. Nebo is venerated as a god of wisdom and learning. The respect that many have for these two gods is seen by the fact that their names are incorporated into a number of personal names of Babylonians​—Belshazzar, Nabopolassar, Nebuchadnezzar, and Nebuzaradan, to mention just a few.
 2. How is the helplessness of Babylon’s gods emphasized?
2 Isaiah says that Bel has “bent down” and Nebo is “stooping over.” These false gods will be laid low. When Jehovah brings his judgment acts against Babylon, these gods will be unable to come to the aid of their worshipers. They will not even be able to save themselves! Bel and Nebo will no longer be carried in the honored place in processions, such as during the Babylonian New Year’s Day festival. Instead, they will have to be carted off like common luggage by those who worship them. Praise and adoration of them will give way to derision and contempt.
 3. (a) What will shock the Babylonians? (b) What can be learned today from what happened to Babylon’s gods?
3 What a shock for the Babylonians to learn that their cherished idols are no more than a burden to be carried off by tired beasts! Similarly today, the world’s gods​—the things in which people put their trust and in whose behalf they expend their energy and even give their lives—​are an illusion. Wealth, armaments, pleasures, rulers, the fatherland or symbols thereof, and many other things have come to be objects of devotion. The emptiness of such gods will be exposed in Jehovah’s due time.​—Daniel 11:38; Matthew 6:24; Acts 12:22; Philippians 3:19; Colossians 3:5; Revelation 13:14, 15.
 4. In what sense do Babylon’s gods “stoop over” and “bend down”?
4 Further highlighting the utter failure of Babylon’s gods, the prophecy continues: “They must stoop over; they must each alike bend down; they are simply unable to furnish escape for the burden, but into captivity their own soul must go.” (Isaiah 46:2) Babylon’s gods seem to “stoop over” and “bend down” as if wounded in battle or decrepit with age. They cannot even lighten the load or furnish escape for the lowly beasts that carry them. So, should Jehovah’s covenant people, even though captive in Babylon, give any honor to them? No! In a similar way, Jehovah’s anointed servants, even when in spiritual captivity, gave no honor to the false gods of “Babylon the Great,” which were unable to prevent her fall in 1919 and will be unable to save her from the calamity that will befall her during the “great tribulation.”​—Revelation 18:2, 21; Matthew 24:21.
 5. How do Christians today avoid repeating the mistakes of the idol-worshiping Babylonians?
5 True Christians today do not bow down to idols of any kind. (1 John 5:21) Crucifixes, prayer beads, and images of saints do not make the Creator more accessible. They cannot intercede in our behalf. In the first century, Jesus taught his disciples the proper way to worship God when he said: “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. If you ask anything in my name, I will do it.”​—John 14:6, 14.
“Carried From the Womb”
 6. How is Jehovah different from the gods of the nations?
6 Having exposed the vanity of worshiping Babylon’s idol gods, Jehovah says to his people: “Listen to me, O house of Jacob, and all you remaining ones of the house of Israel, you the ones conveyed by me from the belly, the ones carried from the womb.” (Isaiah 46:3) What a difference there is between Jehovah and the graven images of Babylon! Babylon’s gods can do nothing for their worshipers. If they are to move, they have to be carried by some beast of burden. In contrast, Jehovah has been carrying his people. He has sustained them “from the womb,” from the time when the nation was formed. Warm memories of being carried by Jehovah should encourage the Jews to shun idol worship and to place their trust in him as their Father and Friend.
 7. How is Jehovah’s tender care for his worshipers even greater than the care of human parents for their children?
7 Jehovah has further tender words for his people: “Even to one’s old age I am the same One; and to one’s gray-headedness I myself shall keep bearing up. I myself shall certainly act, that I myself may carry and that I myself may bear up and furnish escape.” (Isaiah 46:4) Jehovah’s care for his people overshadows that of the most attentive human parent. As children grow up, parents may feel less and less responsibility toward them. When the parents grow old, the children often care for them. It is never like that with Jehovah. He never stops caring for his human children​—even in their old age. God’s worshipers today trust and love their Creator and find great comfort in these words of Isaiah’s prophecy. They need not be anxious about the remaining days or years that they have to spend in this system of things. Jehovah promises to “keep bearing up” those who are advanced in years, giving them the needed strength to endure and remain faithful. He will carry them, strengthen them, and furnish escape.​—Hebrews 6:10.
Beware of Modern-Day Idols
 8. What inexcusable sin have some of Isaiah’s fellow countrymen committed?
8 Imagine the disappointment in store for the Babylonians who put their trust in idols, which will prove to be completely useless! Should Israel believe that those gods are to be compared to Jehovah? Of course not. Rightly, Jehovah asks: “To whom will you people liken me or make me equal or compare me that we may resemble each other?” (Isaiah 46:5) How inexcusable that some of Isaiah’s fellow countrymen have turned to the worship of speechless, lifeless, and helpless statues! For a nation that knows Jehovah, relying on lifeless, defenseless images made by human hands is foolish indeed.
 9. Describe the empty-headed reasoning of some idol worshipers.
9 Consider the empty-headed reasoning of idol worshipers. The prophecy continues: “There are those who are lavishing out the gold from the purse, and with the scale beam they weigh out the silver. They hire a metalworker, and he makes it into a god. They prostrate themselves, yes, they bow down.” (Isaiah 46:6) As if an expensive idol had greater saving power than one made of wood, worshipers spare no expense in building their deity. Still, no matter how much effort is expended or how costly the materials, a lifeless idol remains a lifeless idol, nothing more.
10. How is the absolute futility of idol worship described?
10 Further highlighting the foolishness of idol worship, the prophecy continues: “They carry it upon the shoulder, they bear it and deposit it in its place that it may stand still. From its standing place it does not move away. One even cries out to it, but it does not answer; out of one’s distress it does not save one.” (Isaiah 46:7) How ridiculous to pray to an image that lacks the ability either to hear or to act! The psalmist well describes the uselessness of such objects of worship: “Their idols are silver and gold, the work of the hands of earthling man. A mouth they have, but they cannot speak; eyes they have, but they cannot see; ears they have, but they cannot hear. A nose they have, but they cannot smell. Hands are theirs, but they cannot feel. Feet are theirs, but they cannot walk; they utter no sound with their throat. Those making them will become just like them, all those who are trusting in them.”​—Psalm 115:4-8.
“Muster up Courage”
11. What will help those who waver to “muster up courage”?
11 Having demonstrated the futility of idol worship, Jehovah now gives his people reasons why they should serve him: “Remember this, that you people may muster up courage. Lay it to heart, you transgressors. Remember the first things of a long time ago, that I am the Divine One and there is no other God, nor anyone like me.” (Isaiah 46:8, 9) Those who waver between true worship and idolatry should remember history. They should bear in mind the things Jehovah has done. This will help them muster up courage and do the right thing. It will help them return to worshiping Jehovah.
12, 13. What struggles are Christians caught up in, and how can they come off victorious?
12 This encouragement is still needed today. Like the Israelites, sincere Christians have to fight against temptations and their own imperfections. (Romans 7:21-24) In addition, they are locked in a spiritual battle with an unseen but immensely powerful enemy. The apostle Paul says: “We have a wrestling, not against blood and flesh, but against the governments, against the authorities, against the world rulers of this darkness, against the wicked spirit forces in the heavenly places.”​—Ephesians 6:12.
13 Satan and his demons will stop at nothing to turn Christians aside from true worship. To wage a successful fight, Christians need to follow Jehovah’s counsel and muster up courage. How? The apostle Paul explains: “Put on the complete suit of armor from God that you may be able to stand firm against the machinations of the Devil.” Jehovah does not send his servants into battle ill-equipped. Their spiritual armor includes “the large shield of faith, with which [they] will be able to quench all the wicked one’s burning missiles.” (Ephesians 6:11, 16) The Israelites were transgressors because they ignored the spiritual provisions that Jehovah had made for them. If they had reflected on the powerful acts that Jehovah repeatedly performed in their behalf, they would never have turned to disgusting idol worship. May we learn from their example and be determined never to waver in the fight to do what is right.​—1 Corinthians 10:11.
14. To what ability does Jehovah point in order to show that he is the only true God?
14 Jehovah is “the One telling from the beginning the finale, and from long ago the things that have not been done; the One saying, ‘My own counsel will stand, and everything that is my delight I shall do.’” (Isaiah 46:10) What other god can compare to Jehovah in this regard? The ability to predict the future is an outstanding proof of the Creator’s Godship. However, it takes more than foresight to ensure the fulfillment of things that are foretold. The declaration “my own counsel will stand” stresses the unchangeableness of God’s established purpose. Since Jehovah has unlimited power, nothing in the universe can prevent him from accomplishing his will. (Daniel 4:35) Therefore, we can be certain that any prophecies that are yet to be fulfilled will indeed come true in God’s due time.​—Isaiah 55:11.
15. What remarkable example of Jehovah’s ability to foretell the future is drawn to our attention?
15 A striking example of Jehovah’s ability to foretell future events and then bring about the fulfillment of his words is next drawn to our attention by Isaiah’s prophecy: “The One calling from the sunrising a bird of prey, from a distant land the man to execute my counsel. I have even spoken it; I shall also bring it in. I have formed it, I shall also do it.” (Isaiah 46:11) As “the One telling from the beginning the finale,” Jehovah God will shape the circumstances in human affairs in order to carry out his counsel. He will call Cyrus “from the sunrising,” or Persia in the east, where Cyrus’ favorite capital, Pasargadae, will be. Cyrus will be like “a bird of prey,” pouncing suddenly and unexpectedly upon Babylon.
16. How does Jehovah confirm the certainty of his prediction concerning Babylon?
16 The certainty of Jehovah’s prediction concerning Babylon is confirmed by the words, “I have even spoken it; I shall also bring it in.” While imperfect man is prone to make impulsive promises, the Creator never fails to fulfill his word. Because Jehovah is the God “who cannot lie,” we can be certain that if he has “formed it,” he will “also do it.”​—Titus 1:2.
Faithless Hearts
17, 18. Who can be described as “ones powerful at heart” (a) in ancient times? (b) today?
17 Once again, Jehovah prophetically turns his attention to the Babylonians, saying: “Listen to me, you the ones powerful at heart, you the ones far away from righteousness.” (Isaiah 46:12) The expression “the ones powerful at heart” describes those who are stubborn and confirmed in their opposition to the will of God. Without a doubt, the Babylonians are far away from God. Their hatred for Jehovah and his people moves them to destroy Jerusalem and its temple and to carry its inhabitants into exile.
18 Today those with skeptical and unbelieving hearts stubbornly refuse to listen to the Kingdom message, which is being preached in all the inhabited earth. (Matthew 24:14) They do not want to acknowledge Jehovah as the rightful Sovereign. (Psalm 83:18; Revelation 4:11) With hearts “far away from righteousness,” they resist and oppose his will. (2 Timothy 3:1-5) Like the Babylonians, they refuse to listen to Jehovah.
God’s Salvation Will Not Be Late
19. In what way will Jehovah perform an act of righteousness for Israel?
19 The closing words of Isaiah chapter 46 highlight aspects of Jehovah’s personality: “I have brought near my righteousness. It is not far away, and my own salvation will not be late. And I will give in Zion salvation, to Israel my beauty.” (Isaiah 46:13) God’s liberation of Israel will be an act of righteousness. He will not allow his people to linger in exile. Zion’s salvation will come at the appropriate time, it “will not be late.” Following their release from captivity, the Israelites will become a spectacle to the nations round about. Jehovah’s deliverance of his nation will be a testimony to his saving power. The uselessness of Babylon’s gods Bel and Nebo will be exposed for all to see, their impotence revealed.​—1 Kings 18:39, 40.
20. How can Christians be sure that Jehovah’s “salvation will not be late”?
20 In 1919, Jehovah brought about the release of his people from spiritual captivity. He was not late. That event, as well as the events in ancient times when Babylon fell to Cyrus, encourages us today. Jehovah has promised to bring an end to this wicked system of things, including its false worship. (Revelation 19:1, 2, 17-21) Looking at things from a human standpoint, some Christians may feel that their salvation has been delayed. However, Jehovah’s exercise of patience until his own due time to fulfill that promise is really an act of righteousness. After all, “[Jehovah] does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Peter 3:9) Be assured, therefore, that just as in the days of ancient Israel, “salvation will not be late.” Indeed, as the day of salvation draws closer, Jehovah lovingly continues to extend the invitation: “Search for Jehovah, you people, while he may be found. Call to him while he proves to be near. Let the wicked man leave his way, and the harmful man his thoughts; and let him return to Jehovah, who will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will forgive in a large way.”​—Isaiah 55:6, 7.
[Pictures on page 94]
Babylon’s gods do not protect her from destruction
[Pictures on page 98]
Christians today must beware of modern-day idols
[Pictures on page 101]
Muster up courage to do what is right

