Do You Worship a Living God?
ALTHOUGH Tadashi Ishiguro was born after World War II​—after the Japanese emperor’s historic repudiation of divinity—​he still believed that the emperor was divine. “He should not have renounced his divinity,” Tadashi said.
However, his brother reasoned with him on the matter: ‘The emperor, just like other men, grows old and gets sick. He cannot escape the eventuality of all men: death. He cannot save himself, let alone other people.’ After that discussion, during which his brother referred to the Bible, Tadashi decided to take a closer look at his beliefs.​—Ecclesiastes 3:19; Romans 5:12.
In time, he began to see the wisdom of the Biblical exhortation: “Do not put your trust in nobles, nor in the son of earthling man.” Why not? Because, as the Bible says, “to [him] no salvation belongs. His spirit goes out, he goes back to his ground; in that day his thoughts do perish.” (Psalm 146:3, 4) Indeed, putting trust in mortal humans as deities only leads to disappointment, even disaster!
The Japanese archipelago supposedly was created by drops of water falling from the spear of Izanagi, the father of the sun-goddess Amaterasu Omikami. But such a belief has no real foundation. What, then, about the belief that the Japanese emperor is a human descendant of this goddess and hence is divine? Is this not also unfounded mythology? Because they worshiped what they did not really know, thousands of Japanese sacrificed their lives in behalf of one who was unable to help them. How sad!
As a result of discussions with his brother, it became obvious to Tadashi that our beautiful earth, as well as the life upon it, is the product of a powerful and loving Creator. (Hebrews 3:4) According to the Bible, the true God is “from time indefinite to time indefinite.” (Psalm 90:2) He is alive forever. He is not limited to a life span of 70 or 80 years, nor is he dependent upon counsel from advisers.​—Psalm 90:10; Romans 11:34.
Rather, the Bible says about the Creator: “He is doing according to his own will among the army of the heavens and the inhabitants of the earth. And there exists no one that can check his hand or that can say to him, ‘What have you been doing?’” (Daniel 4:35) How different from humans who may be treated as gods but cannot fulfill even their own will!
As Tadashi studied the Bible, his faith in the God who inspired it grew. This One is no mythological god. Rather, he is a real, invisible Person. In the Bible, which God inspired humans to write, he tells us that his name is Jehovah. (Psalm 83:18) He also tells us about what he has done, about what he purposes to do, and about how he should be worshiped. Yet, how can you be sure that Jehovah is a living God so that your trust in him will not be in vain?
Well, in declaring his superiority over all others, Jehovah said: “I am the Divine One and there is no other God, nor anyone like me; the One telling from the beginning the finale, and from long ago the things that have not been done; the One saying, ‘My own counsel will stand, and everything that is my delight I shall do.’”​—Isaiah 46:9, 10.
Thus, his Godship is confirmed by his ability to foretell the future and to see that his own will is accomplished. He is able to protect and save his servants, unlike humans who are revered as gods but have to be protected by their subjects. So, in time, Tadashi came to worship the God of the Bible, joining his brother in serving Jehovah God as one of His Witnesses.
Whom Will You Worship?
Many gods are worshiped today, including humans to whom people attribute divine powers. The Bible notes: “There are those who are called ‘gods,’ whether in heaven or on earth.” (1 Corinthians 8:5) In the ancient Greek city of Athens, for example, an altar was erected on which was inscribed: “To an Unknown God.” (Acts 17:23) So the Athenians were among those who worshiped what they admittedly did not really know.
The possibility thus exists that we today could also become involved in worshiping what we do not know. Millions of Japanese became involved in such worship, being deceived by false ministers who promoted the belief that the emperor was divine. Even the emperor was in on the deception. So learn the lesson: The fact that our parents believe something or that ministers say that something is true in itself does not make it so. We need to make an examination to make sure that we really know what we are worshiping.
The ancient Athenians, or the Japanese who lived prior to World War II, are far from being the only ones who worshiped what they really did not know. Even today millions of people in Christendom worship a Trinity. If you are such a person, ask yourself: Do I really know the God I am worshiping? What is his name? How can he be three persons in one God? What is the source of my belief?
Believers in the Trinity probably assume that Jesus Christ and his apostles taught it and that it is a Bible teaching. But it is not. The New Catholic Encyclopedia acknowledges: “The formulation ‘one God in three Persons’ was not solidly established, certainly not fully assimilated into Christian life and its profession of faith, prior to the end of the 4th century [hundreds of years after Jesus and his apostles were on earth]. . . . Among the Apostolic Fathers, there had been nothing even remotely approaching such a mentality or perspective.”
On the other hand, hundreds of years before Jesus Christ came to earth as a man, the trinity teaching was firmly entrenched among peoples whose religions were based on mythology. For example, the ancient Egyptians worshiped the trinity of Osiris, Isis (his wife), and Horus (his son). And the Hindus, even down to this day, worship a trinity made up of the three-headed Trimurti of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva.
So rather than simply going along and worshiping the way those around you do, examine to make sure that you really know what you are worshiping. The Athenians, who were worshiping what they did not really know, were told that God “is not far off from each one of us,” and that he could be found by anyone earnestly searching for him. We can be confident, therefore, that if we make an earnest search for the true, living God, we will find him.​—Acts 17:27.
[Picture on page 10]
Tadashi decided to take a closer look at his beliefs

