From Our Readers
Women of India  I appreciated the article “Women of India—Moving Into the 21st Century.” (July 22, 1995) I have always found India fascinating, as it has a culture very different from my own. Your article showed that real liberation will come to the Indian woman only under God’s Kingdom. I look forward to the time when all women will truly be loved and cherished by the husbands they respect.
W. S., British Columbia
Rejected by Family  I am 14 years old, and I am writing to thank you for the article “The Family That Truly Loved Me.” (July 22, 1995) It really strengthened my faith. Udom Udoh is a good example for youths everywhere. He really showed that you can stand up for the truth at a very early age.
A. M., United States
Like Udom, after I began studying God’s Word, opposition came my way. I too was told to leave home. After much verbal and physical persecution, I left. I was graciously cared for by an elder and his wife. Your article really strengthened me. What a joy it is to belong to this unique global family!
L. J., United States
Becoming God’s Friend  Thank you very much for the article “Young People Ask . . . Can I Really Be a Friend of God?” (July 22, 1995) It moved me to tears. I am 13 years old and have done some very bad things. Others tried to encourage me, but I still found it hard to pray to Jehovah. I thought he didn’t love me anymore because of my many mistakes. This article showed me that God forgives and that I can pray to him.
J. D., Germany
Like Doris, who was quoted in the article, I felt unworthy of being God’s friend. I thank Jehovah for providing me with this assistance. It has helped me to understand that if I repent of my bad actions, he is willing to forgive me and be my Friend. I hope you never stop printing these articles for the youths.
B. M. A., Spain
Menopause  We manage a pharmaceutical company specializing in gynecologic medicines. We found the article about menopause entitled “Gaining a Better Understanding” (February 22, 1995) to be most interesting, and we are pleased that you handled the subject. However, the box “What About Estrogen Replacement Therapy?” states that “adding progesterone to the hormone replacement regimen . . . counteracts the beneficial effect of estrogen on heart disease.” This is not always true, especially of natural progestins.
Dr. T. W. and J. K., Germany
Thank you for updating us. While older sources indicated that progestins might lower levels of HDL, or “good” cholesterol, thus increasing the risk of heart disease, more recent research indicates otherwise. A recent study reported in the January 18, 1995, issue of “JAMA” claims that “estrogen alone or in combination with a progestin improves [levels of “good” cholesterol].” No doubt more research will have to be done before all of the long-term effects of hormone treatments are fully understood.—ED.
Evolution  I have just finished reading the series “The Theory That Startled the World—What Is Its Legacy?” (August 8, 1995) My reaction? More than impressed. Overwhelmed! The article was written so colorfully, so comprehensively. Every quote revealed extensive research. Above all, it was enlightening as to the real effect of the evolution teaching on the mind of man. I had no idea! There’s a famine in the world for quality reading, but you have met the challenge.
R. H., United States

