One-​Parent Families​—A Growing Trend
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN BRITAIN
“THERE are more lone-​parent families in the UK than any other country in Europe,” reports The Times of London. “Single parents . . . now head almost one in five UK families with children under 18, compared with one in seven Danish families and one in eight in Germany and France.”
Of every ten lone parents in Britain, nine are women. The traditional, or so-​called nuclear, family that consists of a father and a mother together with their children now seems to be just one “family concept” among others. But why is the one-​parent variety more prevalent than before?
Divorce and separation head the list of causes. Here Britain follows the trend in the United States, where about half of all marriages end in divorce. Also, what people expect of marriage has changed. According to Zelda West-​Meads of Relate, a marriage guidance organization, 20 or 30 years ago, “the gender roles were much more clearly defined. Man was the breadwinner; woman the carer.” But what of the present? “Today’s marriages may be more stimulating and fun, but they can also be more difficult. Women want more from marriage than their mothers and grandmothers expected. They want equality, a good lover, a good friend, career possibilities for themselves​—and children as well.”
Casual sex featured throughout the entertainment world breeds contempt for the traditional family. Youths who have sexual experiences at a very early age are often unaware of the possible consequences. To them matrimony represents a hardship, a reduction of their personal freedom, an unnecessary complication in life.
Some are lone parents by choice; others become so by circumstance. When forced into a one-​parent situation, many married persons are unhappy with their autonomy. Among these are folk who were happily married but have lost their partner in death.
On the other hand, there are those whose marriages have been marked by bitter hostilities. They find relief bringing up their children alone. Many of these comment on the close relationship they have developed with their children.
Although there are numerous causes of the growing trend toward one-​parent families, when it comes to the responsibilities and challenges of everyday living, single parents have particular concerns. What are they? And how can lone parents successfully shoulder their responsibilities?

