R1277 : cover 

Scriptures around perimeter of front page: 

Along top: 

"The Lord Reigneth! Let the Earth Rejoice.— Zion Heard and was Glad.— Judah 

Rejoiced."-Psa. 97:1,8. 

Along left edge: 

Fear not, Little Flock; for it is Your Father's good Pleasure to give You the 

Kingdom. They shall be Kings and Priests unto God, and Reign on the Earth. 

Along right edge: 

To him that Overcometh I will Grant to Sit with Me in My Throne, and to Eat of 

the Hidden Manna, He shall not be Hurt of the Second Death. 

Along bottom: 

"Arise, Shine; for thy Light is Come, and the Glory of the Lord is Risen upon 

Thee."-Isa. 60:1. 



Inside perimeter border: 

Vol. No., Cross & Crown emblem, Date. 

ZION'S 

WATCH TOWER 

and 

Herald of Christ's 

Presence. 



"Watchman, What of the Night? 

The Morning Cometh, and a Night also! If Ye will Inquire, Ye may Inquire. 

Isaiah 21:11. 



THE TEMPLE OF THE LIVING GOD. 



THE CHURCH.— Heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, our Lord. 

The Bride, the Lamb's Wife. 

BASIS OF HOPE.— Ye were Bought with a Price, even the precious Blood of 

Christ— Accepted in the Beloved. 

HER HIGH CALLING.— Therefore, being justified by Faith— we have this Grace, 

wherein we rejoice. 

HER PROSPECTS.— To share the Divine Nature— made like her Lord in the First 

Resurrection. 



PRESENT WORK. --Perfecting the Saints for the work of the Ministry and 

Witnessing to the World. 

FUTURE WORK.— To bless and judge the world in righteousness, bringing all to 

full knowledge of the Truth. 

HOW TO ATTAIN THE PRIZE.— Wherefore, laying aside every weight and sin, let us 

Run with Patience the Race; looking unto Jesus, who for the same joy endured 

the Cross, despising the shame. 

THE WARNING. -He that looketh back is not fit for the Kingdom. Let no man 

take thy Crown. 

ENCOURAGEMENT.— He will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able. 

HER GLORY.— Then shall the Righteous Shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of 

their Father. 

ROM. 8:17; REV. 21:9; 1 COR. 6:20; 1 PET. 18,19; ROM. 5:1,2; 
2 PET. 1:3,4; 1 JOHN 3:2; REV. 20:6; EPH. 4:12; MATT. 24:14; 
GAL. 3:16,29; ACTS 17:31; 1 TIM. 2:4,6; HEB. 12:1,2; LUKE 9:62; 
REV. 3:11; 1 COR. 10:13; MATT. 13:43. 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO., 
"BIBLE HOUSE," ARCH ST.. 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



R1278 : inside cover 

WE CONTEND EARNESTLY FOR THE FAITH 

-ONCE DELIVERED TO THE SAINTS.- 



"We trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men 
—specially [or most fully and everlastingly] of those that 
believe."— 1 Tim. 4:10. 

"To us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, 
and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are 
all things, and we by him."— 1 Cor. 8:6. 

All we are brethren, and one is our Master, even Christ. 
(Matt. 23:8.) Our Master declares: "If ye keep my commandments 
ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept 
my Father's commandments and abide in his love." "And 
this is his commandment, that we love one another." 

WE SEEK TO WALK 

Worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called, with all 
lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one 
another in love; endeavoring to preserve the unity of the 
spirit [oneness of mind] in the bond of peace. There is 
ONE BODY [Church], with ONE SPIRIT [one sentiment 
or disposition], even as we are called in ONE HOPE of 



our calling; ONE LORD, ONE FAITH, ONE BAPTISM, 
ONE GOD AND FATHER OF ALL, who is 
above all and through all and in us all.— Eph. 4:1-6. 

THE ONE BODY-is "the Church of the living God, the 
pillar and support of the truth;" "the Church of the first-born" 
"whose names are written in heaven;" the "little flock," 
to whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom; 
the members in particular of the body of Christ; prospectively, 
Christ's Bride and joint-heir; the "Seed of Abraham," 
of which our Lord Jesus is Head. Since Pentecost this 
Church of Christ has been in process of selection from among 
justified believers, or the general "household of faith;" and 
its members, when complete and glorified, unitedly shall inherit 
the Abrahamic promise and bless all the families of the 
earth.-Gal. 3:16,29. 

THE ONE SPIRIT-is the spirit of the Truth, the spirit 
of God, the spirit of adoption as sons of God, which actuates 
and governs all who are of the ONE BODY, in vital union with 
the one Head, Christ Jesus. It is the spirit of holiness, and 
chief among its fruits is Love. 

THE ONE HOPE— which inspires all the members of the 
one body of Christ, who have the one spirit of the Truth, is 
"the hope set before us in the gospel," and not hopes suggested 
from our own or other men's imaginations or conjectures. 
The one hope is a "good hope" (2 Thes. 2:16), a 
hope of eternal life by a resurrection. (Titus 3:7.) The 
ground of this hope is found in Jehovah's promises, confirmed 
unto us by the death of our Lord Jesus as the ransom 
price for our sins, and by his resurrection from the dead for 
our justification.— 1 Pet. 1:3; Acts 17:31. 

THE ONE LORD-is the Head or Chief of the one body 
—his Church possessing the spirit of the Truth and actuated 
by the one hope of becoming his Bride and joint-heir. He 
and his Father are one, even as he and his church are one. 
(John 17:11.) He is the Redeemer of his church as well 
as her Lord, Exemplar and Master. And he is the Redeemer 
also of the whole world, and by virtue of that office he is 
to be the world's Deliverer from Adamic sin and death. He 
it is who in all things has the pre-eminence in Jehovah's plan 
and work. He was not only "the beginning of the creation 
of God," "the first-born of every creature," but more: he was 
the "beginning and the ending," he was the "Alpha and the 
Omega, the first and the last," of Jehovah's direct creation; for 
all other "things were made by him, and without him was not 
any thing made that was made." (Col. 1:15,18; Rev. 3:14; 
1:8; 21:6; 22: 13; John 1:3.) He it is who, to carry 
out the Father's gracious plan, willingly left the glory which 
he had with the Father before the world was created, and 
became a man— a little lower than the angels— that he might, 
as a man, present himself in sacrifice for the sins of man. 
Thus we behold him as the "Mediator between God and men, 
the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all." 
(1 Tim. 2:5,6.) By his willing sacrifice of himself for men 
he bought Adam and the entire race condemned through his 
fall, and became Lord of all— not only of the living, but also 
of the dead, with full power and authority to awaken and 



restore to all that was lost whosoever accepts of the 
New Covenant of divine favor which, by his death, he sealed 
and made effective to all. But our Lord is no longer in the 
flesh, no longer a human being. He has finished the work 
of ransoming us, for which the taking of the flesh was needful. 
He was indeed put to death in the flesh, but was quickened 
[made alive] in the spirit. "Though we have known 
Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth we know him [so] no 
more." As he was begotten of the spirit at his baptism, so 
he was born of the spirit at his resurrection; and "that which 
is born of the spirit is spirit." "Now the Lord is that spirit." 
(1 Pet. 3:18; 2 Cor. 5:16; John 3:6; 2 Cor. 3:17.) 
Because he showed his obedience to the Father, and 
his confidence, in that he humbled himself to become a man 
and tasted death for every man, therefore God highly exalted 
him— far above manhood, far above the angelic nature; 
even far above his own glorious previous station, and gave 
him a name [title] above every name, that at the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow and every tongue confess, to 
the glory of God the Father. He made him partaker of the 
divine nature and honor, "that all men should honor the Son 
even as they honor the Father." "He is Lord of all."— 
Phil. 2:8-11; John 5:22,23,26; Acts 10:36. 

THE ONE FAITH— is that we were reconciled to God by 
the death of his Son, who died for our sins, the just for the 
unjust, to bring us to God; by whom we have accepted the 
at-one-ment with God, offered unto us. Wherefore, we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; being cleansed 
by his blood [sacrifice], we are brought nigh to God and 
are no longer strangers and foreigners, but children and heirs 
of his favors, prepared for those who love him when brought 
nigh through the precious blood. Through this faith we 
grasp the exceeding great and precious promises of God as 
rapidly as we see them, and gladly appropriate them to ourselves. 
Faith anchors our hearts securely to the precious 
things of the future, though unseen as yet except to the eye 
of faith. Faith is the power of God to every one that believeth. 

THE ONE BAPTISM.-Those of the one BODY and one 
HOPE, joined to the one LORD, possessing the one FAITH, are 
all baptized or immersed into Jesus Christ. (Rom. 6:3.) 
As individuals they have reckonedly ceased to exist: henceforth, 
for them to live is for Christ to live. With their wills 
buried or immersed into the will of Christ, they thenceforth 
live, not unto themselves, but unto him that bought them 
with his own precious blood. Their own wills are dead, 
and henceforth they recognize only the will of the one Lord, 
the Head of the body, which is his church, whose names are 
written in heaven. Justified believers attain membership in 
this Church of Christ through this burial or immersion of 
their hearts, their wills, into the will of Christ. And as the 
Apostle further declares, this immersion of our wills (ourselves) 
into Christ is acceptable only when it is an immersion 
even unto death— an entire, a complete immersion forever. 
"Know ye not that so many of us as were immersed into Jesus 
Christ were immersed into his death? Therefore we are 
buried with him by immersion into death; that like as Christ 



was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we 

also [from the time of our consecration, the immersion of 

our wills into that of the one Lord,] should walk in newness 

of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness 

of his death, we shall be [sharers] also in the likeness of 

his resurrection"— the first resurrection, to be with him and 

like him, partakers of the divine nature. (Rom. 6:3-5; 

Phil. 3:10,11.) This is the only real baptism, of which immersion 

in water is only the beautiful and appropriate symbol. 



R1279 : page 1 

VOL. XII. JANUARY, 1891. NO. 1. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



"Looking back, we praise the way 
God has led us, led us day by day." 

Throughout the civilized world, despite the 
prognostications of many, peace prevails to a 
remarkable degree. While on every hand the two 
great armies, Capital and Labor, are busily organizing, 
and the various elements are preparing 
for the great final struggle and time of 
trouble such as was not since there was a nation, 
yet peace still prevails. And thus we see before 
us a fulfilment of God's prediction that the 
violent winds of war should be checked and 
holden until the sealing of the saints of God 
should be accomplished.— Rev. 7:1-3. 

Meantime the sealing progresses. Daily and 
hourly the saints of God are being searched 
out and sealed "in their foreheads" [intellectually] 
with a clear appreciation of "the mystery 
of God" which has been kept secret in 
part hitherto, but is now made manifest unto the 
saints, according to the will of God— the mystery 
of God being about finished. (Rev. 10:7; 
Rom. 16:25,26.) The "angels" or messengers 
doing this sealing (Rev. 7:1) are the same 
messengers referred to by our Lord when he declared 
that in the harvest or end of this age he 
would send forth his messengers with the sound 
of a great trumpet [the seventh trumpet], to 
gather together his elect from one end of heaven 
to the other. Every consecrated child of 
God who receives the truth realizes at once his 
duty and privilege of imparting it to others. 
He hears the commission, "Go ye into the 
vineyard;" and "He thatreapeth receiveth 
wages and gathereth fruit unto eternal life." 



These are the Lord's "angels"— messengers or 
servants. The sealing and the gathering we 
understand to refer to the same thing. And the 
heavens through which these messengers go sealing 
and gathering is not the heaven of God's 
throne, but the symbolic heavens so often referred 
to in the book of Revelation, namely, 
the nominal church. 

This "gathering together" is not a literal assembling 
in one locality, just as the heavens are 
not literal. The gathering is into one condition, 
into unity of heart and mind through the knowledge 
of the divine plan of the ages, and corresponds 
exactly to the sealing in the forehead; 
for all the elect are to be sealed with the same 
seal; and all thus sealed are to see eye to eye, 
and to be one in heart and hope and work. 

This sealing is performed only upon the consecrated. 
And the rapidity with which the work 
of sealing progresses in each, and which of them 
will eventually be fully sealed, depend upon the 
degrees of faithfulness to their consecration vows 
on the part of the various servants of God in the 
time of the sealing. His servants should serve him; 
and those who, either from slothfulness or from 
being overcharged with earthly things, are neglecting 
Christ's service, and burying the talents 
consecrated to him, will be passed by— will not be 
fully sealed if at all marked, but will be left to 

R1279 : page 2 

have their portion with the world in the great 
trouble which will begin just as soon as the faithful 
are all "gathered" and "sealed." 

All this implies great commotion, not only 
in the "heavens" [nominal church] but also 
among those being "gathered" and "sealed." 
It means crucial testing and sifting and close 
examination by the Lord through his truth and 
providences; for the Lord himself is the great 
superintendent of this important work, and is 
now directing his own servants. Each sealed 
one becomes a sealer of others as soon as he 
himself is sealed; and each gathered one becomes 
a gatherer of others as soon as he himself 
comes into oneness of heart and head with 
the Lord and the present truth. 

We must not wonder, then, at the shaking and 
falling now in progress among those most closely 
in contact with the work of sealing and gathering. 
The divisions must come. The Lord's words 
show us that it will cause much commotion 
when his order to separate wheat from tares is 
put into effect— a commotion which he would not 
permit until the harvest time had come. (Matt. 13:28-30.) 



And then in some respects a still 
greater commotion will ensue when these sealed 
and gathered servants, the "wheat" class, are 
examined after having been brought into some 
measure of the light and privileges of the present 
truth— when, as shown in two parables, 
two classes will be forcibly cast out of the light 
into the outer darkness of the world, thus to 
pass with the world through the great trouble now 
impending. The two classes to be thus cast out 
by the Lord are— first, those who have taken off 
the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness 
and who deny the precious blood and the ransom 
which it alone secures; and secondly, the 
unfaithful servants who bury their consecrated 
talents in earthly things instead of using them 
in the Master's service. No earthly power can 
keep such from going into the outer darkness 
of error, for it is the Master's order that they 
shall be cast out. 

Moreover, we can only expect that such will 
struggle vehemently against any reproofs and 
against any words of warning, and claim that 
instead of going into the outer darkness of the 
world they are following new light. As a reward 
for your efforts to do them good and to help them, 
by exposing their delusions, they will hate you 
and say all manner of evil against you. Be not 
surprised at this; it is merely incidental to the 
sifting which must go on to the finish. Remember 
the Master's words further— It is needful 
that offenses and divisions come, but woe to 
that man by whom the offense cometh. (Matt. 18:7; 
Rom. 16:17; 1 Cor. 11:19.) Let us 
not by our acts or words or looks drive such from 
us, except in so far as faithfulness in speaking 
the truth boldly and in love will do it. Let us 
not by our acts or words or looks drive such from 
us, except in so far as faithfulness in speaking 
the truth boldly and in love will do it. Let the 
truth make the separation. Speak the truth in 
love, and stand firmly by it. It is the power of 
God, not only in the first separating and gathering, 
but it will be the power also in the second 
separating and casting out. "For the word of 
God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any 
two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing 
of soul and spirit and of the joints and marrow, 
and is a discerner [manifester] of the thoughts 
and intents of the heart."— Heb. 4:12. 

Nor will those cast out of the light, as unworthy 
of it, recognize the agency by which the 
Lord will cast them out, any more than they 
recognized his agency in bringing them into the 
light. Yet he tells us that he will cast them out. 
They will go out from us because they were not 



of us, that it may be manifest that they were not 

all of us. (1 John 2:19.) They go out from us 

because they lack full consecration and full submission 

to the will of God. For this cause, thus 

to cast them out, the Lord will send them 

strong delusions, delusive errors, that they may 

believe a lie; that thus all who, when they know 

the truth, fail to take pleasure in serving it, 

may be condemned and manifested as unworthy 

of joint-heirship with Christ, and consequently 

unworthy of the light which he provides only 

for such. 

THE DOUBLE WORK NOW PROGRESSING. 

While the gathering and sealing work naturally 
took precedence to the sifting and testing 

R1280 : page 2 

of the gathered and sealed, yet now both are 
simultaneously progressing; and no sooner is the 
sealed one rejoiced with the beauty of the Lord's 

R1280:page3 

great plan than he, on being ushered into the 
company of the sealed, begins to be sifted and 
tested. "Who is sufficient for these things?" 
"Who shall be able to stand?" (2 Cor. 2:16; 
Mai. 3:2,3; Rev. 6:17.) None but the faithful 
shall be able to stand, because the Lord purposely 
will make the test so severe as to sift and 
shake out all others. (2 Thes. 2:1 1.) The faithful 
are those who are trusting in Jesus for all, 
and whose will is the will of their God, who are 
so consecrated to his will that they rejoice to 
serve him with every talent possessed. 

Both the gathering work and the sifting work 
are increasing. While the division is great and 
many are being cast out of the light, the faithful 
are daily becoming more awake to the privilege 
of being co-workers with the Lord in the 
present harvest, and the gathering more than 
keeps pace with the sifting and the falling. Each 
knows something of the falling, for it is confined to 
no one locality; but you do not all realize the 
great work of gathering now in progress, and we 
want, for your encouragement, to tell you of it 
briefly. 

The monthly circulation of the TOWER averages 
about ten thousand copies, which we may 
safely estimate represents fifteen thousand readers. 
And of those readers, scattered in all parts 
of the world, we estimate, judging from the 
letters received, that about four thousand are fully 



consecrated to the Lord and using their talents 
to praise him to the best of their ability. 
Such have the Master's assurance that they shall 
never fall, but that an abundant entrance shall 
be granted them into the everlasting kingdom 
and joys of their Lord; for they are faithful, 
and faithful is he that called them, who also will 
do all that he has so graciously promised. 

This probable 4000 may look to some like a 
very insignificant number in comparison with 
the millions of nominal Christians; and yet if 
there are so many of the consecrated and faithful 
now living, it is a large proportion of the 
full number-- 144,000 (Rev. 7:4)-to be made 
up during the 1900 years of the Gospel age, 
which would be an average of about 76 persons 
each year. And if 4000 persons now living are 
fully consecrated to the Lord and faithful, and 
have been so developed during the past ten 
years, this would show an average of 400 persons 
annually during the past ten years, or more 
than five times the proportionate annual number. 
So even this seemingly small estimate of 4000 
may be considerably reduced by the trials and 
siftings now in process, which are designed to 
prove their worthiness of the prize of the high 
calling. Like Gideon's band, this 144,000 is 
to be a picked and choice company. 

The others, the many— and the very anticipation 
causes pain— will probably all fall, according 
to the words of our Master's testimony, 
unless they, too, arouse speedily and by a full 
consecration enter fully into the Master's work 
as the chief business of life. While some will 
be falling because of unfaithfulness, losing the 
crowns apportioned to them when they made 
their covenant of consecration (Rev. 3:11), 
others will be "gathered" in and tested until 
the elect number of the "body" is complete. 

Oh! awake beloved, and resolve, each of you, 
that the Lord's work shall be your chief joy and 
chief work during the year just begun. The 
time is short. Labor while it is called to-day, 
for the night of trouble will soon end all the 
present, blessed opportunities, and it is he that 
reapeth that receiveth wages and gathereth fruit 
unto everlasting life. 

Of the estimated four thousand laborers in the 
cause of the present truth, engaged as the Lord's 
messengers in gathering and sealing his servants 
in their foreheads, of course the larger number 
are those who have only one or two talents 
—who were so hampered by marriage, families, 
etc., before the truth got hold of them, before 
their sealing, that their time, influence, means, 
etc., are more or less mortgaged to these earthly 



things, and less is therefore left for the great 
service of our King which now opens before 
them. These are using what opportunities or 
talents they have at their disposal, and are realizing 
the Lord's promise that he that uses his 
talents shall have them increased; and daily, in 
blessing and sealing others with the truth, these 
are entering into the joys of our Lord and having 
a foretaste of the new wine (joys) which we 
shall share with him when the Kingdom is fully 

R1280:page4 

established and when the truth shall flow to and 
bless all the families of the earth. 

Another part of the work which has received 
a great impetus during the past year is that 
known as the Colporteur work. Brethren and 
sisters who have five talents— influence, earthly 
prospects (money, etc.), reputation, strength 
and time— find that the best way of using all 
these to bring honor to the Master, to whom 
these talents by our consecration belong, is in 
taking the truth from house to house and from 
city to city, by introducing to others the Father's 
great plan and the harvest message which has 
sealed and so richly blessed them. It costs 
them something indeed thus to forsake earthly 
things— friends, houses, lands, money prospects 
and reputation; yet, noble band! they count 
all these things but loss and dross for the excellency 
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, 
whom they serve. Yea, they count not their 
lives dear unto them, but rejoice thus to be 
privileged to be Christ's co-workers and ambassadors 
for the truth in his stead. 

The world knoweth these not, even as it knew 
not the Master; but all who do recognize them 
should, if they ever have opportunity, set before 
them the best they have, and should rejoice to 
do for them as unto the Lord. 

Still there is room in this service, which seems 
to be the one most abundantly owned and 
blessed of the Lord. All the unencumbered can 
be given this grand opportunity for preaching 
the glad tidings. And we are continually in 
communication with others who are in various 
stages of preparation for this work, their full 
and grateful hearts longing to give every talent 
to the service of him who loved us and bought 
us with his own precious blood. The unencumbered 
need no preparation; but those who have 
families require to put matters in such shape that 
those dependent on them shall not suffer want 
(1 Tim. 5:8), while they are spreading the good 
tidings, else they must content themselves with 



a lesser service. Truly the work is a marvelous 
one— not that it would be strange to get so 
many to engage in any business if they had good 
salaries guaranteed— that we see every day; but 
it is unusual to find so many laboring for the 
mere necessities of life— for the majority barely 
meet their expenses, and those who can do more 
often esteem it a privilege to donate of their 
surplus to the TRACT FUND to help carry on the 
general work of preaching the truth. 

ANOTHER PART OF THE WORK. 

Another agency being greatly blessed and 
used by the Master in finding and sealing his 
faithful sheep is the OLD THEOLOGY TRACT work. 
Hundreds of thousands of these little messengers 
have gone hither and thither carrying the 
bread and water of life to many. Our readers 
have procured and distributed many thousands 
—one Brother subscribing for and circulating 
three thousand Tracts each quarter, and others 
less quantities in proportion to their means or 
opportunities for using them. Others who are 
too poor to purchase we have supplied gratis, 
and others who have no means of using the 
tracts have sent donations to the fund, thus to 
help on the cause of publishing and circulating 
the truth. 

About a year ago we requested the friends of 
the cause to send in to us memoranda of the 
numbers of the Post Office boxes in use in their 
towns. We got responses from many and sent 
out sample tracts by the hundreds of thousands, 
until the available funds, tracts, etc., ran low. 
We are now preparing for a vigorous campaign 
for our King and his truth, to set at liberty and 
to seal his earnest servants. Over twenty millions 
of pages of Old Theology Tracts are already 
under way and will soon, we trust, be with 
the Lord's other servants and agencies seeking 
and sealing his jewels. We could tell you much, 
too, of the faithful laborers connected with the 
TOWER Office, as well as of others of the faithful 
scattered ones who are doing what they can for 
the Master, whose places of service are less conspicuous 
than those of the colporteurs; but we 
forbear. The Lord knoweth his own. If any 
man will do the Father's will, he shall know of 
the doctrine. 

The grace, mercy, peace and blessing of our 
Lord Jesus be and abide with all who love him 
and serve him and trust his precious, cleansing 
blood during the year begun. Amen. 



R1284:page5 

"FROM GLORY UNTO GLORY." 



-2 COR. 3:18.- 

"From Glory unto Glory!" Be this our joyous song, 
As on the narrow way to life we bravely march along ! 
"From Glory unto Glory!" O word of stirring cheer, 
As dawns the solemn brightness of another glad New Year. 

Our own beloved Master "hath many things to say." 
Look forward to his teaching, unfolding day by day; 
To whispers of his spirit, to insight clear and sweet, 
To blessed consolation, while resting at his feet. 

"From Glory unto Glory!" Our faith hath seen the King. 
We own his matchless beauty, as adoringly we sing; 
But he hath more to show us! O thought of untold bliss! 
And on we press exultingly in blessed hope to this:— 

To marvelous outpourings of his 'treasures new and old,' 
To largess of his bounty, paid in the King's own gold, 
To glorious expansion of his mysteries of grace, 
To radiant unveilings of the brightness of his face. 

From Glory unto Glory! What great things he hath done, 
What wonders he hath shown us, what triumphs he hath 

won! 
We marvel at the records of the blessings of the year! 
But sweeter than the Christmas bells rings out his promise 

clear- 
That "greater things," far greater, our longing eyes shall 

see! 
We can but wait and wonder what "greater things" shall 

be! 
But glorious fulfilments rejoicingly we claim, 
While pleading in the power of the All-Prevailing Name. 

"From Glory unto Glory!" What mighty blessings crown 
The lives for which our Lord hath laid his own so freely 

down! 
Omnipotence to keep us, Omniscience, too, to guide, 
Jehovah's blessed Presence within us to abide! 

The fulness of his blessing encompasseth our way; 
The fulness of his promises crowns every brightening day; 
The fulness of his glory is beaming from above, 
While more and more we realize the fulness of his love. 

"From Glory unto Glory!" Without a shade of care, 
Because the Lord who loves us will every burden bear; 



Because we trust him fully, and know that he will guide, 
And know that he will keep us at his beloved side. 

"From Glory unto Glory!" Though tribulation fall, 
It cannot touch our treasure, when Christ is All in All! 
Whatever lies before us, there can be naught to fear, 
For what are pain and sorrow when Jesus Christ is near? 

"From Glory unto Glory!" O marvels of the word! 

"With open face beholding the glory of the Lord," 

We, even we (O wondrous grace!) "are changed into the same, 

The image of our Savior, to glorify his Name. 

Abiding in his presence, and walking in the light, 

And seeking to do always what is "pleasing in his sight;" 

We look to him to keep us "all glorious within," 

Because "the blood of Jesus Christ is cleansing from all sin." 

The things behind forgetting, we only gaze before 
"From Glory unto Glory," that "shineth more and more," 
Because our Lord hath said it, that such shall be our way, 
(O splendor of the promise!) "unto the perfect day." 

"From Glory unto Glory!" Our fellow-travelers still 
Are gathering on the journey! The bright electric thrill 
Of quick, instinctive union, more frequent and more sweet, 
Shall swiftly pass from heart to heart in true and tender beat. 

And closer yet, and closer, the golden bonds shall be, 
Enlinking all who love our Lord in pure sincerity; 
And wider yet, and wider, shall the circling glory glow, 
As more and more are taught of God that mighty love to 
know. 

O ye who seek the Savior, look up in faith and love; 
Come up into the sunshine, so bright and warm above! 
No longer tread the valley, but, clinging to his hand, 
Ascend the shining summits and view the glorious land. 

Our harp-notes should be sweeter, our trumpet-tones more 

clear, 
Our anthems ring so grandly that all the world must hear! 
O, royal be our music, for who hath cause to sing 
Like the chorus of redeemed ones, the children of the King? 

O, let our adoration for all that he hath done 

Peal out beyond the stars of God, while voice and life are one; 

And let our consecration be real, and deep, and true. 

O, even now our hearts shall bow, and joyful vows renew! 

"In full and glad surrender we give ourselves to thee, 
Thine utterly, and only, and evermore to be! 
O Son of God, who lovest us, we will be thine alone, 
And all we are, and all we have, shall henceforth be thine 
own!" 



Now onward, ever onward, "from strength to strength" 

we go, 
While "grace for grace" abundantly shall from his fulness flow, 
To glory's full fruition, from glory's foretaste here, 
Until his very Presence crown our happiest New Year! 
—Frances Ridley Havergal. 



R1281 : page 6 

THOUGHTS FOR THE NEW YEAR. 



OUR TALENTS AND THEIR USE. 

Exhortation.— "Consecrate yourselves to-day to the 
Lord,. ..that he may bestow upon you a blessing this 
day." "Offer unto the Lord thanksgiving; and pay thy 
vows unto the Most High." 

Promise.— "And call upon me in the day of trouble: 
I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me." "The Lord 
will give strength unto his people."— Exod. 32:29; 
Psa. 50:14,15; 29:11. 

The dawn of another new year is properly a 
time for solemn reflections, both retrospective 
and prospective. In the retrospect how abundant 
is the cause for thanksgiving. We who have 
been blessed with the richest favors of divine 
grace in that knowledge of divine truth which 
reveals to us the high privilege of becoming sons 
and heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled 
and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for 
the called and chosen and faithful according to 
his purpose, have a never failing cause for deepest 
gratitude. Great indeed was the favor which 
revealed to us the hope of everlasting life as justified, 
human sons of God— of full restitution 
to the divine favor and likeness, as at first possessed 
by our father Adam. And great was our 
joy when first, by faith, we appropriated this precious 
promise and realized that legally, through 
merit of the precious blood of Christ shed for 
our redemption, we had passed from death unto 
life, and that in God's appointed time the everlasting 
treasure with all its attendant glory 
and blessing would be ours. But beyond even 
this favor are the "exceeding great and precious 
promises" to those of this justified class who 
have been called, according to God's purpose, 
to become the bride and joint-heir of his dear 
Son. 

Then, in addition to all these blessings of 
hope and promise, was the blessed realization 



during all the year, and with some of us 
for many years past, that though we walk through 
the valley of the shadow of death, as the Psalmist 
aptly represents the present life, our blessed 
Shepherd's rod and staff have been our comfort 
and our safeguard. How often has the friendly 
crook of the Shepherd's staff stayed us from 
wandering off into by-paths and kept us in the 
narrow way; how his chastening rod has from 
time to time aroused us from dreamy lethargy 
and urged us on our way. And at such times 
we have recalled the comforting words: "My 
son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, 
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for 
whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and 
scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. If ye 
endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with 
sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth 
not? But if ye be without chastisement, 
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards 
and not sons."— Heb. 12:5-8. 

Spiritually, we have feasted on the bounties 
of divine favor, while in things temporal, under 
whatsoever circumstances we have been placed, 
having the assurance that all things work together 
for good to them that love God, we have 
realized that godliness with contentment is great 
gain, having promise of the life that now is [so 
long as God wills to have us remain here], and 
also of that which is to come. Wherefore, we 
can and do most heartily "offer unto God 
thanksgiving." And shall we not render unto 
him, not only the praise of our lips, but also the 
incense of truly consecrated lives, throughout the 
year upon which we are just entering. Dearly beloved, 
consecrate yourselves anew to the Lord today 
—not in the sense of invalidating the consecration 
made once for all, possibly many years ago, 
but rather in the sense of re-affirming and emphasizing 
that covenant. Tell the dear Lord that 
you consider yourselves entirely his, and that it 
is still your purpose to keep your all upon the 
altar of sacrifice during this new year and until 
it is wholly consumed in his service. Then let 
us proceed with studious care from day to day 
to pay these, our vows of full consecration, unto 
the Most High. 

As we look back and with sorrow view the imperfections 
of even our best efforts, and then 
forward and see the lion-like difficulties that seem 

R1281 : page 7 

to obstruct our onward course, we will need 
greatly to re-inforce our waning courage with 
the special promises of divine grace to help in 



every time of need. We have the blessed assurance 

that "the Lord will give strength unto 

his people." "Call upon me in the day of 

trouble," he says, "and I will deliver thee, and 

thou shalt glorify me." As soldiers under our 

great Captain, we have enlisted in no uncertain 

struggle, except our own faint-heartedness or unfaithfulness 

should make it so. We are fully 

supplied with the whole armor of God, and will 

be amply protected against all the fiery darts of 

the adversary if we will accept it and carefully 

buckle it on; we are forewarned of all the snares 

and dangers that beset our onward way, so that 

we may avoid and overcome them; we are fully 

informed as to the policy and course of the 

Captain under whose banners we have enlisted, 

and of the part we are to take under his leading. 

We have his constant presence with us, even to 

the end of our course. His inspiring voice may 

always be heard above the clash and din of battle 

—Fear not, it is your Father's good pleasure 

to give you the kingdom! Be of good cheer: 

I have overcome! Let not your heart be troubled, 

neither let it be afraid! Greater is he 

that is for you than all they that be against you. 

If we are weak and incline to faint-heartedness 

we have only to remember the blessed promise, 

"The Lord will give strength unto his people;" 

and by our faithfulness in the service we shall 

glorify God and he will deliver us gloriously 

from all our foes, both seen and unseen. 

HOW SHALL WE PAY OUR VOWS? 

This is an important question with all the truly 
consecrated, and one surely of paramount importance. 
Let us consider, then, that when we 
consecrated ourselves fully to the Lord, we thereby 
signified that we would hold nothing back 
for self. That consecration included all our 
possessions, our time, our physical energies and 
our mental attainments. And it implied the 
sacrifice of all our former earthly ambitions, 
hopes and aims, so that we should no longer 
pursue them to any extent. This, and nothing 
less, is what our vow of full consecration signifies. 
But it signifies, further, that these possessions 
or personal qualifications, which the Lord terms 
talents, are not only to be released from the 
service of the worldly ambitions, etc., but that 
they are to be so released, not for aimless inactivity, 
but for the purpose of being utilized in 
an opposite direction— in the service of God, of 
his plan and of his children. 

In the parable of the talents (Matt. 25:14-30) 
the Lord illustrated very clearly how we are 



expected to pay our vows of consecration to the 
Most High. He says: "It is like a man who, 
intending to travel, called his own servants and 
delivered unto them his goods. And to one he 
gave five talents, to another two, and to another 
one; to each according to his respective capacity; 
and straightway took his journey." 

This master had important and valuable interests 
to leave in charge of his servants; and 
as these servants had all engaged to serve him, 
he had a right to expect of them a sincere and 
faithful interest in the work. Yet he did not expect 
more of them than they were severally able to 
accomplish. He rightly expected larger returns 
from the one who had five talents than from 
those who had one or two talents. And in the 
reckoning, it will be observed that the servant 
who had doubled his two talents was just as 
highly commended as the one who had doubled 
his five. The reply to each was the same— 
"Well done, good and faithful servant: thou 
hast been faithful over a few things; I will make 
thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the 
joy of thy Lord." And had the servant with 
the one talent been similarly faithful he would 
have received the very same commendation. 
Notice also that the parable does not represent 
the obligations of the world of mankind 
in the use of their talents, but merely of "his own 
servants"— the consecrated believers only. And 
notice also that no servant was left without some 
talent of usefulness and responsibility. Each 
servant had at least one talent; and for the right 
use of that one talent he was just as accountable 
to his master as were those who had more. 

But the professed servant with the one talent 
was unfaithful to his master, and yet he evidently 
wanted to be considered a servant still, and 
probably thought he was worthy of commendation 
and reward for not perverting his Lord's 

R1281 : page 8 

money to other uses. He had taken good care 
of the talent; he had not turned it in opposition 
to the Lord, but he had simply buried it- 
failed to use it. At the reckoning time, he who 
had received the one talent said, "Lord, I knew 
thee, that thou art an exacting man, reaping 
where thou hast not sown, and gathering where 
thou has not scattered. And I was afraid, and 
went and hid thy talent in the earth; lo, there 
thou hast thine own." 

"His Lord answered and said unto him, Thou 
wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that 
I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I 



have not scattered: thou oughtest therefore to 

have put my money to the exchangers; and then 

at my coming I should have received mine own 

with interest." It will be observed that this 

servant was not what men would generally call 

wicked. He was simply an idler, willing, if he 

could, to draw a servant's approval and compensation, 

but lacking any real, active interest in 

his master's business. He had no ill will toward his 

master, he was probably very glad that the other 

servants kept the business from going to wreck 

and ruin, he did nothing to hinder them from 

using their talents, but he did not feel the responsibility 

he had assumed in becoming a "servant," 

nor take a proper interest in his master's 

affairs. Yet, as a faithless, slothful servant, he 

was really a covenant-breaker, and therefore 

"wicked" and certainly unfit to be trusted with 

R1282 : page 8 

still greater responsibilities on the master's 
return. 

But let us remember that this was not a real 
case: it was simply a parable used to illustrate 
real cases. And if the illustration fits your individual 
case, let it not lose its effect upon you. 
The very object of the parable is to arouse such 
to a sense of their short-comings, and to recover 
them from the lethargy into which they have 
relaxed, by reminding them of their responsibilities. 
Activity in the Lord's service to the 
full extent of our ability or talents is what the 
Lord has a right to expect of all who profess 
to be his servants; and it is what he does expect. 
Therefore, if you have but one talent, 
do not bury it, but cultivate and use it; do what 
you can, and all you can, in the great work to 
which we have already consecrated our lives. 
And those who have several talents, let them see 
to it that they too are faithful to the extent of 
their abilities, not being content to do merely 
what the one-talented man can do or ought 
to do. Such a one would not be a good and 
faithful servant, and could not expect the 
Master's approving "Well done!" His approval 
will be given to those only who are faithful 
to the extent of their opportunity. 

Those who find the truth and make the consecration 
before they are encumbered with the 
cares of this life, who have no families dependent 
upon them and who have a reasonable degree 
of health, have at least two talents— time 
and health— which can and ought to be utilized 
in the service to the best possible advantage. 
Then there are those who have a money talent, 



or a business talent, and such should consider 
how these are being used. Are they largely 
swallowed up in luxuries or a superabundance 
of the good things of this life, for either self or 
family? Or are they being laid up as treasures 
upon earth— in banks, store-houses and investment 
securities, to enrich and to cultivate the 
spirit of pride in friends or children, and for 
them to quarrel over after you are dead? 

Our talents for use in the Lord's service consist 
of all those things and opportunities which 
are over and above what we need for the necessary 
and reasonable maintenance of ourselves or 
our families, if we have families, and the reasonable 
provision against distress in case of a 
sudden calamity or approaching old age, etc. 
Aside from these, all we have should be in active 
service, be they many talents or few. If we 
have five talents and are using only one or two, 
how can we expect the Master's "Well done, 
good and faithful servant." Did we not covenant 
to give and to use all for him?— all our 
money, all our time, all our influence, all our mental 
activity, all our physical ability? How faithful 
have we been during the past year? How 
do we stand at the bar of our own judgment? 
And how faithful will we be during the coming 
year? After providing things decent and honest 
for ourselves and those dependent upon us, 
let us judiciously appropriate our talents to what 
we profess to consider the chief business of life. 
Here are the testing points of true loyalty and 

R1282:page9 

devotion. Let us ponder them well, and not 
lightly set them aside. 

But observe further what the Lord has to say 
about this "wicked and slothful servant." He 
says: "Take the talent from him and give it unto 
him which hath ten talents; for unto every one 
that hath [made use of his talents] shall be given, 
and he shall have abundance; but from him 
that hath not [made use of his talent] shall be 
taken away even that which he hath. And cast 
ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: 
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." 
The outer darkness here referred to is in contrast 
with the inner light of the holy place of 
favor and communion and instruction from God, 
symbolized in the Tabernacle. The testing 
comes on the return of the Master. Then the 
faithful servants shall enter into fuller joys and 
privileges and blessings, while the unfaithful will 
go into the outer darkness of error and ignorance 
concerning God's plans and ways, which envelopes 



the world in general, and their neglected 
opportunities for more abundant service will go as 
a reward to those who are already earnest and 
active, and whose abundant labors will in due 
time be abundantly rewarded. 

As we thus view our Lord's teaching, we see 
that our only security as sons of God and joint-heirs 
with Christ is in activity in the service of 
the truth. Well, says one, I see very few doing 
that. Very true: only a few will do it. But 
that precious few are the Lord's jewels. Are 
you one of them? Ah, that is the point to be 
considered. No matter how few they are, or 
whether you ever saw or knew of any such, that 
does not alter the conditions of our calling. 
This is the way: walk ye in it. One, at least, 
has trodden it before. Look for his foot-prints 
and follow him, and "He will give strength 
unto his people," even though they walk alone, 
as he did, without the cheering companionship 
of fellow-travelers. 

But think not that you are traveling alone in 
this narrow way. The Lord has now a consecrated 
people, a faithful band of servants who, 
with every talent consecrated, are steadily pursuing 
their course in the narrow way. We know 
some of them by name and by character and by 
their steady and progressive activity in the 
blessed work. Not many of them have five talents, 
but a good many have two or three, and some only 
one. Quietly and unobtrusively they go about 
from day to day preaching the wonderful words 
of life, and God is with them and is leading 
them on. Their hearts are full of joy and 
hope and they are kept securely amidst all the 
perils of this evil day. None are so clear in 
their apprehension and appreciation of truth as 
those who are fully enlisted in its service. Let 
all who would run the race successfully look 
well to their zeal and activity in the Lord's 
work. If we bury our one or our many talents 
under a weight of worldly cares and encumbrances 
which might be avoided or set aside; if 
we bury them under worldly ambitions for either 
self or family— whether this be by wasting consecrated 
time upon science, philosophy, music 
or art; or upon business, politics or pleasures; 
or in pampering pride and appetite— then as 
unfaithful servants we will sooner or later go 
into outer darkness, by being caught in some of 
the snares of this "evil day," and will be led 
farther and farther into error and away from 
truth. 

Mark well that it is not a case of such unfaithful 
servants being liable to get into outer darkness, 
into error: it is a case of must. The Master's 



orders are peremptory and decisive: "Cast 
the unprofitable servant into outer darkness." 
The light now shining is not for the unfaithful, 
but for the faithful servants; and no matter how 
clearly the unfaithful may have seen and understood 
the deep things of God, and no matter 
how he may have enjoyed them, if he has not 
loved them so as to serve them and sacrifice his 
conveniences for them, he is unworthy of them 
and must go out into the outer darkness of the 
world in general. With these as with the world 
the disappointment of theories and plans in the 
great time of trouble will ere long bring the 
weeping and gnashing of teeth foretold. 

It is indeed a notable fact that in no single 
case have we seen one drift away from the truth 
into the snares of these perilous times who was 
very active and fully enlisted in the Lord's work, 
whose one aim and endeavor was to herald the 

R1282:page 10 

truth and to bless others with it. To such the 
Lord says, "My grace is sufficient for thee"— 
"Ye shall never fall, for so an abundant entrance 
shall be ministered unto you into the everlasting 
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ." 

Let us, then, dearly beloved, have for our watchword 
during the year the word DEVOTION; 
and let each of us write upon his heart the gracious 
PROMISE-"The Lord will give strength 
unto his people." Let us be faithfully "his 
people," and let us earnestly desire and faithfully 
use the strength promised. Faithful is he 
that hath promised, who also will do it. So, 
then, if you lack the strength to use faithfully 
your talent, the fault is yours, not God's. You 
either have not his service closely enough at 
heart or else do not make use of the strength 
he provides. "The Lord will give strength unto 
his people"— his trusting, faithful servants— 
those who are using to his praise the talents consecrated 
to their Master, however many or few 
those talents may be. 



R1282:page 10 

THE THRONE OF HIS GLORY. 



-MATT. 19:28.- 
In reply to the Apostle Peter's question- 



"Behold, we have forsaken all and followed 
thee, what shall we have therefore?" Jesus said 
unto them, "Verily, I say unto you that ye 
which have followed me, in the regeneration, 
when the Son of Man shall sit on the throne of 
his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, 
judging the twelve tribes of Israel." In another 
record of the same conversation there is a variation 
of words, but the ideas, so far as the present 
subject is concerned, are substantially the 
same: "Ye are they which have continued with 
me in my temptations; and I will appoint unto 
you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto 
me; that ye may eat and drink at my table in 
my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel." (Luke 22:28-30.) For 
Christ to have a kingdom appointed to him, as 
Luke records the conversation, and for him to 
sit on the throne of his glory, as Matthew records 
it, appear to indicate one and the same 
rank, though in expressing it the same words are 
not used. As this statement contains, in germ, 
so much that is to be developed and perfected 
in the future, it is important to consider in detail 
its various elements. 

R1283 : page 10 

1. THE THRONE. In the regeneration the Son 
of Man is to "sit on the throne." What throne, 
or what kind of a throne? Is it the identical 
seat, bench, or chair of state which David used 
that is to be given to David's Son and Lord 
for his use? Certainly not. Solomon laid 
aside his father's throne, and made a unique and 
costly one for his own use. (2 Chron. 9:17-19.) 
Is it Solomon's, or a material throne of any 
kind, whether made of ivory, or gold, or anything 
like them, which Christ is to occupy? 
There is no testimony to that effect. David sat 
on a material throne, and the throne of David is 
to be given to "the Son of the Highest," but 
it does not follow from that that the Son of the 
Highest is to sit on a material throne. A throne 
is the seat of a priest or a king, and it is often 
used as the emblem, or symbol, of sacerdotal or 
regal authority. In this figurative sense, it seems 
that many glorious promises are to be fulfilled. 
"Thou shalt conceive in thy womb and bring 
forth a Son, and shalt call his name Jesus. He 
shall be great, and shall be called the Son of 
the Highest; and the Lord God shall give unto 
him the throne of his father David; and he shall 
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of 
his kingdom there shall be no end." (Luke 1:31-33.) 
That celebrated promise, which was 



made known to the virgin Mary by the angel 
Gabriel, may be taken as a sample. The throne 
of David is the emblem, or symbol, of David's 
reign, or kingdom; and David's reign, or kingdom, 
is a type, or figure, or shadow, of the 
reign, or kingdom, of David's Son and Lord. 
To the same effect is that memorable testimony 
which was given by the apostle Peter on the day 
of Pentecost: "Men and brethren, let me freely 
speak unto you of the patriarch David, that 
he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is 
with us unto this day. Therefore, being a 

R1283 :page 11 

prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with 
an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, 
according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ 
to sit on his throne; he, seeing this before, spake 
of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was 
not left in hell (hades), neither his flesh did see 
corruption. This Jesus hath God raised up, 
whereof we all are witnesses. Therefore, being 
by the right hand of God exalted, and having 
received of the Father the promise of the holy 
Spirit, he hath shed forth this which ye now see 
and hear. For David is not ascended into the 
heavens; but he saith himself: The Lord said 
unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until 
I make thy foes thy footstool. Therefore, let 
all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God 
hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, 
both Lord and Christ." (Acts 2:29-36.) 
Nor is the authority of Christ confined to the 
house of Israel, or any other particular house, 
the land of Palestine, or any other particular 
land, because "all authority" is his: "God 
hath highly exalted him, and given him a name 
which is above every name; that at the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow, of things in 
heaven, and things in earth, and things under 
the earth; and that every tongue should confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God 
the Father." (Phil. 2:9-11.) The authority 
of Christ to teach, and rule, and judge, extends 
over all heaven, all earth and all hades. Limitarians 
would have us ignore the words— 
"under the earth"— or blot them out of the 
inspired testimony; but hades is a part of Christ's 
dominion, and as indispensable as either earth or 
heaven. Christ has authority to reckon with 
every enemy of God and man; and wherever 
man is, his fealty will one day be claimed. 
"Every knee" is to have the opportunity of 
voluntarily bowing at the name of Jesus, and 
"every tongue" is to have the opportunity of 



voluntarily confessing that the Savior Anointed 
is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father. 
Neither death nor hades is an insurmountable 
barrier to this, because he holds the keys of both 
(Rev. 1:18), and will liberate every captive 
in due time. 

2. HIS GLORY. In the regeneration the Son 
of Man is to sit "on the throne of His glory." 
What glory? "There are celestial bodies, and 
bodies terrestrial, but the glory of the celestial 
is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. 
There is one glory of the sun, and another glory 
of the moon, and another glory of the stars; 
for star differeth from star in glory." (1 Cor. 15:40,41.) 
There is a glory peculiar to each 
kind of existence, whether animate or inanimate, 
from the very lowest to the very highest. 
There is one glory of the mineral, and another 
glory of the vegetable, and another glory of the 
animal. There is one glory of man, and another 
glory of angels, and another glory of the 
Generator and Regenerator of man. It is the 
highest kind of glory to which the Son of Man 
has been raised— that glory which is peculiar to 
the divine nature. This is the burden of that wonderful 
prayer— in the highest sense "The Lord's 
Prayer"— which Jesus uttered shortly before he 
died: "Father, the hour has come; glorify thy 
Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee." 
"And now, O Father, glorify me with thine 
own self, with the glory which I had with thee 
before the world was." (John 17:1,5.) That 
this prayer was answered does not admit of a 
doubt. It is recorded of the martyr Stephen 
that he "saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing 
on the right hand of God, and said, Behold, 
I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man 
standing on the right hand of God." (Acts 7:55,56.) 
To the same effect is the testimony of 
the highly favored Seer of Patrnos, only his description 
of what he saw is much more full and 
gorgeous: "I was in the spirit on the Lord's day, 
and heard behind me a great voice, as of a 
trumpet, saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the 
first and the last." "And I turned to see the 
voice that spake with me. And being turned, 
I saw seven golden candlesticks; and in the 
midst of the candlesticks one like unto the Son 
of Man, clothed with a garment down to the 
foot, and about the paps with a golden girdle. 
His head and his hairs were as white as wool, 
as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame 
of fire; and his feet like unto fine brass, as if 
they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the 
sound of many waters. And he had in his 



R1283 : page 12 

right hand seven stars; and out of his mouth 

went a sharp two-edged sword: and his countenance 

was as the sun shineth in his strength. 

And when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead. 

And he laid his hand upon me, saying unto me, 

Fear not; I am the first and the last; I am he 

that liveth and was dead; and behold, I am 

alive forevermore, amen; and have the keys 

of hell (hades) and of death." (Rev. 1:10-18.) 

It is clear that the glory of our blessed Lord is 

of the same kind as that of the Most High himself. 

He has been glorified with the glory of 

God— the glory which he had with the Father 

before the world was; and his position is at the 

right hand of God. Not merely first in executive 

authority, but first in executive power also, 

in the accomplishment of the divine purpose 

regarding the salvation of man. 

3. SIT. In the regeneration the Son of Man 
is to "sit on the throne of his glory." That 
posture is often assigned to persons when it cannot 
be understood in a literal sense. Among 
the gorgeous imagery seen by the Apostle John 
is an infamous woman "that sitteth upon many 
waters." In her case, neither seat, nor posture, 
nor character, can be taken literally. They are 
all symbolic; and represent an established reign, 
or kingdom, or dominion, extending over "peoples, 
and multitudes, and nations, and tongues." 
(Rev. 17:1,15.) The Psalmist in his day was 
very familiar with the same kind of imagery. 
"The Lord sitteth upon the flood; yea, the 
Lord sitteth King forever." (Psa. 29:10.) 
Here, also, the posture and seat are evidently 
symbolic, and indicate that Jehovah's reign, or 
kingdom, or dominion, is established over all 
created beings. These samples may indicate 
the way in which the posture is to be understood 
in the present case. The expression is undoubtedly 
figurative, indicating that the position of 
the Son of Man, invested with all executive authority 
and power, has been established; and 
not merely established, but permanently established. 
He is to rest in the position which has 
been given to him: "In that day there shall be 
a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign 
of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek; 
and his rest shall be glorious." (Isa. 11:1,10.) 
In what day? Read the context. When he is 
judging the poor with righteousness; when he 
is reproving with equity for the meek of the 
earth; when he is smiting the earth with the 
rod of his mouth; when he is slaying the wicked 
with the breath of his lips; when he is filling 



the earth full of knowledge of the Lord, as the 
waters cover the sea, and so on. His rest is 
not one of "masterly inactivity," but the very 
opposite. He is ever active, and his strength 
is equal to his activity. "Hast thou not known? 
hast thou not heard? that the everlasting God, 
the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, 
fainteth not, neither is weary? There is no searching 
of his understanding. He giveth power to 
the faint, and to them that have no might he 
increaseth strength. Even the youths shall faint 
and be weary, and the young men shall utterly 
fall: but they that wait upon the Lord shall renew 
their strength; they shall mount up with 
wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be 
weary; and they shall walk, and not faint." 
(Isa. 40:28-31.) His rest is in the strength of 
his nature; in the security of his position; in 
the satisfaction of his work; and in the certainty 
of his ultimate and complete success. "The 
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right-hand, 
until I make Thine enemies thy footstool." 
(Psa. 110:1.) That position was given to our 
blessed Lord 1800 years ago; and it is never to 
be given up while one foe of God or man remains. 
Developed, extended, unfolded and 
manifested it will be, but never exchanged for 
any other. 

4. JOINT-PARTICIPATION. In the regeneration 
the twelve apostles are to "sit on twelve thrones." 
This gives every apostle a throne. Not that the 
number of thrones is restricted to twelve, or 
that he who is to occupy a throne must of necessity 
be an apostle. Matthew speaks of them as 
"disciples," and Luke speaks of "thrones" 

R1284:page 12 

without restricting them to twelve, or any definite 
number. The first disciples appear to be 
treated as representing all of their kind— true 
believers: "To him that overcometh will I 
grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also 
overcame, and am set down with my Father 
in his throne." (Rev. 3:21.) The Lord's prayer 

R1284 : page 13 

also, already quoted, is very clear on this point: 
"I pray for them; I pray not for the world, 
but for them which thou hast given me; for they 
are thine; and all mine are thine, and thine are 
mine; and I am glorified in them." "Neither 
pray I for these alone, but for them also which 
shall believe on me through their word." "And 
the glory which thou gavest me I have given 



them; that they may be one, even as we are 
one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may 
be made perfect in one; and that the world 
may know that thou hast sent me." (John 17:9-23.) 
So the apostles seem to have understood 
this matter:— "Simon Peter, a servant and an 
apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained 
like precious faith with us, through the 
righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ: 
Grace and peace be multiplied unto you, through 
the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord: 
according as his divine power has given unto 
us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, 
through the knowledge of him that hath called 
us to glory and virtue. Thereby are given unto 
us exceeding great and precious promises; that 
by these ye might be partakers of the divine 
nature, having escaped the corruption that is in 
the world through lust." (2 Pet. 1:1-4.) "Ye 
are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an 
holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should 
shew forth the praises of him who hath called 
you out of darkness into his marvelous light." 
(1 Pet. 2:9.) "Unto him that loved us, and 
washed us from our sins in his own blood, and hath 
made us kings and priests unto God; to him be 
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen." 

Prophetic utterances are in accord with 
apostolic testimony:— "Behold, a king shall 
reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in 
judgment." (Isa. 32:1.) "Thy throne, O God, 
is for ever and ever; the sceptre of thy kingdom 
is a right sceptre. Thou lovest righteousness 
and hatest iniquity; therefore God, thy God, 
hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness 
above thy fellows." "Instead of thy fathers 
shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make 
princes in the earth. I will make thy name to 
be remembered in all generations; therefore 
shall the people praise thee for ever and ever." 
(Psa. 45:6,7,16,17.) Thus it is plain that the 
glory which is peculiar to the divine nature, as 
well as judicial, sacerdotal and regal authority, are 
to be jointly participated in, not only by Jesus 
and his Apostles, but by all those also who 
"have obtained like precious faith," and who 
"overcome" the seductions of the world, the 
flesh, and the devil, during the present evil age. 
As the anointed Head has been exalted to the 
divine nature, the anointed members are to participate 
in his exaltation; as he has been invested 
with all authority and power, they are to 
participate in his dignity; and as he has to occupy 
his position until his foes are under his 
footstool, they are to participate in that complete 
and beneficent triumph. "This honor have 



all his saints." May we be found worthy! 
JOSEPH MOFFITT. 



R1285 : page 13 

AN IMPORTANT QUESTION. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have been led to 
come again to you for some advice, feeling that 
you will gladly spare me a few moments time 
from your many and arduous duties to help me 
in my perplexity. 

In Matt. 18:7, Christ shows that snares must 
come and warns those through whom they come. 
In Matt. 13:41, the Lord again informs us that 
in the end of this age he will send his servants 
(messengers) to gather out of his Kingdom all 
"snares" and those who work lawlessness. The 
Diaglott shows that the "offenses" of Matt. 18:7 
and the "things that offend" of Matt. 13:41 
are the same words. I have been led to think 
that all organizations among men of these latter 
days having first, the hope of improvement of condition 
as a motive, and which second, owing to 
cupidity and sordidness of men, deteriorate rapidly 
into machines of self-aggrandizement of clique 
or class, belong to the "snares" of which the 
"overcomers" must beware and avoid. While 
their aims are generally honorable and satisfactory, 
especially at first, it seems that their methods, 
being largely founded on envy and strife, make 
them rapidly lawless institutions. The Diaglott 
shows that those who "do iniquity" in Matt. 13:41 
are those who "do lawlessness." In 
James 3:14-16 we are admonished that the wisdom 
of envy and strife is "earthly, sensual, devilish," 
and abounds with "confusion and every 

R1285 : page 14 

evil work." In Eph. 5:11 we are admonished 

to have "no fellowship with the unfruitful works 

of darkness." The rapid movement now in all 

lines of business is to organize for protection 

from evils that must destroy the various lines of 

business unless arrested, and then to proclaim non-intercourse 

with those who do not come into the 

organization and fellowship with it in its methods. 

You may sympathize with the motive and 

aim that prompts the organization, and give 

them your moral support by observing right 

practices, while deprecating the system inaugurated, 



but if you do not fall in line and aid the 

system, you will be persecuted. Query: Is it 

not the privilege and duty of those who are aiming 

to "follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth," 

to remain outside of all these organizations, 

however harmless they may appear, and 

whatever necessity seems to demand their inauguration? 

It seems so to me, and yet I do not 

want to go to extremes, unless it is to an extreme 

the "Lamb" approves; and as you have 

unquestionably studied this feature, you can help 

me by your views, confirming mine, or leading 

me to search the Scripture again more profitably, 

if I am in error. 

I must soon act on this question before 50 to 
100 of my associates in the Insurance profession, 
and if I am confirmed in my present opinions, 
I shall decline to enter into affiliation 
with them, and state simply that fidelity to the 
teachings of God's Word prevents my doing so. 
This confession may open the way to some fruitful 
private testimony. Somehow, since I have 
been writing, the teachings of the Scripture 
quoted assure me that this is an instance where 
God's exhortation to "Come out from among 
them, and be ye separate" (2 Cor. 6:16-18), 
applies. The flesh always shrinks from such ordeals, 
yet thanks be to God, he always strengthens 
us through Christ, if we but accept his outstretched 
arm. 

The Lord is very exceedingly gracious to me, 
and is giving me daily "meat in due season," 
in things new and old, especially opening up 
details in many things old to us, but so new to 
Nominal Israel that they cannot brook them. 
Sr. Page shows increasing hunger for the knowledge 
of the truth. May the Lord grant equal 
zeal and earnestness to spread the "good tidings" 
as opportunity offers (either through favorable 
circumstances or watchfulness to use every 
means at hand). 

Remember me in Christian love to all the 
household of faith, as well as to our dear Sister 
Russell. 

In Christian love, your brother, 
W. E. PAGE. 

[We publish the above and subjoin its answer 
because the subject is daily becoming more important 
to all the saints.] 

DEAR BRO. PAGE:-Yours of the 13th inst. 
came duly. It gives me great pleasure to note 
your conscientious desire to consider and to do 
the Master's will in all things. With the little 
time I have at my disposal just now, I can only 
answer your letter very briefly. 

I think in the main you take a very proper 



view of the binding and fettering processes now 

going on. I would not be prepared to say, dogmatically, 

that a man could not be a member of 

the Knights of Labor or of some other Union, 

and yet be one of the "wheat" class in the barn-condition 

of safety; but I feel that the position 

of separateness from these human institutions and 

bondages is a safe position for the saints. This 

will probably be seen more in the future than at 

present. The present is merely an organizing 

time; it is in the future that the trials and testings 

will come. The present time is more like a 

period of enlistment preceding a war. While 

the recruiting elements are at work, with fife and 

drum, and with flags fluttering, many enlisting 

and wearing the uniform, there is little to arouse 

apprehension of wounds, pain and death. It is 

after the enlistment that the shock of battle 

comes. So with these societies. At present 

they are organizing, but by and by will begin 

the battle between them. I think with you that 

our safe position is to be as separate as possible 

from them all. 

I am glad to hear of Sister Page's progress, 
as well as your own, in the way of truth and 
service. May the Lord continue to bless you 
both in wisdom, grace and love. Your brother 
and fellow-servant, C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1280 : page 14 

MEETINGS IN TORONTO, CANADA. 

At the urgent solicitation of friends in and near 
Toronto, the Editor of this journal has arranged 
to speak twice at Toronto on Sunday, Feb'y 
22nd next. The hour and place will be duly announced 
in Toronto papers. TOWER subscribers 
present are urgently requested to make themselves 
known to the Editor. 



THE ANNIVERSARY SUPPER. 

The Anniversary of our Lord's "Last Supper, 
as reckoned by Jewish method of calculation, 
will this year fall on Tuesday evening, April 
21st. It will be more fully announced later. 



page 15 



EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I feel like writing you 
this evening and telling you how much I have 
enjoyed reading the "View" in November issue. 
How I am often led to rejoice that you 
followed up my "agnostic" remark of several 
years ago, and by it I have been led into truth. 
More and more I realize my unworthiness, but 
try to realize how the worthiness of Christ fills 
up for me what is lacking. I would like to tell 
you of some things that have transpired since I 
saw you last. How crowded I have been, not 
with the cares of business altogether, but how 
my time has been taken up by others in a way 
that has seemed to keep me back, yet in a way I 
could not help. But all the time my heart yearns 
for him who loved and gave himself for us. 

I have been, too, in trouble financially, and 
that has been a burden, also up to this time. I 
ought not to say burden for the Lord has kindly 
helped me to bear it and carry it in such 
a way that I will not call it a burden. But that 
accounts for the dearth of remittances, for I have 
been continually overdrawn in catching and trying 
to keep up. But I can now send you a small 
check ($10.00) which please apply as indicated 
on another sheet. 

I duly received the book of Poems and Hymns 
and have found many sweet words there. May 
I mention one? Page 41, "Filled with Christ's 
Fulness." When I came to that I was so struck 
with its thought that I made four copies and mailed 
them where I knew they would be appreciated. 
I have said so much to emphasize the truth of 
the remark, that though I have delayed saying 
it, yet I appreciate the contents of the book. 

May God continue to bless you and yours is 
the prayer of your brother in Christ, 
J. H. BROWN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I received a letter a 
few days since, some parts of which I thought 
would be both interesting and encouraging to 
you, and to many of the readers of the TOWER. 
The letter was from a brother, both in the flesh 
and in the Lord. He has been a Methodist 
preacher for some twenty years. Following are 
some extracts: 

"Since I wrote you last, our trials have been 
increasing, but our heavenly Father has been 
leading us and has greatly blessed us in many 



ways. We are learning lessons of faith and mean 
to maintain our integrity to the last. I am reading 
DAWN, Vol. I., for the third time and find nothing 
so far that I cannot accept. You have done 
untold good by sending those books and papers. 
I shall always thank God for your kindness to 
me in this my most severe trial. I believe I 
should have fainted and given up if it had not 
been for your kindness, and for these books. 
God has made them a wonderful help to me. 
How glad I should be if I could be a similar 
help to any one else. If I had the means I 
would start out over this country and lecture 
and preach on the THE PLAN OF THE AGES, and 
circulate these books, and scatter what has been 
such a great blessing to me. 

"I should love to meet the brethren at their 
annual meeting, but oh, how far we are from 
having such a privilege. Our heavenly Father 
will reward you. May God bless you abundantly. 
Pray for us, that our blessed heavenly 
Father may teach us his perfect will, and perfect 
that which is lacking in our faith. We are rejoicing 
in the Lord. Accept much love. 

Yours in Him, E. R. WEST." 

It is needless to say that this news greatly rejoiced 
my own heart. Can you wonder that I 
sat down immediately and wrote him a twelve-page 
letter, telling him, among other things, 
that I could not conceive of a higher calling or 
a grander work in the world than introducing 
these books which have been such a God-send 
to us, and which will be so to every true grain of 
wheat, and advising him and his wife to commence 
this work at once. I told him that I 
thought one could do more good in this way 
than in any other, and glorify God more fully 
and at the same time make a good, honest living. 
It affords, too, such rare opportunities to 
feed the truth-hungry children of God. Like 
our Master, we can go about doing good, preaching 
from house to house, to individuals, and to 
assemblies when practicable. I wonder why 
more of our dear brethren and sisters do not 
engage in this work. Surely it is a blessed privilege. 
"Look on the fields, for they are white 
already to harvest." And "He that reapeth 
receiveth wages." This (as it seems to me) applies 
to the end of this age as fully as it did to 
the end of the Jewish age. 

Yours in the love of the truth and in the 
harvest work, JAS. A. WEST. 



ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in Bible House Chapel, 
Arch Street, Allegheny, Pa. Readers and friends 
will be warmly welcomed. Preaching every 
Lord's-day afternoon at 3 o'clock. A Social 
Meeting at 7.15 p.m. is followed by a Question 
Meeting at 8 o'clock, at which all reverent Bible 
questions are entertained. 



Our German-speaking friends occupy the same 
room every Lord's-day forenoon at 10:30 o'clock. 



page 16 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, 60 CENTS A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1338:page 16 

THE TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 



This is a business association merely; it was chartered as a corporation by 
the state of Pennsylvania, and authorized 

to hold or dispose of property in its own name as though it were an individual. 
It has no creed or confession. 

It is merely a business convenience in disseminating the truth. Any one 
subscribing to one copy or more of the Society's 

quarterly, styled Old Theology Tracts, (6 cents a year,) is considered an 
active member of this Society— but 

not a voting member. Any one subscribing for $10 work or more of the O.T. 
Tracts, or any one donating $10 or 

more to the funds of the Society for the spread of the Truth, is a voting 
member and is entitled to one vote for each 

$10 he or she may have donated. The affairs of the Society are so arranged 
that its entire control rests in the care of 

Brother and Sister Russell as long as they shall live. In fact, the only 
objects in having the corporation are:— 

First, To provide a channel or fund through which those who desire can 
employ their money talent, whether 

small or great, to better advantage for the spread of the Truth than if each 
interested one acted and published independently 
of the others. Second, The corporation was called for by reason of the 
uncertainty of the lives of those at 

present managing the fund. Some wrote that they were doing all that their 
present necessities permitted, but that at 

their death, they desired to do more; and urged the necessity of a legal 
corporation, as Brother and Sister Russell 
might die too, and they wanted their donations to go to the spread of the Truth. 

The Society owns nothing, has nothing, pays no salaries, no rent, or other 
expenses. Its policy is to use in the 

work every dollar received, to the best advantage, and as speedily as possible. 
Its success in publishing and circulating 

among the right kind of readers, tons of the Old Theology Tracts, is 
phenomenal alike to its friends and its enemies. 

The latter imagine that there must be great wealth connected with the concern, 
whereas really there is very 

little.— Few of the friends of this cause do, or are able to do, much 
financially; but what money there is, under economy 

and the divine blessing, is like the widow's cruse of oil: it accomplishes about 
a hundred times as much as other 
Tract Societies, which spend most of their receipts upon salaries. 



THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS 

No. 1. Do the Scripture Teach that Eternal Torment is the Wages of Sin? 

No. 2. Calamities— Why God Permits them. 

No. 3. Protestants, Awake! How Priestcraft now Operates. 

No. 4. Dr. Talmage's View of the Millennium. 

No. 5. Bible Study and Students' Helps, Price Lists, etc. 

No. 6. The Hope of the Groaning Creation. 

No. 7. The Old, Old Story. (Poem-156 Verses.) 

Those who desire to send out sample tracts by mail to their friends, or to 
general lists of addresses of ministers or 
others, can send the lists to us, and we will save you all the trouble, and in 



lots of one hundred or more at a time 

will charge only what the stamps would cost you— one dollar a hundred. 

The first edition of each tract costs more proportionately than subsequent 
ones, and in order to give you the advantage 

of this we propose to send the old, back numbers, 1 to 6, at 45 cents per 
hundred for lots of one or more hundred, 

separate or assorted. (Price 1 cent each for less than 100.) Colporteurs are 
supplied with any of the above tracts free. 

Those who can use tracts to advantage, but who cannot pay for them, will 
please in ordering say how many they 

think they can use judiciously, and also explain their method of using that 
we too, may judge of its advisability. 



page 16 

THE WONDERFUL STORY." 

This is the same Poem as in No. 7, but it is more elegantly gotten up, with 
"Leatherette" covers and contains 15 illustrations. 

Originally gotten out to sell at 25 cents, it has been decided to put the price 
at 15 cents, or two copies for 

25 cents, to induce the greater number of sales. As this tract and another one 
to be issued during this year are larger 

and more costly than the regular issues, subscribers will be charged 25 cents 
for the four issues of 1891; and those 

whose subscriptions are for large quantities, and who send at the previous rates 
will be sent only a proportionate number 

of the more expensive issues. Of our Lord it was prophesied— "His name shall be 
called Wonderful." This is 

the story of him and his wonderful love and sacrifice, and of his coming reign 
of blessing and restitution. 

We believe that this simple statement of the plan in verse— suitable to the 
young, the middle aged and the elderly 

—is destined, under God's blessing, to do a great work. It will prove an 
entering wedge to many hearts, and will, 

we believe, lead on to the fuller details and proofs of the plan of the ages 
presented in the Millennial Dawn series. 

On these the colporteurs will be allowed one-half of the proceeds toward 
meeting their expenses— 6-1/4 cents each, in 

lots of 25 or 50 or 100 at a time. Those not regular colporteurs, but who are 
regular subscribers for the Old Theology 

Tracts, who may desire these for loaning or giving away will be supplied on 
the same terms in the same quantities. 

ADDRESS ORDERS TO Tower Tract Society, ALLEGHENY, PA. 



inside back cover 

MILLENNIAL DAWN SERIES. 

"HELPING HAND FOR BIBLE STUDENTS." 



VOL. l.-"THE PLAN OF THE AGES." 



This work is specially designed to make plain the divine 
plan. It begins at the beginning of the subject, by establishing 
the faith of the reader in God and in the Bible as 
his revelation. It traces the glorious plan therein revealed, 
and shows which parts of the plan are accomplished 
and which will be accomplished during the Millennial 
age, also the manner of its introduction, and its 
objects and methods. 

We know of nothing to compare with this book, as a 
"Bible Key." The Two Hundredth Thousand is now 
on the press, and many who have read it carefully and 
prayerfully declare that if they could not obtain another 
they would not part with their copy, and the hopes it has 
enkindled, for millions. 

Clear type, good paper, 350 pages. Price in cloth covers, 
embossed, $1.00. (The subscribers to ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, are supplied in any quantity at the wholesale 
price, 50 cents, as all are considered agents.) Price in 
paper covers, 25 cents, reduced from 50 cents. 
A GERMAN TRANSLATION OF THE ABOVE AT SAME PRICES. 

VOL. II.-"THE TIME IS AT HAND." 



This volume presents evidences that:— 
Six Thousand Years from Adam ended in A.D. 1872. 
The Date of our Lord's Birth was October, B.C. 2. 
The Date of Annunciation to Mary, Dec. 25th, B.C. 3. 
The Date of our Lord's Baptism was Oct., A.D. 29. 
The Date of our Lord's Crucifixion, April, A.D. 33. 
The "Seventy Weeks" of Israel's favor ended A.D. 36. 
The Jewish Age "Harvest" was 40 years, A.D. 30-70. 
The Christian Age "Harvest," 40 yrs., A.D. 1875-1914. 
The Jewish Jubilees were Typical of the "Times of Restitution 

of all Things."-Acts 3:19-21. 
The Typical Jubilees Mark the Date of their Antitype. 
The "Times of the Gentiles" will End with A.D. 1914. 
The Jewish Age, in Its Length, Its Ceremonies, etc., Typified 

the realities of the Christian Age and its Length. 
Elias or "Elijah the Prophet" was a Type.— How fulfilled. 
The Antichrist Has Come! What? When? Where? 

Besides the above, it treats many other subjects of deep 
interest and great importance to "the household of faith." 

Terms the same as Vol. I.— 360 pages. 

VOL. III.-"THY KINGDOM COME." 



(In preparation. Do not order until it is announced as ready.) 

This volume treats of the prophetic periods of Daniel 
and Revelation— The 2300 Days, The 1260 Days, The 
1290 Days, The 1335 Days. -The Work of the Harvest 
now in Progress.— The Return of God's Favor to Israel.— 
The Great Pyramid of Egypt and its wonderful corroboration 
of all the prophetic testimony. 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 



This is a very choice collection of 150 Poems and 333 
Hymns representing the choicest thoughts of some of 
God's saints, of both the past and the present. Some 
of these have been slightly and some considerably altered, 
to fully harmonize them with the clearer light of truth as 
it is now shining. Authors' names are given so far as 
known, and any alterations are noted. Cloth bound, red 
edges, 494 pages, $1— to TOWER subscribers, 50 cents. 

Every TOWER reader should have and use this means 
of grace. Its poems are gems and will encourage and 
comfort any loyal heart. Nothing is better calculated to 
inspire true devotion. To enable all our readers to 
profit by this means of grace, those of you too poor to purchase 
at the reduced price will be supplied free, upon request, 
out of the funds of the Tower Tract Society. 