From Our Readers
ABORTION
A woman I called on had received your magazine featuring the article “Diary of an Unborn Child.” At that time her daughter was pregnant and going through a divorce. The mother was going to go with her to the abortion clinic one day to help her. When the daughter came to her mother’s house, her mother asked her to read this article before they left, and she did. While reading it, the daughter went into the bathroom and had a good cry. When she came out she decided not to go through with the abortion. Since then she has remarried and has a good husband that takes good care of her and her beautiful baby girl. That magazine certainly proved to be a lifesaver of that baby, and saved that mother from being a murderer.
J. N., Florida
SUICIDE
I wish to thank you so very much for the articles concerning suicide. When one is in such a situation it is difficult to understand just how and why things happen. The articles answered many such questions for me. The advice was strengthening. “So Glad to Be Alive” was like me in so many ways. I truly appreciated these articles.
P. M., Ohio
I am 16 years old and live in a foster home. Since the age of 14 I have tried committing suicide four times. I never wanted to die, only to make other people notice me and help me. You should print more articles about suicide. I know of many people that are interested in this topic, especially teenagers, as suicide is like an epidemic or a disease that unfortunately strikes many kids. After reading your article on tranquilizers, I realize that God can help me to cope a lot better with life and reality than tranquilizers can. Thank you. Your articles have helped me very much.
A. R., Canada
FOG IN PRINT
Your article “Fog in Print” was very informative and highly amusing. It really is amazing how people seem to rate what they read by how intelligent it sounds rather than by how understandable it is. And the ones more prone to do this are the medical profession, the lawyers, the universities and colleges, not to mention religion. In time this trend could filter down to kindergarten. Who knows, one day little junior may come running home to Mom to recite for her his first nursery rhyme learned at school as follows: “Diminutive Jack Horner reclined in a mural intersection, masticating yuletide pastry. He inserted his polar dexter and extracted a delectable fruit and exclaimed: ‘Oh! How I am prodigiously precocious.’”
D. M., Florida
I am writing to express my gratitude for the article entitled “Fog in Print.” I laughed several times in sheer delight, it was so true! I have spent several years in the academic environment, mostly in research laboratories. During that time I spent innumerable hours reading scientific manuscripts. It was often incredibly difficult to determine what the author meant.
C. M., California

