Are You Enduring?
1 “No greater cause for thankfulness do I have than these things, . . . that my children go on walking in the truth.” (3 John 4) The endurance of John’s spiritual children brought him great joy. How it must delight our heavenly Father to see millions of his prospective children “go on walking in the truth”!​—Prov. 23:15, 16; 27:11.
2 While God’s people as a whole are persisting in zealous Christian activity, some have gradually slowed down. Though these may have been energetic when they first learned the truth, with the passing of years, they have settled into a pattern of having only a small or infrequent share in the disciple-making work.
3 Understandably, some may have slowed down because of physical limitations and the effects of advancing age. However, they are to be commended for their endurance. They are doing what they can. But each one who has dedicated his life to God should ask himself: ‘Have I allowed myself to focus so much on personal pursuits that Kingdom interests occupy only a small place in my life? Have I become somewhat “lukewarm,” or am I still exerting myself “vigorously”?’ (Rev. 3:15, 16; Luke 13:24) May all of us prayerfully reflect on what we are doing and make improvement as needed, bearing in mind that Jehovah promises to provide “glory and honor and peace for everyone who works what is good.”​—Rom. 2:10.
4 How to Endure: What helped Jesus to endure? Paul explained: “For the joy that was set before him he endured a torture stake, despising shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.” (Heb. 12:1-3) The joy that was set before Jesus far outweighed the temporary trials that he had to face. Keeping in mind the joy that is set before us can help us to endure also. (Rev. 21:4, 7; 22:12) If we look to Jehovah to give us strength through personal study, regular meeting attendance, and persistent prayer, we will be able to persevere in the work he has given us to do.
5 Jehovah rejoices in the endurance of his loyal ones. So let us increase his joy by continually “walking in the truth.”

