Are You Benefiting Yourself?
1 Millions of people today want to know how to overcome problems and enjoy happy lives. They devour self-help books or look to groups and organizations for advice on how to better their lives. Perhaps some can point to limited benefits they have gained. Yet, judging by the quality of life today, have people in general learned to enjoy peaceful, deeply satisfying lives through human programs of instruction? Hardly can that be said!​—1 Cor. 3:18-20.
2 On the other hand, our Creator provides free of charge the most helpful instruction to all who will listen. Jehovah wants everyone to benefit from his teaching. He has generously provided his inspired Word to guide mankind in uprightness, and he has caused the good news of his Kingdom to be declared in all the earth. (Ps. 19:7, 8; Matt. 24:14; 2 Tim. 3:16) A truly happy life is directly related to paying attention to Jehovah’s commandments.​—Isa. 48:17, 18.
3 Jehovah’s guidance is far superior to that provided by any self-help books or self-improvement schemes offered by the world. We can obtain genuine help and lasting benefits if we take full advantage of Jehovah’s provisions as outlined in his Word and taught by his organization.​—1 Pet. 3:10-12.
4 Benefit Yourself at Congregation Meetings: Today, Jehovah shows genuine interest in teaching us his ways, and we benefit by paying attention to his instruction. Our five weekly meetings give evidence of Jehovah’s loving concern. When we attend congregation meetings, our knowledge of God increases. We learn how to protect ourselves from what is bad by drawing close to Jehovah. In this way our spirits are uplifted.
5 There is more. At congregation meetings we are able to “widen out.” (2 Cor. 6:13) This involves getting to know others in the congregation. We benefit from an interchange of encouragement, such as the apostle Paul wrote about in his letter to the Romans. (Rom. 1:11, 12) When writing to the Hebrews, he strongly admonished those who may have been developing the custom of forsaking Christian fellowship.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
6 Joyful satisfaction in living is directly related to being interested in the welfare of others. We are encouraged to seek ways to contribute to the happiness of others. Our Christian meetings, therefore, certainly are for our personal benefit and for the benefit of those with whom we cultivate wholesome fellowship. What is required of us is our heartfelt participation.
7 The apostle Paul made a similar point in his counsel to Timothy when he wrote: “Be training yourself with godly devotion as your aim.” (1 Tim. 4:7) We can ask ourselves: ‘Am I training myself? Am I learning to benefit from what I am hearing at the congregation meetings?’ Our answers will be yes if we pay attention to what we hear at the meetings and endeavor to apply what we learn. With eyes of faith, we must be able to look beyond the brothers who are doing the teaching and see Jehovah as the Grand Instructor of his people.​—Isa. 30:20.
8 Theocratic Ministry School and Service Meeting: These two meetings are designed to help us be effective in the Christian ministry. The Theocratic Ministry School is just that​—a school with students who receive instruction and counsel on a regular basis. You have the opportunity to demonstrate your advancement as a public speaker and as a teacher of God’s Word. But to gain the most from the school, you have to enroll, attend, participate regularly, and put your heart into your assignments. Accepting and applying counsel that is given will help you make advancement.
9 The Service Meeting teaches us the importance of the Christian ministry and shows us how we can share in the work of making disciples. Are you and your family benefiting fully from what is presented at these two meetings? A Christian couple observes: “At one Service Meeting, we heard that we should consider the daily text as a family. We were not doing this, but now we are.” How have they benefited themselves? They admit: “We find that our conversations around the meal table are more enjoyable. There is no more arguing at dinnertime.” Do even little children benefit from the meetings? Yes. The mother says: “It is obvious that our children are deeply affected by the meetings. One particular week we caught our six-year-old son telling some lies. But that week at the meeting, the instruction talk was about lying. With the guiltiest expression on his face, our son looked at his father and scrunched down in his seat. He got the point, and we had no problems after that.”
10 A pioneer sister says she is glad that suggestions to improve our ministry are given at the Service Meeting. Why? She explains: “I get into a rut. Sometimes I think that what is suggested in Our Kingdom Ministry will not work. But at the Service Meeting, when I hear that we should try it, I get fired with enthusiasm to apply the suggestions. It makes the ministry exciting!” After several weeks of applying the suggestion to try to start a Bible study on the initial call, she started a study on the first call with a girl who had been praying for help.
11 When you hear a talk that includes Bible counsel on personal choices you make, do you sense that Jehovah is speaking directly to you? A brother felt that way. He said: “Recently at one meeting, there was a talk in which a brother discussed what forms of entertainment were proper for Christians and what forms were improper. I used to like to watch boxing on television. But after that meeting, I decided that this sport fell into the category of entertainment that would not be proper for Christians. So I don’t watch it anymore.” Yes, though this brother had developed a fondness for something that is violent, he humbly responded to Jehovah’s leading.​—Ps. 11:5.
12 The Public Meeting, the Watchtower Study, and the Congregation Book Study: The public talks we hear each week cover a variety of Bible subjects. What are you deriving from these talks? One Christian husband commented on the benefits he had received: “One public talk highlighted all the fruits of the spirit. The speaker mentioned, with regard to himself, that in order to work on cultivating these fruits, he would choose one particular quality and work on that for a week. At the end of the week, he reflected on how he did in displaying that fruit in his everyday activities. Then he worked on another quality for the next week. I liked the idea and began to do that myself.” What a fine application of what was learned!
13 The Watchtower Study teaches us to apply Bible principles in various situations of life. This helps us to maintain calm minds and hearts despite life’s anxieties. The Watchtower Study also keeps us up-to-date with progressive truth. For example, did we not benefit from the study of the May 1, 1999, Watchtower articles entitled: “These Things Must Take Place,” “Let the Reader Use Discernment,” and “Be Vigilant and Be Diligent!” How did these studies affect you personally? Do you show by your actions that you take to heart Jesus’ warning about the future? Are you preparing yourself for the tests ahead when we see “the disgusting thing that causes desolation . . . standing in a holy place”? (Matt. 24:15-22) Do your goals and life course manifest that, not the accumulating of material goods, but the sanctifying of Jehovah’s name is the most important thing to you? At the Watchtower Study, are we not learning to benefit ourselves now?
14 Think of how much we learn at the Congregation Book Study each week. Currently we are studying the Bible book of Daniel. In the four months that we have been studying that Bible book, have we not seen our faith grow each week? Like Jehovah’s beloved prophet Daniel, we strengthen our faith so that we might endure.
15 Jehovah Teaches Us to Live Joyfully: We avoid much heartache when we pay attention to God’s commands. Moreover, we experience what joyful living is all about. Following Jehovah’s lead, we become participants in his work, not just observers. And those who are doing God’s work are happy people.​—1 Cor. 3:9; Jas. 1:25.
16 Think actively of how you will apply the things you hear at congregation meetings. (John 13:17) Serve God enthusiastically, with your whole heart. Your joy will overflow. Your life will become richer, more meaningful. Yes, you will be benefiting yourself.

