Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting August 14
Song 114
12 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Comment on May field service report for the country and the local congregation. Only two weekends are left in August, so encourage everyone to participate in the ministry before the month ends. Review the weekend schedule of meetings for field service.
15 min: “Fight the Fine Fight of the Faith.” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Draw added comments from Our Ministry book, pages 44-5, on how Congregation Book Study conductors organize field service activity for their groups and give attention to any who need personal help to share in and report their ministry regularly.
18 min: How You Can Benefit by Going to School. A father talks to his children to help them appreciate why a secular education is beneficial. (See Young People Ask book, pages 133-9.) Many youths feel that going to school is a real challenge in today’s unruly society. They also feel bored, concluding that what they learn will be of little practical value. Father reviews Scriptural principles and sound reasons why it is wise to acquire an adequate amount of secular education. He encourages his children to study well and pay attention in class.
Song 127 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 21
Song 143
12 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Have a well-rehearsed field service demonstration showing how to answer the question: “Why would a God of love allow suffering to continue so long?” (Reasoning book, pages 395-6) Encourage everyone to share in the ministry this weekend.
 8 min: “New Special Assembly Day Program.” A talk. Announce date of the next special assembly, if known, and urge all to attend the entire day. Encourage publishers to invite newly interested ones and Bible students.
25 min: “Are You Benefiting Yourself?” Questions and answers.
Song 152 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 28
Song 165
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for August. Congregation Book Study conductors should check with everyone in their group so that all reports can be tallied by September 6.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Meetings Benefit Young People.” Question-and-answer discussion conducted by an elder. When discussing paragraph 8, consider some practical things that promote better concentration and attentiveness during meetings. (See September 22, 1998, Awake!, pages 19-20.) Encourage parents to be firm in having their children regularly attend all the meetings.​—See experience in the September 1, 1997, Watchtower, page 25.
Song 176 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 4
Song 196
15 min: Local announcements. Question Box. Have publishers relate the experiences they had when witnessing informally on the way to, during, or returning from the district convention.
10 min: Our Time Is Special. A talk by an elder, based on November 15, 1996, Watchtower, pages 22-3.
20 min: “Are You Enduring?” Talk and audience discussion. Encourage all to reflect on their personal success in demonstrating endurance in the Christian ministry. If weaknesses become manifest, there is a need to strengthen ourselves spiritually. Include comments from October 1, 1999, Watchtower, pages 20-1, paragraphs 17-21. Invite two or three publishers who have endured faithfully over a period of years to relate what they are doing to persevere.
Song 206 and concluding prayer.

