“Fight the Fine Fight of the Faith”
1 The apostle Paul admonished Timothy to “fight the fine fight of the faith.” (1 Tim. 6:12) Paul himself lived up to those words. Late in his life, he spoke with assurance that he had personally fought a good fight. (2 Tim. 4:6-8) In every way, he pursued the ministry with boldness, courage, and endurance. By imitating his example, we can have the same inner assurance that we are doing the best we can in our fight for the Christian faith.
2 Expend the Effort Needed: Paul worked hard in the ministry. (1 Cor. 15:10) So do we as we search to find all the deserving ones in our territory. (Matt. 10:11) To reach some of them, it may mean getting up early to witness to those we meet on the street. Or it may mean working in the late afternoon or early evening to meet people after they return to their homes.
3 It takes self-discipline and good scheduling to be punctual when meeting with our book study group for field service. For example, some of the members of the Bethel family travel up to 60 minutes each way to share in the ministry with their assigned congregations on weekends. Also, we may admire some publishers and families in our congregation who travel quite a distance but are on time. Such examples of diligence and personal organization are worthy of imitation.
4 We should be motivated to follow up on all the interest we find. Even when placing literature on the street or in informal settings, we need to make an effort to obtain the individual’s address or telephone number. Then we can call on him to develop the interest and endeavor to start a Bible study.
5 Be Regular in the Service: Paul was consistent and thorough in preaching. (Rom. 15:19) What about you? Do you have a regular share in the ministry? Have you participated in the field service yet this month? Congregation Book Study conductors are interested in seeing that everyone in their group shares in the ministry during August. They will help you to do so.
6 By imitating Paul’s example in fully supporting the good news, we will continue to “fight the fine fight of the faith.”

