





Show Appreciation for Jehovah’s Generosity




JEHOVAH is a generous God. (Jas. 1:17) From the dark expanse of the starry heavens to the verdant blanket covering the earth, Jehovah’s creation sings of his generosity.—Ps. 65:12, 13; 147:7, 8; 148:3, 4.
The psalmist’s appreciation for his Creator was so deep that he was moved to compose a song extolling the works of Jehovah. Read Psalm 104, and see if you do not share his sentiments. The psalmist said: “I will sing to Jehovah throughout my life; I will sing praises to my God as long as I live.” (Ps. 104:33) Is that your desire too?



SUPERLATIVE EXAMPLE OF GENEROSITY

Jehovah wants us to follow his example of being generous. He also provides sound reasons for us to be generous. Note what he inspired the apostle Paul to write: “Instruct those who are rich in the present system of things not to be arrogant, and to place their hope, not on uncertain riches, but on God, who richly provides us with all the things we enjoy. Tell them to work at good, to be rich in fine works, to be generous, ready to share, safely treasuring up for themselves a fine foundation for the future, so that they may get a firm hold on the real life.”—1 Tim. 6:17-19.
When Paul wrote his second inspired letter to the congregation in Corinth, he emphasized the proper attitude to have toward giving. “Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart,” said Paul, “not grudgingly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.” (2 Cor. 9:7) Next, Paul mentioned those who benefit from generous giving: the recipients, whose needs are satisfied; and the donors, who are enriched by spiritual blessings.—2 Cor. 9:11-14.
Paul concluded this section of his letter by referring to the strongest evidence of God’s generosity. “Thanks be to God for his indescribable free gift,” wrote Paul. (2 Cor. 9:15) Jehovah’s gift evidently includes the sum total of all the goodness that God extends to his people through Jesus Christ. It is so lofty that words cannot fully describe its value.
How can we show appreciation for all that Jehovah and his Son have done and will yet do for us? One way is by being generous in the giving of our time, energy, and resources to advance the pure worship of Jehovah, whether it is a small amount or a greater portion.—1 Chron. 22:14; 29:3-5; Luke 21:1-4.



How Some Choose To Contribute To The Worldwide Work
  As in the apostle Paul’s day, many today “set something aside,” or budget an amount of money, and place it in the congregation contribution box labeled “Worldwide Work.” (1 Cor. 16:2) Each month, congregations forward these contributions to the office of Jehovah’s Witnesses that serves their country. It is also possible for you to send donations directly to a legal entity that is used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in your country. To learn the name of the primary legal entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in your country, please contact the branch office. The address can be found on www.jw.org. The types of donations that you can send directly are the following:
OUTRIGHT DONATIONS
            Donations via electronic bank transfer, debit card, or credit card. In some branches this is also possible using jw.org or another designated website.

            Donations of cash, jewelry, or other valuable personal property. Include a letter indicating that the cash or the item is an outright donation.


CONDITIONAL DONATION ARRANGEMENT
            Donations of cash with the condition that it can be returned if needed by the donor.

            Include a letter stating that the donation is conditional.


CHARITABLE PLANNING
  In addition to gifts of money and valuable personal property, there are other methods of giving to benefit Kingdom service worldwide. These are listed below. Regardless of the method or methods you would like to use, please first contact the branch office that serves your country to see which methods are available. Since legal requirements and tax laws vary, it is important to consult qualified tax and legal advisers before choosing the best way to donate.
Insurance: A donation made by specifying an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses as the beneficiary of a life insurance policy or a retirement/pension plan.
Bank Accounts: Bank accounts, certificates of deposit, or individual retirement accounts set up as a trust or made payable on death to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in accord with local bank requirements.
Stocks and Bonds: Stocks and bonds donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses as an outright gift or by means of a written agreement to transfer on death.
Real Estate: Salable real estate donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses, either by making an outright gift or, in the case of residential property, by reserving a life estate to the donor, who can continue to live in the residence during his or her lifetime.
Gift Annuity: Money or securities donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses under an arrangement where the donor receives a specified annuity payment every year for life. The donor may receive an income-tax deduction for the year in which the gift annuity is established.
Wills and Trusts: Property or money may be bequeathed to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses by means of a legally executed will or by specifying the entity as the beneficiary of a trust agreement. This arrangement may provide certain tax advantages.
  As the term “charitable planning” implies, these types of donations typically require some planning on the part of the donor. To assist individuals desiring to benefit the worldwide work of Jehovah’s Witnesses through some form of charitable giving, a brochure entitled Charitable Planning to Benefit Kingdom Service Worldwide has been prepared in English and Spanish. The brochure was written to provide information on a variety of ways that gifts may be made now or later, such as through a bequest at death. The information covered in this brochure may not apply fully to your situation because of tax laws or other laws in your country. Hence, after reading the brochure, you should confer with your own legal or tax adviser. By using such methods of charitable giving, many have helped to support our religious and humanitarian activities worldwide and maximize tax benefits. If available in your country, the brochure may be obtained by requesting a copy from the secretary of the local congregation.
  For more information, you may contact the branch office.


