From Our Readers
Missing Children  By the time I finished reading the series of articles “Missing Children​—When Will the Tragedy End?” (February 8, 1995), tears were rolling down my face. Some of the experiences related in the articles were similar to mine. I thank Jehovah for giving me the strength to endure. Through his Word I have gained the hope of a paradise in which people will no longer suffer such evils.
T. O., Brazil
Japanese Prisoner  I was encouraged to read the article “My Father Was ‘Atom-​Bombed Out Of Prison.’” (October 8, 1994) I was recently baptized as a Christian, and I have often wondered if I would maintain my integrity under test. As I read about Brother Katsuo Miura’s rocklike faith, strong emotions welled up inside me. It helped me realize what I am lacking in my own faith​—that I need to make Jehovah God the source of my confidence.
K. T., Japan
Genetics  We have been discussing the genetic code in school. So I took the occasion to put the magazine on the subject “Human Genetics​—What Makes You ‘You’” (March 22, 1995) in my exercise book. Our science teacher analyzed the article with me. She told me that even though she is a biologist and has studied DNA for years, she was impressed by how deep the material was.
P. N., Italy
The articles showed how a complicated subject can be explained in comprehensible terms. It enabled me to understand better the material I am studying in biology class. However, I am unable to make use of the quotes in the article, since you do not give reference information such as author and publisher.
M. G., Germany
Because of space limitations, we usually do not publish lists of secular references as is often done in technical and scientific journals. Since “Awake!” is written for the general public, not for professionals only, we feel that such bibliographic information would be of interest to relatively few readers.​—ED.
Homosexuality  I serve as a ministerial servant and a pioneer, a full-​time evangelizer. The “Young People Ask . . .” articles on homosexuality seem to have been written for me! (February 8, February 22, and March 22, 1995) In my early and mid-​teens, I explored homosexuality. I stopped, but ever since I’ve found it hard to fight these feelings. With these articles, however, I finally understand my feelings, and I’ve received help to keep on fighting!
Name withheld, Denmark
I’ve had homosexual feelings since puberty. I was raised a Christian, so these feelings have been really confusing to me. Because I felt so ashamed and confused, I could never bring myself to confide in anyone, not even my own parents. I’m married now to a beautiful woman, but I still have wrong desires from time to time. Finally, I told my wife my secret, and she encouraged me to talk with the congregation elders. They were very understanding and supportive. If I could say anything to anyone struggling with these feelings, it would be this: Don’t keep it a secret. Tell your mate, your parents, an elder, or a trusted friend​—but don’t keep it inside.
Name withheld, United States
From childhood, I suffered sexual abuse. No love or affection was ever shown to me. I practiced homosexuality, but if young people only knew the shame, pain, sadness, and frustrations that homosexual attitudes bring, they would flee from them. Many avoid talking about this topic, but you treated it in a clear manner. I thank you with all my heart for publishing such subjects.
Name withheld, Brazil

