What the Future Really Holds
MANY science-​fiction enthusiasts have an inquiring mind, a desire for change in human society, and a great interest in the future. The Bible has much to say about the future, but the Bible’s view of man’s fate bears little, if any, resemblance to the speculations of science-​fiction writers.
Science fiction offers many, many different versions of what the future may be like. But would you stake your life on any one of these? On what would you base your choice? These scenarios, or projected courses of events, cannot all be true. In fact, since all of them involve conjecture​—fiction—​can you confidently say that even one of them is the truth? It is far more likely that none of them are.
Coming to Nothing
Already, many science-​fiction scenarios are coming to nothing. In what way? In that those that deal with how science could lead the way to a better civilization here on earth have not come to pass. Far from an improved civilization, the reality of today is the opposite. German writer Karl Michael Armer notes: “The future has overwhelmed us.” He points to “global threats of atomic death, environmental disasters, hunger, poverty, energy crises, [and] state-​sponsored terrorism.”
In other words, the future for the earth and for the human family described in many science-​fiction stories is not moving toward realization. To the contrary, as conditions deteriorate on the earth, the human situation is going in the opposite direction. In spite of any scientific or technical advancements, throughout the world human society experiences more and more crime, violence, poverty, ethnic hatreds, and family breakdown.
Some scientific endeavors have added greatly to man’s ills. Consider just a few examples: the chemical pollution of our air, water, and food; the disaster at Bhopal in India, where an accident in an industrial plant released poison gas, causing the death of 2,000 people and injury to some 200,000; the meltdown of the nuclear power plant at Chernobyl in Ukraine, resulting in many deaths and increases in cancer and other health problems over a wide area.
Colonizing Outer Space?
A large number of science-​fiction stories about the future offer escape from life’s miseries and the failures of human schemes on earth in yet another way. They transfer the enthusiast to imaginary scenarios in outer space. Humans using intergalactic spaceships to colonize other planets and other parts of the universe are common themes. Such induce many to feel as did the person who wrote to the editor of a New York newspaper: “Mankind’s future lies in space exploration.”
True, space exploration continues with the flight of space shuttles near the earth and the launching of instruments to probe space. But what about living in outer space? Although there is talk of extended spaceflight by humans, there are at present no definite working plans to colonize the moon or any of the nearby planets​—much less the other galaxies. Really, the colonizing of outer space by human efforts is not a realistic option in the near future. And current space programs of various nations cost so much that they are being scaled back or abandoned.
The reality is that mankind’s future, your future, is not in any space adventures promoted by humans. Your future is right here on earth. And that future will not be determined by scientists, human governments, or script writers. Why can we be so certain?
Because the future will be determined by the Creator of the earth, Jehovah God. And no science-​fiction scenario can emulate the promises held out in the Bible. In that book​—God’s inspired Word, which he has communicated to mankind—​he tells us what the future will be for humans. (2 Timothy 3:16, 17; 2 Peter 1:20, 21) What does it say?
The Future of the Human Family
The Word of God clearly spells out the Creator’s purpose to perform a complete overhaul of human society by means of a new government in the hands of Jesus Christ. In the Bible that heavenly government is called the Kingdom of God.​—Matthew 6:9, 10.
Regarding that Kingdom the inspired prophecy of Daniel 2:44 declares: “In the days of those kings [existing today] the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these [present-​day] kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”
Under the inspiration of God’s powerful active force, the apostle Peter also wrote concerning future life on earth under God’s Kingdom. He said: “There are new heavens [God’s heavenly Kingdom] and a new earth [a new human society under that Kingdom] that we are awaiting according to [God’s] promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.”​—2 Peter 3:13.
What will life be like for those who are privileged to live on earth under the rule of God’s heavenly Kingdom? The Creator’s promise is: “‘[God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.’ And the One seated on the throne said: ‘Look! I am making all things new.’ Also, he says: ‘Write, because these words are faithful and true.’”​—Revelation 21:4, 5.
The kind of future that the Creator promises is a marvelous one. It is completely different from any fictitious scenarios by science-​fiction writers or scientists, scenarios so often characterized by weird, fantastic beings and surroundings. True Christians put faith in God’s sure promises for the future. Indeed, they do more. They stake their life on them.
Why can they do so with such confidence? Because they know from God’s Word that this “hope does not lead to disappointment,” since ‘God cannot lie.’ In fact, “it is impossible for God to lie.” (Romans 5:5; Titus 1:2; Hebrews 6:18) As Joshua, a servant of God, stated long ago: “Not one word out of all the good words that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed. They have all come true for you. Not one word of them has failed.”​—Joshua 23:14.
Much of science fiction reflects the ideologies of this wicked old system. How so? Science fiction got off the ground in a period of so-​called enlightenment, when many persons rejected traditional authority and believed that man could work out his own future. They rightly blamed worldly religion for much of society’s trouble, but then they threw out the truth about God’s existence and purpose as well. They were disappointed with the way things were working out and so sought other ideas.
However, human ideas, no matter how well thought out, are limited in scope. Our Creator says: “As the heavens are higher than the earth, so my ways are higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.”​—Isaiah 55:9.
True Scientific Discovery
In God’s new world, mankind’s natural thirst for knowledge will be quenched in part by genuine scientific inquiry. There will be no need to invent scenarios, for the reality will captivate and educate the mind in a wholesome, truthful way.
Many will then understand how the renowned scientist Isaac Newton felt when he likened himself to “a boy playing on the sea-​shore, . . . whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before [him].” Doubtless, in God’s new world, He will direct faithful humans to one stimulating discovery after another.
Yes, scientific research will then be based entirely on truth, since Jehovah is “the God of truth.” He invites us to learn from man’s earthly environment and also the animal world. (Psalm 31:5; Job 12:7-9) Honest scientific endeavor guided by the God of truth will surely be a fascinating feature of God’s new system. Then credit for all inventions, discoveries, and wonderful improvements in man’s life and living standards will be awarded, not to any human, but to the Creator of the universe, Jehovah God.
In that fast-​approaching new world, all obedient humans will glorify God for his loving care and guidance. They will serve him with great rejoicing and will say to him, as described at Revelation 4:11: “You are worthy, Jehovah, even our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they existed and were created.”
[Picture on page 9]
Mankind’s future is on the earth

