From Our Readers
Marriage
I want to thank you for the article “‘Surviving’ the First Year of Marriage.” (August 8, 1982) I was recently married and I certainly needed some advice as to how to cope with my new situation but at the same time enjoy it. It’s nice to know that there are rough spots in almost every marriage. I was beginning to feel I had the only marriage with rough spots. But most importantly, I appreciated the advice as to how those rough spots can be smoothed out. Please keep up the good work.
H. S., Ohio
I had to write and tell you how much we enjoyed the article on “‘Surviving’ the First Year of Marriage.” So much of it expressed how I personally felt. My husband and I had a lot of tension toward the end of the second year of our marriage. The specific points with regard to “Adjusting Sexually” were written for us! Thank you so much. My husband and I plan to read this together as part of our family study.
C. A., New York
Violence
This morning I sat down to read the article on “Violence” (July 22, 1982). I was in tears. For some time now I’ve acted, at times, violently toward my three-and-a-half-year-old son. I love him more than I can say and yet I continued in my course. Four days ago I beat my son for doing something that irritated me but was not really wrong. As soon as I put him down for a nap I went to my room to pray for help with my bad temper. This morning I picked up the Awake! on “Violence” and didn’t give any consideration to my problem until I read in the first article the experience about how Marjorie treated her son. Immediately I remembered my problem and my prayers and started to cry. I read the articles on “Violence” and took notes on things that applied to me most (keeping in mind, all the while, my problem). Now I realize that I have a responsibility​—to work in harmony with my prayers. Thank you, thank you so much for the excellent coverage.
D. M., Ohio
Alcoholism
I want you to know how much good your article on “Alcoholism” (July 8, 1982) did for at least one person​—me! For years I suspected that I was an alcoholic. I have read other articles on drinking but was able to excuse myself with the thought that they did not actually apply to me. Not so with this Awake! I tested the medical findings and points in the boxes. I learned that one beer could set me in motion so that I would be unable to stop. I’m happy that I have not drunk anything since reading that magazine, nor do I intend ever to drink another drop of anything alcoholic, no matter what! The results? I feel wonderful, am sleeping better, am happy and, best of all, can function mentally as I did ten years ago when I started drinking. I thank you with all my heart.
A. N., Virginia

