Fully Support Your Congregation’s Public Meeting Program
1 Some years ago a young man found a handbill advertising the meetings of the local congregation. Since he was looking for the truth, he decided to attend the Public Meeting that very Sunday, arriving at the hall well in advance. A publisher warmly greeted him and, during the course of the conversation, offered him a Bible study, which he declined. However, he was so impressed by the well-prepared public talk that he changed his mind, and after the meeting he accepted the study. This young man made rapid progress and was baptized several months later. We can learn at least three helpful lessons from this experience.
2 First, the Public Meeting had been advertised. Do you use printed handbills to advertise your congregation’s meeting program? As the chairman announces the title of the public talk to be delivered the following week, think of those in your territory who may be especially interested in the subject, whether they are currently reading our literature or not. Some people do not like to read, or they read with great difficulty, but they may be willing to listen to a talk on a Scriptural topic.
3 Second, the newcomer was given a warm welcome. If you plan to arrive at the hall as early as possible, you can greet your brothers and sisters as well as any interested ones. (Heb. 10:24) If a newcomer is attending for the first time, he may not know what to expect. Explain that our meetings begin with song and prayer, and tell him how the meeting will be conducted. If appropriate, invite him to sit with you so that you can share your Bible and songbook with him. Invite him to discuss with you any questions he may have once the meeting has been concluded.
4 Third, the talk was well prepared. Those who are privileged to represent the congregation as public speakers spend many hours preparing and rehearsing the material in order to incite the audience to greater love and fine works. All of us are under pressure today, and the refreshing truths from God’s Word are just what we need to help us endure. Of course, no matter how informative the public talk may be, it will be of little value to us personally unless we pay close attention to what is said. Do you occasionally have difficulty concentrating during the talk? It may be helpful to make brief notes, just as we often do during our conventions. Be sure to follow along in your Bible as each Scripture text is read and explained.
5 The Society has provided public talks on a wide variety of Scriptural subjects. Working through the presiding overseer or a brother designated by him, the body of elders coordinates the congregation’s Public Meeting program. Subjects outlined by the Society are selected to address current local needs. Do not miss any of this vital information, and fully support your congregation’s weekly Public Meeting.

