Service Meetings for February
Week Starting February 7
Song 131
15 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Feature magazine presentation based on current issues. Review main points in Question Box.
18 min: “Develop Interest in God’s Kingdom of Peace.” Discussion of article with audience. Two demonstrations. After considering paragraph 2, show how to offer tract to householder who is busy. Have publisher respectfully ask question that will lay foundation for return visit. Demonstrate presentation in paragraph 3 in which householder shows interest and publisher uses brochure. Again, groundwork should be laid for return visit.
12 min: Benefit From 1994 Yearbook. Drawing upon information in 1994 Yearbook, pages 10-18, elder and ministerial servant discuss points of encouragement that can be used to build up appreciation for theocratic organization.
Song 137 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 14
Song 126
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Relate Society’s expressions of appreciation for donations sent, and commend congregation for loyal support of local congregation needs. Encourage participation in weekend field activity, and outline any special field service arrangements for holiday on February 21.
20 min: “Stimulate Growth Through Meaningful Return Visits.” Question-and-answer discussion. Have demonstration of return visit based on presentation in paragraph 3. Highlight need for discernment in not covering too much material during visit, and stress importance of instilling interest in future visit.
15 min: “Objects of Hatred by All the Nations.” Talk by experienced elder.
Song 122 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 21
Song 198
 5 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News.
15 min: “Hail Jehovah’s Firstborn!” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Warm, enthusiastic presentation by elder, encouraging all to make list of individuals they will invite to attend Memorial and next regular public talk. Demonstrate points made in paragraph 7. Have publisher approach person who enters Kingdom Hall and looks around. Publisher learns that man was encouraged to attend by relative who lives in another city. Publisher invites man to sit with him and his family so that they can share Bible and songbook. Publisher offers to answer any questions that man might have after the meeting. Conclude part by announcing time congregation will celebrate Memorial.
10 min: The Bible​—Our Best Source of Encouragement. Reasoning book, pages 117-21. Talk by elder. Many inside and outside the congregation are in need of encouragement. Show how each publisher in congregation can use God’s Word to encourage others.
15 min: “How Beneficial to Recount What Jehovah Has Done!” Question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 1-11 of this article in insert. Have two prepared comments by brothers who have personal or family program for reading book. Ask them to mention something they appreciated learning.
Song 208 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 28
Song 219
 5 min: Local announcements. Outline literature offer for March.
15 min: “How Beneficial to Recount What Jehovah Has Done!” Question-and-answer consideration of paragraphs 12-20 of insert. Have two prepared expressions from publishers who have benefited from reading book.
15 min: “Fully Support Your Congregation’s Public Meeting Program.” A talk, but may include one or two questions directed to audience. Explain how interested people attending Public Meeting for first time can be made to feel welcome. Have one prepared comment from publisher expressing how he has benefited from attending the Public Meeting regularly.
10 min: “Guard Against Mistaken Kindness.” A talk.
Song 197 and concluding prayer.

