Stimulate Growth Through Meaningful Return Visits
1 To help those who have shown interest, it is vital that we continue to provide them with a flow of spiritual food by regular return visits. Our visits will progressively help to stimulate their spiritual growth. (1 Cor. 3:6-9) For our visits to be meaningful, though, it is necessary that we prepare ahead of time, having that person in mind.
2 Calling Back on Those With Whom We Left a Tract: Perhaps the Peaceful New World tract was placed on the initial call.
After briefly reviewing what was discussed, we might ask something like this:
▪ “What government can bring about these changes? [Allow for comment.] No doubt you too would enjoy living in conditions like this. How can we personally enjoy such conditions?” Then consideration may be given to the material under the subheading “How It Is Possible for You.” If interest is shown, attention can be drawn to the Live Forever book, chapter 15, “Becoming a Subject of God’s Government.” We may discuss the first two paragraphs and then ask the question: “How should learning about God affect us?” Arrangements may be made to answer the question and to discuss more of the chapter on the next visit.
3 When calling back on those with whom we left the brochure “Does God Really Care About Us?,” we might say:
▪ “The last time I called, we discussed the many problems facing mankind and what God promises to do about them. Why, though, has God permitted suffering for so long? The interesting answer is found in part 6 of the brochure we looked at.” Ask the householder to get his copy if convenient. After considering a few paragraphs, we might ask: “What do we need to do to benefit from God’s promises?” The material under section 11, “The New World’s Foundation Now Being Formed,” on pages 28-31, may be highlighted for discussion at the next visit.
4 Calling Back on Those With Whom We Left Magazines: If you selected a specific article that interested the householder, develop additional points from the article when you return, focusing your comments on one key scripture and the material discussing it. If there is continuing interest, the benefits of the magazines may be discussed. Also, attention may be drawn to the next issue of the magazine if it contains an article that discusses the same subject. Otherwise, we may direct attention to material in the Live Forever book on that subject and make arrangements to discuss it at our next visit.
5 Our showing personal interest in following through with meaningful return visits will demonstrate our love for people and for Jehovah. (John 13:34, 35) May we continue to stimulate the spiritual growth of those in our territory by regularly making meaningful return visits.

