From Our Readers
Winning Parents’ Respect
I want to thank you so much for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Win My Parents’ Respect?” (October 22, 1984) I really enjoyed the part which says: ‘If you want your parents’ respect, treat them with respect.’ I have greatly benefited from this article.
J. W., Wisconsin
Teenage Marriages
Thank you so much for your articles “Teenage Marriage​—Pleasure or Pain?” and “How Wise Is a Teenage Marriage?” (September 22, 1983) I must confess that the experiences in both articles point to my situation today. If these articles had been published before my decision on marriage, I could for sure have arrived at a wise decision. The scar and pain are very much with me. Please continue to publish articles like these for the benefit of those who might read them and adjust their viewpoint before getting into marriage.
E. B., Nigeria
Clothing Fashions
I want to thank you for the articles “Fig Leaves, Fashions and Figures” and “I Have Nothing to Wear!” (November 22, 1984; December 8, 1984) Now I realize how much I have to wear, thanks to the articles. They have helped me to become better organized.
L. F., California
I just read the article “Fig Leaves, Fashions and Figures.” I work as an Image/​Color Consultant, and this information was so similar to what I use in working with my clients in color analysis and wardrobe coordination.
C. J., Texas
I wish to express appreciation for the articles “Fig Leaves, Fashions and Figures” and “I Have Nothing to Wear.” These were really class articles, showing that the ‘Best Dressed Woman’ has it together both “inside” and “outside.” And she doesn’t have to compromise Christian principles to do it. Further, I appreciated that the information can also apply to men in this area of dress and Christian personality.
R. E., Illinois
I found your article “Fig Leaves, Fashions and Figures” very informative, but I must also admit feeling a bit excluded from it. Because of a physical disability, I walk with the aid of a leg brace and a cane. I feel very self-conscious about this, and so I hide the brace as much as possible by wearing long pants all the time. This causes me to feel different from other women, especially in situations where they generally wear skirts or dresses. Please give me some tips on fashion for women who feel that they must wear slacks.
M. S., California
There can be circumstances, such as those mentioned, where slacks might well be the more appropriate and modest type of dress. If so, the fashion tip would be to select a style of pantsuit that is attractive, fits properly, and meets the requirement of ‘well-arranged dress with soundness of mind.’ (1 Timothy 2:9) Then wear such with the dignity suitable for the occasion.​—ED.

