Have You Ever Wondered—
What Causes Children to Become Delinquent?
From all over the world comes the same alarming report: Crime by children is rising at a shocking rate.
You personally may have been confronted by disrespectful, even criminal, youngsters or have known of children who went bad. What was wrong?
ARE PARENTS A MAJOR CAUSE?
Often they are. Obviously, no one can have as great an influence​—either for good or for bad—​on children as their parents. They have molded the child’s mind and heart since infancy.
Without being taught proper standards children can easily become delinquent. Often parents are so involved with their own work or social activities that they neglect to give their youngsters the necessary attention.
But making sure that children receive the needed direction in life is not easy. Why? Because, according to the Bible, “foolishness is tied up with the heart” of a child. Discipline is needed to get the child to take responsibility seriously. (Prov. 22:15) Who is in the best position to administer such discipline? Is it not the parents? When parents fail to do so, delinquency is usually the result.
Frequently parents are not firm with their children because they are not firm with themselves. If they set a bad example, being dishonest or disrespectful to proper authority, who’s to blame if the child imitates them?
However, there are some parents who have tried to do their best, yet their child turns bad. Why?
IS IT ALWAYS THE PARENTS’ FAULT?
No, because we live in a world where the prevailing standards are quite different from what many parents teach their children. Our children live in a selfish, immoral and dishonest world. Pressure from schoolmates or playmates​—not to mention corrupt television programs or movies—​can undermine the best efforts of parents.
Conscientious parents may spend years trying to develop within their children fine habits. Yet all this work could be spoiled by the child’s companions. Many parents know the sad truth of the Bible warning: “Do not be misled [yes, do not think that it cannot happen]. Bad associations spoil useful habits.”​—1 Cor. 15:33.
Also, there are youngsters who simply will not respond to the good advice from parents. The Bible frankly states that there would be children who would ‘hold a father in derision and despise obedience to a mother.’​—Prov. 30:17.
Despite outside pressures and wayward tendencies of youth . . .
WHAT CAN PARENTS DO TO PREVENT DELINQUENCY?
When a man asked what he could do to keep his children from becoming delinquent, a long-time juvenile-court judge answered: “Love your wife.” “If parents love each other the kids will be all right,” he explained. Yes, a loving atmosphere in the home is one of the first steps in preventing delinquency. A good example usually rubs off on the children.
Does this mean letting the child do anything he wants? “An infallible way to make your child miserable is to satisfy all his demands,” warns another judge. A parent needs to say “No” at times, and mean it!
The Bible shows that genuine love for a child involves firmness, saying: “The one holding back his rod is hating his son, but the one loving him is he that does look for him with discipline.”​—Prov. 13:24.
When a parent is firm, his child realizes, deep down, that the parent cares. He may put up an argument, but in reality he appreciates the security such firmness gives. Especially if the parent follows up such firmness with loving concern for the child will his heart be reached. This concern involves teaching a child proper standards of right and wrong. The Bible counsels: “Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger; but bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.”​—Eph. 6:4, New American Standard Bible.
Much more could be said about preventing delinquency. Many additional suggestions are detailed in the Bible, and these are discussed in the book “Making Your Family Life Happy.”a Millions of persons have found that, when applied, they really work.
WHY IS DELINQUENCY SO BAD IN OUR TIME?
The Bible foretold that the increase of delinquency would be a sign of the “last days.” It predicted: “But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here,” for during that time many would be “disobedient to parents.”​—2 Tim. 3:1, 2.
“Haven’t there always been delinquent children?” some may respond. True, but never before has there been such mass disrespect from children on an earth-wide scale. In some countries juveniles now commit ONE HALF of all reported serious crimes, student revolts have paralyzed scores of cities in recent years and some schools have become virtually armed camps. Such conditions are without parallel in history​—all evidence of the accuracy of Bible prophecy. These developments show that we are nearing the time when God will remove all delinquents from our earth​—both adult and juvenile.​—Prov. 2:20-22.
Jehovah’s Witnesses will be happy to assist you without charge to become acquainted with the counsel in your Bible about rearing children. They themselves use the beautifully illustrated publication “My Book of Bible Stories”b to mold the thinking of their young ones in a wholesome way. And to help their teen-agers to get sound counsel on situations that they face, they use the book “Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It.”c They will gladly share with you what they have learned about coping with the problems of youths now, as well as what the Bible says each family must do in order to survive the coming end of this wicked and selfish world into one wherein righteousness will prevail throughout the earth.​—2 Pet. 3:13.
[Footnotes]
Published by Watchtower Bible and Track Society of New York, Inc.
Published by Watchtower Bible and Track Society of New York, Inc.
Published by Watchtower Bible and Track Society of New York, Inc.

