Assuming Our Responsibility to Do Good to Others
1 The apostle Paul admonished first-century Christians: “Do not forget the doing of good and the sharing of things with others.” (Heb. 13:16) Their efforts to help their brothers even under adverse circumstances would reinforce their love for God and for one another. (John 13:35) We too are encouraged to do good and share with others.
2 To this end, Jehovah has made provision for us to be spiritually well fed and well equipped. What a wealth of information we have in each Watchtower and Awake! What joy we find in reading each issue as soon as possible after receiving it! Meditating on the Scriptural information, we may make note of points to use in the field ministry as well as in our conversations with others. Similarly, we may buy out time to prepare for each meeting and especially for the weekly consideration of The Watchtower. Personal study of God’s Word helps us to develop “the mind of Christ” and enables us to impart what is favorable to those we meet.​—1 Cor. 2:14-16; Ps. 19:14.
3 Responsibilities Worth Accepting: All who come to love Jehovah dedicate their lives to him. By accepting the responsibilities associated with dedication, we demonstrate that we are for Jehovah and have separated ourselves from Satan’s world and its offensive ways. By following the model left by Christ Jesus, we set a fine example for others. (1 Pet. 2:21) Circuit assembly programs such as the one outlined for the 1992 service year, with its theme “Carrying Our Own Load of Responsibility,” encourage us to live up to our dedication.
4 Regular attendance at congregation meetings allows us to share upbuilding thoughts with one another. Our personal study and preparation for the meetings provide us with much good information that we can share. Showing such personal interest in others promotes a warm, friendly family spirit. By contributing to the meetings, we show we really agree with Paul’s words recorded at Hebrews 10:24, 25 and accept our responsibility to encourage others.
5 Reach Out for Additional Responsibilities: During the 1992 service year, could we reach out for added responsibilities, such as auxiliary or regular pioneer service? Rather than placing undue emphasis on the hour requirement, why not focus attention on the increased opportunity to share in the ingathering work? (John 4:35, 36) Regularly working with other qualified publishers and pioneers will help us improve our skills in the ministry. An increased number of auxiliary pioneers also serves as a healthy stimulus to the congregation. If possible, why not apply as a regular pioneer or arrange to be an auxiliary pioneer on a regular basis or as often as possible this year?
6 Responsibilities are readily extended to qualified dedicated and baptized male members of the congregation. (1 Tim. 3:1-10, 12, 13) All can demonstrate their willingness to serve by their well-thought-out comments at the meetings, participation in the Theocratic Ministry School, and acceptance of assignments to present a demonstration or to care for other parts on the Service Meeting. Even children can be exemplary in these ways and in their conduct at the Kingdom Hall. They can be helpful in working with their book study group when assigned to clean the Kingdom Hall or care for other such needs.​—km 3/76 pp. 1, 8.
7 Jesus expressed his willingness to accept the responsibility to do good to others with the words: “I want to.” (Luke 5:12, 13) Following his example, we too can encourage and help our brothers, interested ones, and sincere people we meet in field service to associate regularly with Jehovah’s organization. Accepting our responsibility to “work what is good toward all” requires a determined effort and perhaps personal sacrifice on our part. (Gal. 6:10) But when we see the good that is accomplished, we can agree with Paul, who said: “With such sacrifices God is well pleased.”​—Heb. 13:16.

