Congregation Book Study Arrangement
Part 3​—A Center for Field Ministry
1 In addition to providing a place for group study, the location of the Congregation Book Study may serve as a meeting place for field service. Times for such meetings should be convenient for the majority of the publishers, and the meetings should offer practical assistance in organizing the publishers for field service.
2 Groups properly organized for study and service build spirituality. Who has not benefited by encouragement or suggestions on how to handle objections, how to start a conversation, how to offer a Bible study, or what to say on a return visit? Fellow publishers and pioneers meeting at the book study location provide just such assistance.​—Gal. 6:9, 10.
3 Conductor’s Role: The Congregation Book Study conductor takes the lead and is responsible for organizing the activity of the group. He regularly works with the publishers in the field. (1 Pet. 5:2, 3) Well-prepared meetings for service impart Scriptural and practical instruction to equip the group for the field. It is normally preferable for each book study group to have its own meeting for field service rather than have all groups meet together at one location. However, two small groups may be combined if necessary. When field service follows the Watchtower Study, the meeting for field service should be brief. Thereafter, each book study conductor will care for his own group.
4 Consistent field service arrangements encourage regular participation in the ministry. If the meetings for service are held at the time and location scheduled, the publishers plan accordingly, encouraged by the knowledge that there will be territory available and others to work with. (Compare Luke 10:1.) Even when the study conductor cannot be present, he provides territory and makes arrangements for the group. (om pp. 44-5) If no qualified brother is available to conduct a meeting for service, the conductor may assign a sister to do this. (om pp. 77-8; km 3/88 p. 3) Confusion is avoided when the group meets regularly at its usual time and place for service. Any temporary adjustments in this should be announced a week in advance if possible.
5 Cooperation Needed: All should strive to have a meaningful share in the various features of the field ministry. Publishers can take the initiative to prepare together with practice sessions, using realistic objections and circumstances that are likely to arise in the local territory.​—Prov. 27:17.
6 Would you like to have an experienced publisher help you become more skilled in the disciple-making work? If so, speak with your Congregation Book Study conductor. He may be able to arrange for a qualified publisher to assist you. To benefit, diligently apply the suggestions received and keep appointments made.
7 Those assigned by the book study conductor to assist should be helpful and reasonable in their expectations. Experience has shown that those with a positive and balanced view of field service and who have a practical approach are best able to train others. (km 7/79 pp. 3-4; km 8/79 pp. 3-4) Commendation should always be given as progress is made. Then other goals can be set.​—Compare Luke 19:17-19.
8 We want to help one another to be effective in preaching the good news and making disciples. Worsening world conditions testify to the urgency of this work. Lives are involved, and Jehovah is speeding up the ingathering. (Isa. 60:22) As we keep in mind the ministry given to us, we will work closely with our Congregation Book Study group to accomplish our assignment fully while exhorting and encouraging one another.​—Rom. 12:6-8; 2 Tim. 4:1, 2, 5.

