Be Whole-Souled in the Field Ministry
Part 3​—Contribute to the Progress of Others
1 The relationship between the older brother Paul and the devoted young man Timothy has often been cited as a fine example of training for the ministry. (1 Cor. 4:17) Timothy was directed by Paul to impart to others the same knowledge and training that he had received. (2 Tim. 2:1, 2) We do well to follow the same procedure in the congregation today.
2 Train Others: The need for training becomes obvious when we realize that in the United States today there are some 70,000 more publishers than there were three years ago. Very likely most of these would benefit from the training that experienced publishers can give. One sister who usually spent only one or two hours a month in field service learned to speak effectively at the doors when given help by an experienced publisher. Her former reluctance to share in the ministry vanished, and she became a zealous publisher of the good news. Now as a proficient pioneer, she looks back and says: “All I needed was to be taught what to say, and then I began to enjoy the ministry.”
3 If you are an elder, a ministerial servant, a pioneer, or an experienced publisher, how can you contribute to the progress of others? The first step would be to inform your Congregation Book Study conductor that you would like to assist another publisher.
4 Be Organized and Prepared: It helps to have a definite appointment to work together. Your companion may be nervous or unsure of himself at the beginning, but he will appreciate that someone is working with him to help out if the need arises. (Eccl. 4:9) If possible, select a territory where you are more likely to find people who are willing to converse on Bible themes. This will help the new one to become involved and thus gain confidence.
5 To continue the progressive training, it would be beneficial to discuss how to make a return visit on the interest found. That involves laying the groundwork on the initial call by leaving the householder with a question to be answered when you return. Be sure to help the less experienced publisher prepare, and then accompany him on the call. If a study is started and the new publisher is still somewhat unsure of his own ability, the more experienced publisher may wish to conduct the study a few times until the new one qualifies to take over.
6 With the rapid influx of new ones into the organization, the wisdom of providing intensive education in the field ministry becomes self-evident. Help is needed from those who have developed their skills in the preaching activity. If you can help someone, in time he too will be “adequately qualified to teach others.”​—2 Tim. 2:2.

