Presenting the Good News​—Starting Studies With the Direct Approach
1 Jesus commanded us to “make disciples.” (Matt. 28:19) To accomplish this usually requires starting Bible studies with interested ones. Using the direct approach to start Bible studies in the house-to-house ministry can help us to accomplish this quickly. It also serves to identify clearly a major purpose in calling.
2 What might we say when using the direct approach in starting Bible studies? A very simple approach is best. We might say: “I am interested in helping people to understand the Bible and would be pleased to study it with you and your family in your home at no cost or obligation. We can use your Bible. If you do not have one, I can make one available to you.”
3 Another approach might be: “My purpose in calling today is to encourage home Bible study, which will help you to understand where this world is heading and what God has in store for us. I would be glad to show you how you can get the most from your Bible. There is no obligation or cost on your part.” If the householder is agreeable, you may use the tract Life in a Peaceful New World or the Creation book, perhaps starting on page 234, paragraph 6. The opening pages of this chapter highlight Jehovah’s promise to restore Paradise.
4 Use Bible Tracts: Many have found tracts to be helpful when using the direct approach. When the householder answers the door, give him the tract Life in a Peaceful New World unfolded so that he can see the complete illustration. Have another tract in your hand, and read or paraphrase the questions in the first two paragraphs. Discuss the answers, and read a supporting scripture or two. Then mention that you have enjoyed the discussion, and arrange to return. Explain briefly our free home Bible study program, if appropriate, or simply arrange to call back and consider a further point in the tract.
5 When arranging to return, it is good to mention something you feel will interest the householder. This can be in question form. It will leave the householder looking forward to your next visit when the question will be answered.
6 The Creation book is outstanding in many ways. It furnishes concrete evidence that proves the existence of God. It shows why evolution cannot be true. It shows why we can trust the Bible as God’s Word. The illustrations in chapters 18 and 19 will get the attention of honesthearted people, generating interest in the Bible and Jehovah’s purposes. So let all of us take advantage of every opportunity to start studies and share in the commission to “make disciples.”​—Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20; Mark 13:10.

