Service Meetings for September
Week Starting September 2
Song 17
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Highlight talking points from current issues of magazines.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Starting Studies With the Direct Approach.” Question-and-answer coverage. After considering paragraphs 3 and 4, demonstrate the direct approach using the Creation book and the tract Life in a Peaceful New World. The direct approach will help you to determine the extent of the householder’s interest. Emphasize the need to call back on all interest whether literature is placed initially or not. Encourage all to try starting Bible studies by using the direct approach in field service this weekend.
15 min: Question Box, “Our Kingdom Ministry Gets a New Format,” and Theocratic News. Encourage participation in field service this weekend.
Song 157 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 9
Song 214
10 min: Local announcements. Review points in magazines to be used in field service this weekend. Demonstrate one or two presentations as time allows.
20 min: Set Personal Goals for New Service Year. Service overseer reviews congregation’s activity for past service year. Warmly commend where improvement is noted. Outline areas needing further attention locally during new service year, and provide practical suggestions. Review last report of circuit overseer. Use Index to find material on need and how to apply counsel given. Those enduring in faithful service encourage others. (Heb. 6:10) Interview two publishers or pioneers who made good progress during past service year. What goals have they set for 1992? Also, interview a publisher or a pioneer who has served faithfully for many years, having him or her outline difficulties faced and how these were overcome with help from Jehovah and his organization. Encourage all to set worthwhile goals for improving their ministry during 1992 service year.
15 min: “Assuming Our Responsibility to Do Good to Others.” Question-and-answer presentation. When considering paragraph 4, demonstrate how an elder at the Kingdom Hall may give commendation to a publisher for his faithful example over the years. An inquiry can be made as to what can be done to assist. However, emphasis should be placed on the commendation.
Song 94 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 16
Song 44
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Read Society’s donation acknowledgments and express appreciation for publishers’ financial support of Society’s activities as well as those of the congregation.
20 min: “Congregation Book Study Arrangement​—Part 3.” Two Congregation Book Study conductors discuss the material, making local application. Emphasize mutual benefits when publishers cooperate with service arrangements. Mention the need to show respect for homes used when meeting for field service, and commend those hospitably opening up their homes. (km 3/86 p. 3) Since other locations are needed from time to time, anyone wishing to make his home available can advise the presiding overseer or service overseer. Tie in points from last week’s discussion about setting service goals. Service overseer can help and encourage publishers to reach goals in ministry.
15 min: “Youths​—Will You Pass the Test of Christian Loyalty?” Talk based on article in the June 15, 1991, Watchtower. Emphasize folly of leading a double life.
Song 171 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 23
Song 187
10 min: Local announcements. Highlight one or two points from current magazines. Encourage publishers to share in the field service this weekend.
20 min: “Be Whole-Souled in the Field Ministry​—Part 3.” Question-and-answer discussion. On paragraph 4, have experienced publisher demonstrate how to assist newer one when out in service. Show practice session with newer one using suggestions of experienced publisher to overcome realistic objections.
15 min: Local needs or discussion of introductions appropriate for use in local territory. Base discussion on Reasoning book, pages 9-15. May briefly relate experiences of publishers who have started Bible studies this month by using the direct approach.
Song 70 and concluding prayer.

