Panama
Come along to the “land of many fishes.” That title has been applied to Panama, a long, narrow isthmus forming the link between Central and South America. With a length of about 480 miles (772 kilometers), and running roughly east and west, this country has the shape of a reclining “S.” Colombia borders it on the southeast and Costa Rica on the northwest. The width of the Isthmus of Panama ranges from 120 miles (193 kilometers) to about 37 miles (60 kilometers). The narrowest point is between Panama City and Colón, which made that region the logical choice for the site of an inter-oceanic canal. That world-renowned waterway​—the Panama Canal—​is an important tie between the Atlantic and the Pacific.
It is said that Panama was discovered by Rodrigo de Bastidas about 1500 of our Common Era. The isthmus was explored by Columbus in 1502 and crossed by Balboa in 1513, with his discovery of the Pacific Ocean taking place on September 26 of that year.
Panama has a total land area of about 29,000 square miles (74,108 square kilometers). It is inhabited by an estimated 1,700,000 individuals of many different extractions, including Indians and chiefly a mixture of Spanish and native Indians. Spanish is the official language, though English is used in the Canal Zone, and several Indian dialects also are spoken.
This tropical land is traversed by two principal mountain ranges and laced by hundreds of rivers. Rainfall varies between 90 and 130 inches (229 and 330 centimeters) annually in different areas of the country. Panama is reputed to have over 2,000 different plants peculiar to the tropics, as well as a wide variety of animals, including the puma, peccary, sloth, anteater and alligator. Add to these a generous number of snakes, some of them possessing venom that can kill a man in a matter of minutes.
During the sixteenth century, Spain conquered Panama and made it a colony. Roman Catholicism became the state religion. In the year 1718 Panama became a part of the viceroyalty of New Granada. Independence from Spain was declared in 1821 and union with Colombia effected. By means of the 1846 Bidlack Treaty, the United States won right of transport across the isthmus and it built a railroad from coast to coast. This facilitated travel from the east coast of the United States to California and its fabulous goldfields.
In 1903, when Colombia refused to permit the United States to dig a canal, Panama declared her independence. Then Panama gave the United States the right to dig the canal and to use in perpetuity (a point that since then has been disputed) a five-mile-wide (8-kilometer-wide) strip of land on each side of the waterway in order to maintain and protect the canal. The Panama Canal was completed in 1914 and, in 1920, formally became the “Funnel of World Commerce.” Achieved thereby, at a cost of some $366,000,000, was a “Land Divided​—a World United,” at least in a commercial sense.
From an economic point of view, Panama is comparatively prosperous today. Bananas are the principal export, and cattle raising for export is increasing in importance. Fruits, vegetables and coffee also are exported. Millions of dollars in revenues, directly or indirectly related to the operation of the Canal, accrue to the Republic of Panama. Also, tourism is growing in importance.
Panama is a nation of religious freedom. The majority of the populace profess to be Catholic. However, most of the Protestant churches are represented, as well as Oriental religions.
THE GOOD NEWS IS HEARD
The Kingdom work in Panama started about the turn of the century. In the late 1890’s an agent of the American Bible Society brought some of the Watch Tower Society’s publications into the country and began to distribute them. Soon others became interested in the Kingdom message and began to talk about it. Isaiah Richards, a schoolteacher in the city of Colón, organized a class (or “ecclesia,” as it was called) and presided at the weekly Bible studies. That was about the year 1900.
There was a close connection between the spread of God’s truth on the island of Jamaica and in Panama, for many West Indians came here to work on the canal. First, interest was shown by a few persons in Colón, on the Atlantic side. One of those interested in the good news of God’s kingdom was Hubert L. Walker, a Freemason from Panama City who had moved to Colón because of employment. In 1910 the Society’s representative in Kingston, Jamaica, sent two colporteurs or full-time workers​—Brothers Morgan and Laing—​to publish the good news in Panama City and vicinity. They were received into the home of Mr. Walker before he moved to Colón. The brothers also had a room for the meetings and another room for the storage of literature. Already thousands of Bibles and the Watch Tower Society’s volumes Studies in the Scriptures had been distributed among the English-speaking people, largely canal construction workers. In that same year, a Christian congregation was established in Panama City and the number of persons associated with it came to be nearly fifty.
Shortly before that, W. R. Brown, who later became known as “Bible” Brown in Nigeria, West Africa, had become interested in the good news. That was in 1907, when he attended a street-corner lecture given by Isaiah Richards. The Bible discourse was based on the “Chart of the Ages,” which was used as an aid in explaining God’s purposes. Upon learning the truth, Brown returned to Jamaica. His purpose? To take the truth to his mother and sister. Both accepted it and expressed their faith by baptism. That was in 1909. Returning still later to Colón, Brother Brown became employed as a launch pilot. He proved to be very zealous for the truth. So when colporteurs Morgan and Laing got started in Panama City, Brown immediately left Colón and joined them in spreading the good news. The three of them then rented a three-room apartment; they lived in one room and used the other two for meetings and storage.
In 1911 Brother E. J. Coward, a representative of the Watch Tower Society, came to Panama for a Bible lecture tour among the canal construction workers. He met with Brothers Brown, Morgan and Laing, as well as all the interested persons in Panama City and Colón. Brother Coward perceived that Brother Brown was qualified for special service and, after finishing his isthmian lecture campaign, took him along to Trinidad. There Brother Brown continued to serve till 1922, when he and his family left for Africa, where he became so well known as “Bible” Brown. In the meantime, the colporteurs and interested persons pressed on with the Kingdom proclamation in Panama. As a result, strong classes were established on both sides of the isthmus and in the labor towns of the Canal Zone.
While in Kingston, Jamaica, Brother Coward had appointed and trained some young men to be colporteurs. In 1912 three of them came to the Canal Zone to take up secular work there. They also associated closely with the congregations and did much to build up the existing organization and spread the truth.
Charles Taze Russell, first president of the Watch Tower Society, visited Panama in 1913, lecturing at the National Theater in Panama City and at the Garden Theater in Colón. Naturally, interest in the Kingdom message was greatly stimulated as a result of his visit. But changes occurred in 1914, when the canal was opened to shipping. As the construction work tapered off, many of the brothers and interested ones had to return to their homes in the West Indies. Numerous towns built to house the laborers were abandoned. Even so, fairly strong groups of Bible Students (as Jehovah’s Witnesses were then called) remained in Panama City and Colón. So, for a time, the Kingdom-preaching work continued to prosper.
FAITHFULNESS IN TRYING TIMES
But with the death of Pastor Russell in 1916 and the subsequent period of sifting, the zeal of many cooled off. Moreover, some began to think of themselves as leaders of the flock and started following other teachings, particularly those of some who formerly had been members of the Society’s headquarters family in New York city, but who had proved unfaithful. With these developments, our work suffered a decline in Panama, and by 1930 only a handful were faithfully attending the congregational meetings and reading The Watch Tower. Still, the Christian congregations in Panama City and Colón were never dissolved.
In 1931, Brother J. F. Rutherford, the Watch Tower Society’s second president, passed through Panama on his way to California. He spoke to the few interested ones in the Canal Zone towns of La Boca and Cristobal. Present were some of those who had expressed dissatisfaction with the way the Society was being run. This meeting proved to be a deciding factor for these and there began a falling away, which was completed when they refused to identify themselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses, the name adopted by the Bible Students in 1931. From then on the unfaithful ones formed their own group. This proved to be a blessing to the faithful few. Said one: “It was the first time in years that we felt completely at ease in the meetings, completely in harmony with the Lord and with one another.”
In 1938, Brother T. E. Banks of the Society’s branch office in Jamaica visited Panama and did what he could to strengthen the congregations here. The Kingdom-preaching work continued, but with very little increase, and with the Spanish field virtually untouched. Something was urgently needed! What? The Watch Tower Bible School of Gilead would furnish the answer and bring about a real turning point for the Kingdom work in Panama in 1945.
MISSIONARIES ARRIVE
On a fine summer day in February 1945, a Pan American Airways plane rolled to a halt at Albrook Air Force Base, Canal Zone. Among the passengers alighting were a middle-aged man and woman carrying briefcases. A group of the faithful Witnesses warmly welcomed Brother and Sister Roy W. Harvey, the first Gilead School graduates to reach Panama. In early 1945 there were 45 Kingdom proclaimers in this land. Just three Christian congregations then functioned in the entire country. These were in Panama City, Colón and Bocas del Toro.
It was necessary to find a suitable home for Gilead missionaries that were soon to follow the Harveys, some from their own second class. Brother Harvey was to be a “servant to the brethren,” or circuit overseer, visiting congregations to help them to achieve better organization for the furtherance of the Kingdom interests. When not traveling, Brother and Sister Harvey were associated with the congregation in Panama City.
Shortly afterward, Brother Donald Kjorlien arrived and was assigned to missionary work in Colón. Still later, in September 1945, four more missionaries arrived. They were Anna Mueller, Thelma Hultquist, Mary Dobrowalsky and Ada Anderson, all of whom started their missionary work in Panama City. With the arrival of the missionaries, the vast majority of the country’s population was to have its first opportunity to hear the Kingdom message in its own language​—Spanish. Only Brother Kjorlien knew Spanish, though. The other missionaries needed to learn that language. And learn it they did!
Near the end of 1945, Hazel Burford, Sylvia Prescott and Ellen Kienbaum arrived and were sent to Colón. By means of a local attorney, Brother Harvey had gotten legal status for the Society. Everything was set up for the increase, and the people began to respond. By the end of 1945 there were 53 Kingdom publishers in the country. Return visits had increased in number from a total of 1,657 during the previous year to 3,879 in 1945, and Bible studies had risen from 32 to 113. The missionary work was under way in Panama with telling effect.
BRANCH OFFICE ESTABLISHED
At the beginning of the year 1946, Mary Hinds, Sister Burford’s partner, who had been left in New York with the flu, arrived on the isthmus and was assigned to Colón. In April, N. H. Knorr, the Watch Tower Society’s third president, visited Panama, accompanied by F. W. Franz. To the delight of all, it was announced that the Society was establishing a branch office in Panama. Roy W. Harvey became the country’s first branch overseer. Since 1938, Panama had been under the jurisdiction of the Costa Rican office.
Besides that, during Brother Knorr’s visit a new missionary-home arrangement was put into effect. This greatly increased the missionaries’ feeling of security.
PUSHING OUT WITH THE MESSAGE
Later on in 1946, Brothers Archie Raper and Julius Lewis arrived. Their destination, and that of some others, would be David, Chiriquí Province, in western Panama. This was to be one of the very first assignments of Gilead missionaries away from the large cities and population centers. Brothers Kjorlien and Raper first set up a home, and then Brother Lewis joined them. But the home had room for five. The other two, Al Jacczak and F. E. Harvey, arrived before the year’s end.
In many ways their assignment, David, Chiriquí, was like a frontier town of the early American West. “Cowboys” could be seen herding cattle right through the dusty back streets. This rich, fertile area provided much of the beef, rice and green vegetables used in the country. Of course, the missionaries were interested in seeing what kind of spiritual harvest could be had there, and so began to work in the “field.”​—Compare 1 Corinthians 3:5-9.
Six months later a group had been formed, with nine associated. These new Kingdom publishers were not conducting any Bible studies with others, but were making spiritual progress themselves. Within another six months, three more had been added to the group and by then it was advisable to push out still farther with the Kingdom message.
During 1947 and 1948, the missionaries in David witnessed extensively in just about all the towns and villages in the province of Chiriquí. They placed thousands of our books in the hands of the reading public, and some seeds of truth began to grow.
INTO HIGH GEAR!
Others who took up missionary work here in 1946 were Brother and Sister Roper and their daughter, Mary Lea, as well as Emily Dzurak (now Mrs. Archie Raper), Ethel Coffman and Hope Laier. About this same time, the first Spanish congregation was established in Panama City. The 1945-46 service year ended with 109 publishers, on the average, and a peak of 131. These figures included 23 missionaries and a handful of pioneers. In round figures they had spent 12,000 hours in the Kingdom-preaching work, placing 38,000 books and booklets and 28,000 magazines. Return visits came to 15,000 and, on the average, 214 studies were conducted. Yes, by then the Kingdom work in Panama was shifting into high gear.
During the 1946-47 service year, Panama’s very first circuit assembly was held in Spanish. The five missionaries from David were present and were sufficiently advanced in Spanish to take part on the program. By the end of the year there were nine congregations, six of which were in the interior. By then, there were 175 Kingdom publishers. From early 1945 until the end of the 1947 service year, there had been about a 289-percent increase in their numbers!
In the ensuing years, some missionaries left their assignments for various reasons. There was always a struggle to find adequate meeting places for the congregations. The branch home was moved several times in order to accommodate more missionaries and to have room for the storage of literature. From 1948, when two native special pioneers were appointed, the number of these began to rise steadily. In fact, there has been steady growth in Christian activity through the years.
A NOTABLE GATHERING
In 1948 a district assembly was held on Bocas del Toro, a small island of northwestern Panama. A boat was chartered to carry about a hundred Christian brothers and sisters from Colón and Panama City. On the day for the trip, however, the chartered vessel was conspicuous by its absence. But Jehovah provided another boat and, only an hour or two late, the happy group of 103 Witnesses sailed past the breakwater in Colón harbor into the choppy, azure waters of the Caribbean. As night came, the greater number bedded down on the deck under calm tropical skies, rather than occupying the somewhat dubious-looking bunks below deck. These, in any case, were entirely too few. Many voyagers became seasick and spent the night near the rail. But all survived and were thankful to arrive safely at 2:30 p.m. the following day, after a journey of some 250 miles (402 kilometers).
Circuit overseer Archie Raper came aboard with the news that both our hotel accommodations and assembly place had been canceled. Nevertheless, again Jehovah provided and the boat served as a hotel. Residents of that little island flecked to the wharf. They got to know that Jehovah had an organization in Panama and that his people were different. On that little vessel, there were white Americans, black West Indians, native Spanish-speaking Panamanians, at least one Chinese and people of other races and nationalities, all living and eating together in the close confines of a motor launch. This Christian harmony was something new to the islanders. The whites they had known were the exclusive “reverends” or the Fruit Company bosses, who kept strictly segregated from the polyglot of races that make up Panama’s population.
The assembly hall was just a platform with a roof over it that jutted right out over the waters of the lagoon and was cooled by the trade winds that had free sweep across the assembly location. This gathering started with 99 present and ended with 178 at the public lecture. It was such a success that another was scheduled for the following year.
These and other assemblies, as well as the ever-increasing work of special pioneers, accomplished much in spreading the Kingdom message. The branch office planned to extend the preaching work progressively until it penetrated all the territory. As quickly as publishers who qualified for the special pioneer work became available, these would be sent out, generally to the larger towns first, then to those towns of the next size, and so forth. If any particular town gave promise of producing disciples, more pioneers would be sent in. Where results were negative, the pioneers might be sent elsewhere and that territory given a rest.
1950​—AN EVENTFUL YEAR
Now we come to 1950, the year of the Theocracy’s Increase Assembly in New York city. For the first time, Panama was represented at an international convention. Four native Witnesses were present.
In Panama, the 1950 service year saw a peak of 496 publishers in 14 congregations and various isolated groups. There had been a publisher increase of about 1,000 percent in the first five years of missionary service in Panama!
Early in 1950 Brothers Knorr and Robert E. Morgan had visited Panama. In February, almost immediately after the visit of the brothers from the Society’s headquarters, a national assembly was held in the city of David, Chiriquí. Recalling the trip from Colón and Panama City, Hazel Burford wrote:
‘Several buses went up from Panama City containing brothers from both terminal cities. The trip took some twenty hours over dirt roads full of ruts and chuckholes. Since this was toward the end of the dry season, the powdery dust was inches deep. Those of us who sat over or behind the wheel boxes were sitting in clouds of dust, as the floor of the bus had pulled away from the wheel box a couple of inches. So the dust picked up or stirred up by the wheels poured into the bus. At times, we could not see the front of the bus. We tied handkerchiefs over our noses and mouths in an attempt to strain out some of it, but we breathed and swallowed a goodly portion. When we arrived in David about noon, we were all exactly the same gray dustcolor​—skin, hair and clothes. Obviously, our first need was a shower, which was hospitably provided. Soon we all emerged with our true identity.
‘The assembly was fine, as always. It resulted in a tremendous witness to the people of David and vicinity and was a real stimulus to our brothers there. Knowing the condition of our bus, on the return trip we packed wet gunnysacks around the wheel boxes and so prevented much of the dust from entering the bus.’
A GLIMPSE AT MISSIONARY LIFE
After these missionaries returned from a vacation and the Theocracy’s Increase Assembly, four of them went to a new assignment in Chitré. Looking back to that time, Mary Hinds, a pioneer since 1930, wrote:
‘At the end of August, Hazel and I were packed and waiting for the arrival of an interested person to bring his truck and move us. He arrived later than we anticipated. But before we could be on our way, he had to wash down the truck. It had been used to transport cattle the previous day. A stop on the highway to change tires delayed our arrival in Panama City, where we were to pick up Ellen Kienbaum. Carolyn Grenz followed later. We also obtained a supply of canned goods, as we had heard that fresh fruits and vegetables were very scarce in our new assignment. After eating lunch at the branch, we were off.
‘Getting there was more than half the fun! The truck driver’s wife accompanied us and, since only three persons could ride in the cab, the other two had to crawl in back with the furniture. During the last half of the journey, the driver’s wife and I were in the back, just in front of the endgate, sitting on a mattress on a table turned upside down and with a tarpaulin taut above us. Rain overtook us; so the driver stepped on the gas, thinking that speed would prevent the rain’s running down into the back end of the truck. We caught the brunt of it​—not only the rain, but also the terrific jolts over that rough road.
‘Nightfall found us unloading things under the scrutinizing glances of the neighbors. We spent the night on the mattresses spread on the floor of the apartment. Our two bedrooms, large dining-living room and the kitchen on one end of the porch all were cupboardless. Wooden shutters covered the windows. Necessity was laid upon us to ply our skills at carpentering. Hazel and Ellen screened the windows and made screen doors. A little later, Hazel and I made cupboards for the kitchen and wardrobes for the bedrooms.
‘We learned that our water supply was piped in from the nearby river, where people bathed, swam and washed their clothes. There, too, cattle drank and pigs wallowed. Whether it was clear or chocolate in color, we boiled every drop of our drinking water for fifteen minutes, then let the sediment settle, and we never had amoebas or dysentery during our more than two years there. Pulp of a species of cactus prevalent in that section was employed to clear the dirt out of the water we used for washing clothes.’
Describing something of the local life-style and the people, Sister Hinds continued: ‘Chitré​—capital of progressive, agricultural Herrera Province—​was the meeting place of old and new civilizations! Here is where mud walls of thatch-roofed huts with dirt floors stand beside modern chalets of concrete block walls, tile roofs and glazed tile floors; where witch doctors practice alongside modern medics; where cattle from barren pastures, driven over dusty city streets to the river below to quench their thirst during the summer months, were just a stone’s throw from others of their species in modernly equipped pasture lots with running water.
‘Here was a town where Catholicism had dominated with such a stranglehold that people feared to read the Bible, much less discuss it; feared to refrain from keeping a wake for days after the death of a relative in order to appease the spirit of such a one; feared to provoke the priest in any way that would bring his disfavor and resultant prohibition of their being buried in “holy ground”; feared to violate any tradition that had been taught them.
‘It was a marketplace for campesinos (country folk), who arrived by chiva (small homemade buses) with large pans of eggs atop the head, or by horseback with side baskets filled with produce, even pigs. Sometimes they were leading a second pack animal tied to the tail of the one in front. Or they came by foot, carrying baskets of produce over the shoulder. In exchange for the produce, they preferred silver coins to paper money. Here was the home of a humble, lovable people, reared with the custom of sharing whatever they possessed and expecting to be accorded the same courtesy by others, the home of a hardworking people, most of whom eked out a living by tilling the soil in the sweat of the brow. This was to be our territory for somewhat over two enjoyable years.’
The missionaries were there to tell the populace the good news. Would this be easy? Wrote Sister Hinds: ‘Now the problem was, how to reach the heart of this people. The literature placed by others who had gone out to scatter the seed of truth during vacation periods prior to our arrival had stirred up the resident priest. So we found ourselves in a hornets’ nest of prejudice. “Don’t listen to those people.” “Don’t read their literature.” “Spit on them.” “Pelt them with stones.” “If you read the Bible half through you will go crazy.” The priest had said it! Understandably, when the people saw us coming, they would run and hide.
‘Unintentionally, insult was added to injury in this way: Answering my knock at a certain door one morning was a slender, tall, sickly looking person dressed in what looked to me like a long dirty gown. By the feminine endings on my Spanish words, I addressed this figure as a “poor little lady” and asked if she was sick. Invited inside, I found this to be the priest! What a dressing down I received, as he accused me of being a Yankee imperialist there to mislead the people and bribe them away from their religion! That man left no stone unturned to give us trouble.’
Nevertheless, Christian zeal and neighbor love won out, as Sister Hinds explained: ‘Kindness, patience, empathy. How necessary and how effective! Before many days had passed, people were calling us into their homes and asking why the priest was so against us. Little by little, their confidence was gained. So, after a few home Bible studies, Señor Ramos had courage to ask me: “Was the flood of Noah’s day before or after 1914?” From her low banquito (bench), María queried: “Why is it a sin to eat meat on Friday?” Many were the questions just that simple, but this was the first time that they had been answered. Soon the four of us were conducting all the home Bible studies we could adequately care for. . . .
‘Health problems? Oh, yes, missionaries are not immune. But we found an excellent doctor who was acquainted with tropical ailments and who endeared himself to our hearts by his whole-souled interest in us, as demonstrated by his morning and night home visits until he was satisfied that his patient was recovering​—all of this without extra charge after his first visit. So Doctor Rojas Sucre pulled Hazel through malaria and me through a stubborn case of influenza, which I found to be far more treacherous in the tropics than in a moderate clime.’
After twenty-eight months in Chitré, a newly formed congregation was left to the direction of dedicated native brothers. The missionaries were reassigned, two of them to the Canal Zone.
YEARS OF MARKED INCREASE
In the first half of 1951, George A. Luning, a graduate of Gilead School’s twelfth class, was assigned to Panama. On June 1 he became Panama’s second branch overseer. However, Brother Luning soon became ill and was unable to continue for more than a few months. So George Papadem, previously branch overseer in Cuba, was sent to Panama and became the third branch overseer here. But Brother Luning remained in Panama as a missionary.
At that time there was just one congregation in the Canal Zone. It was in the town of Gamboa and consisted of black brothers employed by the Canal Company. But among the white, largely American population employed in the Zone very little had been done. Hence, in 1952 Hazel Burford and Mary Hinds were assigned to work in the Canal Zone towns. About a year and a half later a congregation was formed in Balboa. It consisted of the two missionaries and five congregation publishers​—all sisters. The number of Kingdom proclaimers in this congregation has fluctuated as military men, whose wives were in the truth, would finish their tour of duty and move away, or others, employed in the Zone, would leave. In time, another congregation was established in Paraiso, a Canal Zone town for local rate employees.
From 509 in 1952 the number of Kingdom publishers grew to 906 in 1955, an increase of nearly 78 percent. The period from 1951 saw the arrival of a number of missionary sisters, and some others. Among these were Dorell Swaby and Fay Goodin from Costa Rica; Mavis Myers from Jamaica and Frances Taylor, Doris Beals and Mildred Tyler from the United States. Some were sent to interior towns, and so new territories began to be worked. The good effects of this were apparent from the increase to 31 congregations by the end of 1955.
Early in 1955, Brother Papadem was transferred to the branch office in Mexico and Archie Raper, who had been in circuit work here for some time, was appointed as branch overseer in this country. Brother F. E. Harvey was assigned to the circuit work at that time, to serve all the Spanish congregations, which by then numbered about twenty, including some isolated groups. A few months later, Brother W. R. Gilks, a graduate of Gilead School’s fourteenth class also was assigned to the circuit work. We then had three circuit overseers, and the district work was being done by the branch overseer. At that time there were three circuits, with 31 congregations and a goodly number of isolated groups.
Steady progress was maintained during the period from 1955-1960. The special pioneer work was emphasized, and by the end of 1960 these full-time preachers numbered more than forty. Also, we then had 21 missionaries in Panama.
NEW BRANCH FACILITIES
In 1957 we received authorization to construct a new branch office and missionary home having a Kingdom Hall with a seating capacity of some three hundred. This structure was ready for dedication when Brother M. G. Henschel visited us in January of 1958. The missionary family, as well as those in the office, and all the local congregations were delighted with the fine new facility. It proved to be a real boon to the advancement of the Kingdom work in Panama.
By 1960 there were 1,231 Kingdom publishers in Panama. There had been almost a 36-percent increase in five years. New congregations had sprung up, too, as those associated with isolated groups developed greater spirituality and some brothers qualified for congregational responsibility. So by 1960 there were 41 congregations and some isolated groups. To meet a growing need, Dimas Alvarez was selected from the special pioneer ranks to become the country’s second native circuit overseer. Shortly thereafter, David Sanchez, also formerly a special pioneer, took up the circuit work. By that time, the Kingdom work was making itself felt in virtually every part of Panama.
A TIME TO EDIFY
After increasing from 45 publishers early in 1945 to 1,231 in 1960, it seemed that the time had come for consolidating the gains made and for edifying those already in the truth. So from 1960 to 1965 there was an increase of only 95 publishers.
This does not mean that our work was slacking off. Not at all! Preaching activity continued to be pushed in the entire territory. There simply was less response. Unsettled political conditions during this period may have affected our work to some extent.
PREACHING ACTIVITY INCREASES
Healthy growth occurred from 1966 to 1970. The number of Kingdom publishers had risen to an average of 1,781 by the end of 1970, with 45 congregations and about 16 isolated groups in Panama. Most of this increase was attributable to the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life and to the enthusiastic work of the publishers and pioneers in placing it and starting Bible studies.
Increase continued during the years 1971 to 1976. In April 1971 we passed the 2,000-publisher mark for the first time. Little increase was noted in 1972 and 1973, but 1974 saw a 15-percent rise in the number of those announcing Jehovah s kingdom. During the 1975 service year, we had a monthly average of 2,686 preachers of God’s Word, a 16-percent increase over the previous year. And during April 1976, 3,028 happy Kingdom proclaimers reported preaching activity.
A TIME TO BUILD
In earlier years, we encountered difficulty in finding adequate meeting places. But by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness this problem has been surmounted. For example, there is a fine Kingdom Hall in our branch building right in the center of Panama City. From 1959 to mid-1976, at least thirty-eight Kingdom Halls were either constructed anew, or buildings were bought and remodeled as places of assembly. So by 1976 the majority of our congregations were meeting in their own Kingdom Halls.
Growth of the Kingdom-preaching work in Panama also has increased the need for literature storage space. First in 1970, and again in 1975, some expansion and remodeling work was done at the branch office to meet this need. Mainly, this work was done by brothers who contributed their time and energy. We had thought that the building completed in 1958 would provide ample storage space, but we did not foresee the almost unbelievable increase in the quantity of literature that would be placed in spreading the good news in this land. Today, with about three times the original space, we still lack sufficient room to keep on hand a two-year supply of Bibles, books and booklets. If necessary, we are willing to make further adjustments so that an adequate supply of Bible literature will be on hand for the preaching work in Panama.
SPIRITUALITY ENHANCED
Highpoints in the theocratic history of Panama include spiritually upbuilding visits by brothers from the Watch Tower Society’s headquarters and by zone servants. We will never forget the “God’s Sons of Liberty” International Assembly held here in December 1966. Some 600 visitors came from many nations and all but one of the Watch Tower Society’s directors were present. This assembly was held simultaneously in English and Spanish.
Another feature of the educational work of the Society that has contributed appreciably to the spirituality of the Christian witnesses of Jehovah here, as elsewhere, has been the Kingdom Ministry School. The first classes were composed of congregational overseers and special pioneers, both brothers and sisters. However, the course now is for Christian elders. Such training has had a most healthy effect on the work here. It has brought about better congregational organization and has given overseers greater insight into the principles of the Bible.
SUFFERING AS CHRISTIANS
Through the years, there have been sporadic instances of Witness children being expelled from school. Why? Because of their position concerning worshipful acts before national emblems and the singing of songs containing prayerful sentiments for part of this present system of things. In more recent years, the insistence of the authorities that Jehovah’s people conform to their customs has intensified. But, of course, true Christians maintain neutrality as regards politics and they shun all forms of idolatry.​—Deut. 5:8-10; John 15:19; 18:36; 1 Cor. 10:14.
On May 20, 1971, after a group of children of Jehovah’s Witnesses refused to salute the flag or sing the anthem in school, this was reported in the press. Also, circuit overseer Pedro Cordoba and three other male Witnesses (one of them a fifteen-year-old minor) were detained by members of the National Guard. These Christians were pushed about and insulted by a drunken major, and later transferred to the jail in Panama City. After nearly a week, the judge of the juvenile court released the minor in custody of his parents. The others were released after a few weeks with no formal charges lodged against them.
A lawyer engaged to take the case of the imprisoned brothers was verbally abused before one of the highest authorities of the nation, a cabinet member. Why? Because the attorney tried to show him that the law cited as the basis of the charge was not applicable to the case. It appears that there is no law in the statute books of Panama that directly indicates obligation to salute the flag or sing the anthem.
REWARDS OF PERSEVERANCE
Despite any problems encountered in practicing true Christianity, Kingdom proclaimers in Panama have persevered in preaching the good news and Jehovah has blessed their efforts. The value of perseverance is well illustrated in an experience enjoyed by Emily Raper. She writes:
‘Ten years ago I began a Bible study with a woman who had become the mistress of a well-to-do married man. She had a son about twelve or thirteen years of age at the time and he would sit in on the study. This woman began coming to our meetings and brought her son, though he became rebellious as he began to find out what the real situation was with his mother and supposed father. She very much wanted to leave the man and dedicate her life to Jehovah, but the obstacles were almost too great for her. She had no legal papers and no chance of getting a job without them. The man even threatened to commit suicide to dissuade her from making a change. Heaped upon all of this were the insults and threats of the man’s children by his legal wife, as they blamed this woman for ruining their father’s life. After several years, the Bible study was discontinued, although I still kept visiting her from time to time to offer encouragement and take her the latest issues of our magazines. In the meantime, her health was breaking down and the boy was becoming a delinquent, drinking heavily and running with a wild crowd. What could she do?
‘Well, about this time the government changed and a law was put into effect requiring all foreigners to get their residence papers in order or get out of the country. By this time the boy had married, and so the three of them left Panama without leaving any forwarding address. Had my seven years of labor with them been all in vain?
‘After three years of wondering what had happened to them, a letter arrived that gave us an unforgettable thrill. The son and his wife had been baptized and had even participated in the temporary pioneer service, while the mother was preparing for baptism at the next circuit assembly. Some time later, we had the privilege of visiting them. Oh, what a thrill it was to see how this family had changed! The mother had just finished a period of temporary pioneering and the son was busy practicing a part in one of our assembly dramas. This now was a well-ordered and happy family. Surely Jehovah had blessed them and had made the truth grow in their hearts.’
In time, this former immoral mistress married a Christian man and thus came to enjoy wedded life in a home founded on Bible principles. Interestingly, through the years Jehovah’s Witnesses in Panama have performed the marriages of about 850 couples. Perhaps half, or more, of these couples had been living in a consensual relationship and were legally married after one or both of them learned Bible principles and desired to comply with these in order to be baptized in symbol of a dedication to God.
PAST AND PROSPECTIVE BLESSINGS
Doubtless many other sincere Panamanians will yet dedicate their lives to Jehovah. God has blessed us richly through the years as we have sought to make disciples, and we are confident that he will bless our future efforts in proclaiming the Kingdom message.
The influx of Jehovah’s praisers has accelerated with the passing of time. It took about fifty-five years to reach the first thousand Kingdom publishers in Panama. That happened by 1955. Another sixteen years passed before we reached the two-thousand mark, in 1971. However, only about five years later​—in March 1976—​we reached the 3,000-publisher mark.
Now over 3,000 strong, the Kingdom proclaimers in Panama look to the future with confidence in Jehovah’s continued blessing. It is our prayer that we will remain loyal to our God, doing the work he has entrusted to his people. We know that such activity will result in rich rewards, for “a man of faithful acts will get many blessings.”​—Prov. 28:20.

