Kingdom News No. 31
Are We Nearing Armageddon?
ARMAGEDDON—Not a Reason to Fear, but to Hope!
World events in fulfillment of prophecy show that we are deep into the “last days,” in “critical times hard to deal with.” (2 Timothy 3:1-5) This means that we are nearing the Biblical “Armageddon.” (Revelation 16:16) The magazine Family Weekly noted that many “believe that the social order is collapsing, with Armageddon just around the corner.”
However, the approach of Armageddon should not be a cause for fear, but for real hope! Why? Because Armageddon is God’s war to cleanse the earth of all wickedness, paving the way for a bright, prosperous new order! The Bible explains that then the righteous “will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”—Psalm 37:11.
With bad conditions forever gone, every day of life then will be a delight. Not even sickness or death will mar the happiness of people. God will “wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”—Revelation 21:4.
How can you be confident that a better world is near?
Millions of people have gained such confidence by regularly reading The Watchtower and Awake! Each year more than 400 million copies are printed in over 100 languages. These magazines point readers to the fulfillment of Bible prophecies that show how Armageddon will soon open the way to eternal blessings for all lovers of righteousness.
The Watchtower November 1, 1981
“The End of the World”—Something to Fear or to Hope For?
The issue at the left contained convincing evidence that Armageddon is something to hope for. Some of the other subjects in recent issues of “The Watchtower” were:
• THE BIBLE—Can We Believe It Today?
• CHRIST’S RETURN—How? When?
• DO ALL RELIGIONS LEAD TO GOD?
• SICKNESS—What Hope for Relief?
• RIVALRY BETWEEN WORLD POWERS—Did the Bible Foretell It?
Awake! November 8, 1981
Will There Ever Be a Real Paradise
In addition to the fascinating issue shown here, “Awake!” has covered these vital topics:
• THE BROTHERHOOD OF MAN—Just a Dream?
• WORLD WAR III—Can Anybody Stop It?
• YOU CAN FIGHT DEPRESSION!
• MARRIAGE OR “LIVING TOGETHER”—Which Is Better?
• “I SURVIVED THE TITANIC”—But Will You Survive a Greater Disaster?
Did you miss any of the above articles? You will not want to miss the coming issues.
‘They don’t beat around the bush’
The Watchtower February 1, 1981
Can You Love Your Neighbor and Smoke?
Awake! March 22, 1981
Does Religion Belong in Politics?
One reader said: “The Watchtower and Awake! are my ‘lifelines.’ I would not want to be without them.” Another wrote:
“I wanted to tell you that I think your magazines are very interesting and also very helpful when it comes to finding out Bible principles. . . . I’m a Catholic and I don’t think I’ve ever heard or seen the Bible and its glorious message proclaimed in quite the way the Witnesses do it. Even though people are prejudiced and though the times are hard, I hope that you will be able to continue in your work. I’ve been to different churches and it feels good knowing that there’s someone out there who doesn’t beat around the bush when it comes to the Bible and its meaning. It’s a refreshing change.”
You also can have these two Bible-based journals delivered to your home by filling in and mailing the accompanying coupon.
Please send a year’s subscription for The Watchtower and Awake!; I enclose $8 (U.S.). (Contribution subject to change.) For mailing this coupon I am to receive three free booklets.
[Picture on page 2]
AFTER ARMAGEDDON—a marvelous new order of peace and security

