Announcements
“SEPARATING TO THE RIGHT” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This is the twelfth annual campaign for taking subscription for The Watchtower. February, the second month of the campaign, has been set aside as a special Testimony Period entitled “Separating to the Right”. Thoughtful readers of this magazine know there is no better Bible publication than The Watchtower for helping people to be separated to the right of the King Jesus Christ in this judgment day of the nations. As an added inducement to the public to subscribe, a premium of 8 assorted booklets is offered with every year’s subscription for The Watchtower at the regular rate of $1, American money. To persons already subscribing for The Watchtower a year’s subscription for the companion magazine Awake! may be offered, however without the premium added. We especially invite our Watchtower readers one and all to join in this campaign during February. A postcard to us will bring instructions and references to local fellow campaigners. Yes, by all means, report on our form the success with which Jehovah God blesses your activities during February.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 2: “Stick to Your Work,” ¶1-24 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15, 1950.
Week of April 9: “How to Stick to It,” ¶1-21 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15, 1950.
SAVE
your personal or home copy of each issue of The Watchtower. Do not throw them away, but preserve them in a binder or drawer or on library shelves. At the end of each year, in its December 15 issue, The Watchtower contains an index of subjects and an index of all the scriptures cited, quoted and commented upon in all the leading articles throughout the year. By saving your copies and keeping them in date order you will have an invaluable reference library for consultation in your study of the Bible. Organized companies should preserve copies in the library of their local Theocratic ministry course school.
FOREIGN-LANGUAGE SUBSCRIPTIONS
When writing the Society regarding a Watchtower or Awake! subscription in a language other than English, the foreign language should be clearly indicated (as, Greek, Spanish, or Polish, etc.). This is especially necessary when sending in changes of address and subscription renewals, using other than the regular renewal slips. Renewal slips with no foreign language indicated are always believed to be English, hence considerable trouble and delay may be caused if a foreign-language subscription is desired. Be sure to indicate the language plainly in all correspondence and in upper right-hand corner on all renewal slips. It will greatly facilitate the work in the office if you use the renewal slips that are sent with your magazine. Your correspondence with the Society’s office at Brooklyn will be given quicker attention if you write in the English language whenever possible.

