An Enthusiastic Response!
1 Christian families everywhere have expressed their enthusiastic appreciation for the video Young People Ask​—How Can I Make Real Friends? A father in the United States said that after viewing it his sons sat silently​—they could relate to everything in the video! A report from Malawi says that young brothers and sisters there could also relate to it because they experience the same pressures from their peers at school. A father in Germany said of the video: “I consider it an answer to my prayers.” A youth said: “Thank you for reminding me that Jehovah does care about me.” An elder in New Zealand reported: “It helped one of our teenagers get back on the road to life.” A married adult watched it and said: “How I wish every young person in the truth would see this video and be moved to make the truth his own!” Families, why not watch it again? Afterward, discuss together the following questions.
2 Introduction: What is a true friend?​—Prov. 18:24.
3 Roadblocks to Friendship: How can you overcome the feeling of being left out? (Phil. 2:4) Why must you be willing to improve your personality, and who can help you to do that? What will open up opportunities to make more friends, and where can they be found?​—2 Cor. 6:13.
4 Friendship With God: How can you develop a relationship with Jehovah, and why is it worth the effort? (Ps. 34:8) Who can best strengthen your friendship with God?
5 The Wrong Kind of Friends: Who are bad associates? (1 Cor. 15:33) How can the wrong friends lead one into spiritual ruin? What does the Bible account about Dinah teach you?​—Gen. 34:1, 2, 7, 19.
6 A Modern-Day Drama: How did loneliness affect Tara? How did she justify her association with worldly youths? To what dangers did they expose her? Why did her parents fail to see the danger she was in, but with what attitude did they help her to recover spiritually? How did a pioneer sister prove to be a real friend to Tara? Why must Christians heed Proverbs 13:20 and Jeremiah 17:9? What important lesson did Tara learn?
7 Conclusion: What lessons have you learned from this video? How can you use it to help others?​—Ps. 71:17.

