Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting April 8
Song 39
13 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage everyone to view the video Young People Ask​—How Can I Make Real Friends? in preparation for the discussion at the Service Meeting the week of April 22. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to present the April 15 Watchtower and the April 22 Awake! In each case, show a different way to handle the conversation stopper “I have my own religion.”​—See Reasoning book, pages 18-19.
12 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Work What Is Good Toward All.”a After the question-and-answer discussion, interview one or two publishers who tell how they are expanding their ministry.
Song 157 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 15
Song 101
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Pioneers Keep Assisting Others. Service overseer holds a panel discussion with a Congregation Book Study overseer, a pioneer, and a publisher. The service overseer reviews the Pioneers Assist Others program as outlined in the September 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4. Then he discusses with each one on the panel his or her role in the program and how it is serving its purpose. What has been done to make it a success? The service overseer invites all publishers to let him know if they want to receive assistance in the ministry. Those who were assisted in the past may be included again to receive further help in another feature of the ministry.
20 min: “The Joys of Full-Time Service.”b Encourage youths to apply for auxiliary pioneering through the spring and summer months.
Song 199 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 22
Song 90
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8, have a ministerial servant demonstrate how to present the May 1 Watchtower and have a sister show how to present the May 8 Awake! After each demonstration, restate the opening sentence or two that was used to arouse the householder’s interest.
10 min: Be on Time! A talk. Activities associated with our worship and service are important affairs, calling for “an appointed time.” (Eccl. 3:1) We want to derive the fullest benefit from theocratic provisions. Congregation meetings and meetings for service should begin promptly at the designated times. Jehovah is never late in carrying out his activities. (Hab. 2:3) Do we need to improve in this regard? Occasionally, individuals may be unavoidably delayed. But with good organization, we need not be habitually late, arriving after the opening song and prayer of a meeting or after field service arrangements have already been made. Discuss practical ways to cultivate better habits that will ensure our being prompt for all spiritual activities.​—See June 15, 1990, Watchtower, page 29.
25 min: “An Enthusiastic Response!”c In paragraph 1, allow the congregation to add some brief expressions about the video Young People Ask​—How Can I Make Real Friends? Then get right into an audience discussion of each question presented in paragraphs 2-7. In June we will review the video Our Whole Association of Brothers.
Song 191 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 29
Song 162
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for April.
15 min: “Kingdom Preaching Helps Save Lives!”d Draw comments from the audience on how the scriptures apply.
20 min: Research Using the Reasoning Book. Audience discussion. Questions often arise in the ministry about topics that are not listed under “Principal Subjects” (pages 5-6) in the Reasoning book. The “Index” (pages 439-45) is very useful in locating Scriptural support for our beliefs. Invite audience to participate in finding answers to the following questions by looking in the index under each italicized word: What is a Christian’s view of national anthems and flags? Why does God permit disasters? How can you explain the Bible’s view of divorce? Why and when do sisters sometimes need to wear a head covering? What is the origin of Mother’s Day? How do we know that 144,000 is a literal number in the Bible? What does the parable of the rich man and Lazarus mean? Encourage everyone to use the Reasoning book in the ministry.
Song 28 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 6
Song 141
10 min: Local announcements. Discuss “Continue Benefiting From The Watchtower and Awake!”
10 min: Planning Ahead for Summer. Talk and audience discussion. Outline activities usually planned for summer: attending the entire district convention, auxiliary pioneering one or more months, making improvements around the house, and perhaps enjoying a vacation or some recreation. Invite a few to relate their summer plans and how they will make sure that they do not neglect their family study, congregation meetings, and field service, even if traveling elsewhere. If the congregation has seldom-worked territory, announce what arrangements are being made for thorough coverage. Remind all to make sure that the Congregation Book Study overseer receives their field service reports, regardless of whether they are at home or away.
25 min: “Spiritually Strong Families​—How?”e After discussing the article, relate some practical experiences from the February 15, 1999, Watchtower, pages 10-12.
Song 17 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

