Spiritually Strong Families​—How?
1 Christian families are commended for ‘practicing godly devotion in their own households.’ (1 Tim. 5:4) However, with so many bad influences around us that can weaken our faith, it is vital that families work hard to remain spiritually strong. How can this be accomplished?
2 Exercise Christlike Headship: Family heads need to imitate Jesus Christ in the way they shoulder their responsibility to strengthen their households. More than giving a onetime demonstration of his love for us through his sacrificial death, Jesus continually “feeds and cherishes” the congregation. (Eph. 5:25-29) Loving parents follow this example of tender care by seeing to the day-to-day spiritual needs of their families. This includes holding a family Bible study each week, having rich spiritual discussions whenever possible, and addressing problems as they arise.​—Deut. 6:6, 7.
3 In the Field Ministry: All family members should appreciate that witnessing to others about Jehovah and his purposes is an important part of their worship. (Isa. 43:10-12) If you parents want your children to be faithful Witnesses of Jehovah, you must start very early in preparing their heart for the ministry. Discuss the reasons why there is a need to be self-sacrificing in the service and to engage in it each week. (Matt. 22:37-39) Then make arrangements for them to share regularly with you in the field ministry.
4 Build appreciation for the preaching work by setting aside time during the weekly family study to prepare and rehearse an effective presentation. Give your children individualized training in the ministry, helping them to make advancement according to their age and ability. After spending time together in service, discuss how they saw Jehovah’s goodness firsthand. Relate faith-strengthening experiences. The more that families “have tasted that the Lord is kind,” the closer they will be to Jehovah, fortifying them to resist “all badness.”​—1 Pet. 2:1-3.
5 At the Meetings: How fine it is when family members help one another to attend all congregation meetings, especially if one of them is feeling tired, discouraged, or overwhelmed! “When my father comes home from work, he is tired,” remarked one young sister. “But I share with him a good point that will be talked about at the meeting that evening, and it encourages him to go. Then when I feel tired, he encourages me to go.”​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
6 Doing Things Together: Families should do things together, such as helping with household duties. Time should also be set aside for well-chosen recreation. Picnicking, hiking, playing games, and traveling to visit relatives or friends can provide happy moments and fond memories to look back on.​—Eccl. 3:4.
7 Stalwart Christian families overcome the daily challenges to their spirituality. By drawing even closer to Jehovah, they experience the power that he supplies.​—Eph. 6:10.

