The Joys of Full-Time Service
1 As a young person, you have no doubt given some thought to your future. Proverbs 21:5 tells us that “the plans of the diligent one surely make for advantage.” It will be to your advantage to give serious thought to your goals in life. As you make your plans for the future, consider taking up the full-time service. Why?
2 Ask some adults who pioneered during their younger years what their impressions are and invariably they will say the same thing: “Those were the best years of my life!” A brother who experienced the joys of full-time service from his young manhood on said in later life: “It is a source of deep satisfaction to look back on the time of youth and be able to say that one has heeded the wise counsel: ‘Remember, now, your grand Creator in the days of your young manhood.’” (Eccl. 12:1) It takes good planning now, by both you and your parents, to work out a way for you to experience this kind of joy in your young manhood or young womanhood.
3 Parents, Encourage Full-Time Service: Jehovah, as a caring Father, shows you exactly which way to go. (Isa. 30:21) In providing such loving guidance, he sets a fine example for you as Christian parents. Instead of leaving it up to your children to choose which way is best for them, wisely train them in the way that they should go so that they will have Jehovah’s blessing. Then, when they grow older, your training will help them “distinguish both right and wrong.” (Heb. 5:14) Adults know from experience that they cannot trust their own judgment; they must rely on Jehovah to make their paths straight. (Prov. 3:5, 6) This need is even greater for youths, who are less experienced in life.
4 Parents, as your children approach the teen years, or even earlier, talk to them realistically about their career goals. School counselors, teachers, and classmates will try to influence them in favor of worldly, materialistic pursuits. Help your children to choose school courses that provide practical training, equipping them to care for their material needs without sacrificing Kingdom interests. (1 Tim. 6:6-11) In many cases, a high school education along with vocational and/​or on-the-job training may be all that is needed to care adequately for one’s necessities while starting out in the regular pioneer ministry.
5 Encourage youths to pursue the gift of singleness. If they later decide to marry, they will be in a better position to assume the heavier responsibilities of marriage. (See paragraph 19 in the June 2001 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, “Can You Make Yourself Available?”) By speaking in a positive way about pioneering, serving where the need is greater, Bethel service, and missionary activity, instill in young people even at an early age a desire to use their lives in a way that pleases Jehovah, benefits others, and brings joy to themselves.
6 Youths, Put Full-Time Service First: Young people, you need not wonder what the pioneer work is like. You can try it on a part-time basis by auxiliary pioneering whenever possible throughout the school year and during vacation periods. Then you will know how satisfying the pioneer service really is! Can you see your way clear to auxiliary pioneer between now and the end of summer?
7 If you are a young brother in God’s organization, also think seriously about reaching out to qualify as a ministerial servant. (1 Tim. 3:8-10, 12) Additionally, decide whether you want to apply for Bethel service or to attend the Ministerial Training School, once you reach the qualifying age. Your experience in the pioneer ministry will teach you valuable lessons, such as how to live by a schedule, how to improve your personal organization, how to get along with others, and how to develop a sense of responsibility. All of this will prepare you for greater privileges of service later on.
8 A key factor in succeeding in full-time service is having a spirit of theocratic industriousness. The apostle Paul encouraged such an attitude, and he pointed out the blessings that would result: “Whatever you are doing, work at it whole-souled as to Jehovah, . . . for you know that it is from Jehovah you will receive the due reward.” (Col. 3:23, 24) May Jehovah bless you with many joys in the full-time service!

