Questions From Readers
▪ Are Jehovah and Jesus the ones meant at Proverbs 30:4, which asks: “What is his name and what the name of his son?”
This verse makes it evident how limited man is compared to the Most High. Its rhetorical questions could be asked about any man, but these questions should lead a reasoning person to the Creator.
The writer Agur asked: “Who has ascended to heaven that he may descend? Who has gathered the wind in the hollow of both hands? Who has wrapped up the waters in a mantle? Who has made all the ends of the earth to rise? What is his name and what the name of his son, in case you know?”​—Proverbs 30:1, 4.
No imperfect human has gone up to heaven and come back omniscient; nor has any human the ability to control the wind, the seas, or the geological forces shaping the earth. In effect, then, Agur asked: ‘Do you know the name or family line of any man who has done these things?’ We must answer no.​—Compare Job 38:1–42:3; Isaiah 40:12-14; Jeremiah 23:18; 1 Corinthians 2:16.
Thus, we have to look outside the human sphere to find one who has the superhuman power to control natural forces. We are not, though, limited to learning about him by observing his accomplishments. (Romans 1:20) This is because he has, as it were, descended with information about himself and his dealings. He has provided specific information. He did this, for example, when he ‘descended’ to give the Law to Moses on Mount Sinai. (Exodus 19:20; Hebrews 2:2) He has also helped his servants to appreciate his meaningful name, Jehovah. (Exodus 3:13, 14; 6:3) Later, he identified his Son, who was named Jesus and who literally descended from heaven with additional information about the Creator.​—John 1:1-3, 14, 18.
This should help all of us to reach certain conclusions: Like Agur, we cannot from our own resources gain true wisdom. (Proverbs 30:2, 3) And we cannot name any human who has superlative powers or knowledge. Hence, we should humbly look to the One who is able to provide the wisdom we need. This is the Most Holy One, whose name we can know and whose Son has died so that we might be ransomed and gain everlasting life.​—Matthew 20:28.

