From Our Readers
Creative Guidance
I have enjoyed the issues of your magazine during the past year more than words can say. As a commercial writer, I continually find creative guidance in your magazine. But most importantly, no matter who or where you are, no matter what your situation​—each time you read the latest issue it’s as if it were written just for you!
L. H., Canada
Employee Fitness
In your issue of December 22, 1983, the little item on “Employee Fitness” caught my eye. The company I work for recently started a suggestion contest, so I clipped the article, added some thoughts as to how a fitness program would work in our area and submitted it. The idea caught on immediately and I won $50. Thanks for such informative articles.
M. O., Oregon
Help With Schoolwork
Recently I was assigned to do research on the subject of comic books, and my teacher told me to go to the public library. I and a friend went there, but we were told no such material was available there. I returned home worried, but to my great relief my mother gave me a copy of the Italian edition of your magazine with the articles on comic books. (English, June 22, 1983) There I got the information I needed. The next day my teacher told the whole class that my research on this assignment was outstanding, and she read my material to the entire class. When she finished reading, all clapped their hands. Thank you for the wonderful magazines.
S. T., Italy
The Pope on the Move
I just had to write you and offer congratulations on the splendid article you wrote about the Pope. (December 8, 1983) The world is not perfect and never will be, but showing his face around the world will help a little. Now let me talk about the important part of my letter. Evidently you do not love your mother. Sounds silly, but that is what you are saying. You know that our Lord LOVES his mother. When he died on the cross he looked down and was thinking of his mother.
R. A. D., Illinois
By all means we have love for our mothers, as the Bible teaches. (Exodus 20:12; Proverbs 6:20) Jesus had great love for his mother, yet he did not encourage others to show preferential treatment to her. When someone said to him: “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside wanting to see you,” Jesus replied: “My mother and my brothers are these who hear the word of God and do it.” (Luke 8:20, 21) True, when Jesus was suffering on the stake, he showed loving concern for his mother, assigning her to the care of a beloved disciple. (John 19:26, 27) But as he was dying his thoughts were turned toward his father, as he stated: “Father, into your hands I entrust my spirit.” (Luke 23:46) He did not encourage us to pay homage to Mary.​—ED.

