Do You Remember?
Have you given careful thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? You may find it interesting to recall the following:
□ How does one ‘come to Jesus’ in harmony with his invitation at Matthew 11:28?
Jesus said: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake and continually follow me.” (Matthew 16:24) Hence, to come to Jesus implies submitting one’s own will to the will of God and Christ, accepting a certain load of responsibility and doing so continually.​—8/15, page 17.
□ Why do only a “few” find the ‘cramped road leading off into life’ that Jesus mentioned at Matthew 7:13, 14?
The narrow road is restricted by God’s laws and principles. Hence, it would appeal only to someone sincerely desiring to conform his life to God’s standards. Although appearing restrictive, the ‘cramped road’ sets a person free in every important respect. Its boundaries are set by “the perfect law that belongs to freedom.” (James 1:25)​—9/1, page 5.
□ How can discernment be cultivated?
Discernment does not come easily or naturally. But with patience, prayer, earnest effort, wise association, study of and meditation on the Bible, and reliance on Jehovah’s holy spirit, discernment can be cultivated.​—9/1, page 21.
□ How can human jealousy be a force for good?
It can move a person to protect a loved one from bad influences. Moreover, humans can properly show jealousy for Jehovah and his worship. (1 Kings 19:10)​—9/15, pages 8, 9.
□ What is meant by the expression at Genesis 50:23 concerning Joseph’s grandsons: “They were born upon Joseph’s knees”?
This could simply mean that Joseph acknowledged the children as his descendants. It could also indicate that he affectionately played with the children, dandling them upon his knees. Fathers today do well to show their children similar affection.​—9/15, pages 20, 21.
□ What is vitally important to a successful marriage and family life?
To achieve such desirable results, marriage partners must always put God’s will first. Doing so, marriage mates try to stick together and work out their problems by applying the counsel of God’s Word. They thus avoid all sorts of heartaches that result when God’s will is ignored. (Psalm 19:7-11)​—10/1, page 11.
□ How crucial today is a godly sense of urgency?
A godly sense of urgency is an integral part of whole-souled service to Jehovah. It wards off and helps thwart the Devil’s attempts to cause God’s servants to ‘get tired and give out in their souls.’ (Hebrews 12:3) It protects them from unnecessary involvement with the world and its materialism, keeping their minds on the things above​—“the real life.” (1 Timothy 6:19)​—10/1, page 28.
□ In the parable of the sheep and the goats, when does Jesus sit down on his throne and why? (Matthew 25:31-33)
The parable does not show him sitting down in the sense of becoming King. Rather, he sits down as Judge. That judging is not something extending over a period of many years. Instead, the parable points to the future when Jesus will in a limited time pronounce and execute judgment on the nations.​—10/15, pages 22, 23.
□ What is the “generation” so frequently referred to by Jesus?
Jesus applied the term “this generation” to the contemporary masses with their “blind guides” who made up the Jewish nation. (Matthew 11:16; 15:14; 24:34)​—11/1, page 14.
□ In the final fulfillment of Jesus’ prophecy at Matthew 24:34-39, to what does the expression “this generation” refer?
Jesus apparently refers to the peoples on earth who see the sign of Christ’s presence but fail to mend their ways.​—11/1, pages 19, 31.
□ How did the arrangement of refuge cities and their restrictions benefit the people in ancient Israel?
It impressed upon the Israelites that they should not be careless or indifferent about human life. It also emphasized the need to show mercy when doing so is warranted. (James 2:13)​—11/15, page 14.
□ What is the antitypical city of refuge?
This is God’s provision for protecting us from death for violating his commandment about the sanctity of blood. (Genesis 9:6)​—11/15, page 17.
□ How can the Christian brotherhood help us to “regain power”? (Isaiah 40:31)
Among our Christian brothers and sisters, there are some who may be facing similar pressures and trials and who may be experiencing feelings much like our own. (1 Peter 5:9) It is reassuring and faith strengthening to know that what we are going through is not uncommon and that our feelings are not unusual.​—12/1, pages 15, 16.

