Righteousness Exalts a Nation
AFTER days of rain, what a pleasure it is to wake up and see the sun shining in a cloudless sky! The earth has been refreshed, and now the vegetation can grow luxuriantly. Jehovah God once used such a picture to illustrate the blessings of righteous rule. To King David he said: “When one ruling over mankind is righteous, ruling in the fear of God, then it is as the light of morning, when the sun shines forth, a morning without clouds. From brightness, from rain, there is grass out of the earth.”​—2 Samuel 23:3, 4.
God’s words proved true during the righteous rule of David’s son, King Solomon. The Bible reports: “Judah and Israel continued to dwell in security, everyone under his own vine and under his own fig tree, from Dan to Beer-sheba, all the days of Solomon.”​—1 Kings 4:25.
Ancient Israel was God’s chosen nation. He gave them his laws and told them that if they obeyed his voice, he would place them “high above all other nations of the earth.” (Deuteronomy 28:1) It was not Israel’s own righteousness but Jehovah’s righteousness that exalted them. The commandments that God gave them were far superior to the laws of the nations around them. As a people, they were just as imperfect as all those nations. Hence, to Jehovah’s superior Law and their strict adherence to it go the credit for their being lifted up above the nations. When they obeyed Jehovah’s laws, they enjoyed his favor and blessing. King Solomon experienced this during his reign. He could say: “Righteousness is what exalts a nation, but,” he warned, “sin is something disgraceful to national groups.”​—Proverbs 14:34.
Sadly, through frequent acts of disobedience, the nation of Israel was brought to a low standing. They suffered national disgrace. This eventually led to their permanent rejection in favor of a new spiritual nation.​—Matthew 21:43.
Spiritual Israel
At a meeting of the Christian governing body in Jerusalem, James, born a Jew, said under inspiration that God had “turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his name.” (Acts 15:14) The apostle Paul called this new Christian nation “the Israel of God.” (Galatians 6:16) Respecting the purpose of their calling, Peter wrote: “You are ‘a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for special possession, that you should declare abroad the excellencies’ of the one that called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.” (1 Peter 2:9) As God’s chosen people, they were to shine as illuminators in the world. Jehovah’s righteousness would set them on high.​—Philippians 2:15.
The selection of these spiritual Israelites can be compared to diamond mining. When rich diamond-bearing ore is brought to the surface, it may yield only 1 carat (.007 ounce [200 mg]) per 3 tons of earth. A method once used to separate the diamonds involved mixing the ore with water and flowing the mixture over tables of grease. Diamonds are water-repellent, and they stuck to the grease while the unwanted material was washed away. At this stage the diamonds were rough. However, when cut and  polished, they reflected light in all directions.
Like water-repellent diamonds that are no part of the matter around them, Jehovah’s people have been separated from the world. (John 17:16) When first drawn to the light, they may have lacked luster. But Jehovah’s Word and spirit create within them a new personality, and they shine as illuminators in this world. It is because of Jehovah’s righteousness that they are set on high and reflect the glorious light of Kingdom truth in all directions, not because of their own righteousness.
Yet, from the latter part of the first century C.E., apostasy crept into the congregations and affected many. So-called Christians became integrated with the nations of the world and could not be distinguished from the world around them.
Today a faithful remnant of spiritual Israelites have been restored to Jehovah’s favor. They have separated themselves from the world and have cleansed themselves “of every defilement of flesh and spirit.” (2 Corinthians 7:1) Being clean and upright before Jehovah, they uphold his righteousness. This has elevated them to a high position of favor above the nations of the world. Through their zealous preaching of the good news of the Kingdom, a great international crowd has been drawn to Jehovah and has become part of his people.​—Revelation 7:9, 10.
The World Can See the Difference
Worldly authorities at times praise the conduct of God’s servants. Some time ago, the chief security officer of the Pretoria Show Grounds, South Africa, commented on the behavior of Jehovah’s Witnesses, from all races, who use those facilities for their annual conventions. Among other things, he wrote: “Everyone was and is courteous, people speaking nicely to one another, the attitude displayed the past few days​—it all testifies to the calibre of the members of your society, and that all live together like one happy family.”
Jehovah’s people can contribute to the righteousness of his nation not only at such large gatherings but also in their private lives. For example, the South Africa branch of the Watch Tower Society received a letter from a lady in Johannesburg, saying: “Last week I drove away with my purse on top of my car. It fell off in Jan Smuts Avenue and was picked up together with all its contents by a member of your congregation, Mr. R—, who phoned and returned it to me. . . . I very much appreciate this honesty which has become a rare commodity in present times and commend your congregation for setting down the principles which your members adhere to.”
Yes, by adhering to Jehovah’s righteous principles, his people are made to stand out as different from the world. Because these exhibit Jehovah’s righteousness, honesthearted ones are drawn to the Christian congregation. It is natural to be attracted to something clean and pure. For example, a stranger once came to a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Zurich, Switzerland, and said that he wanted to become a member of the congregation. He explained that his sister had been disfellowshipped for immorality and added that he wanted to join an organization that “does not tolerate bad conduct.” Even the New Catholic Encyclopedia acknowledges that Jehovah’s Witnesses are known as “one of the best-behaved groups in the world.”
While righteousness uplifts, sin can bring disgrace upon one’s good name, especially if serious wrongdoing becomes known in the community. The Christian congregation at times has to bear the shame heaped upon it when individual members commit gross sin. Understandably, the faithful members of the congregation can defend the good name of the congregation by showing that the wrongdoer has been disciplined in a merciful way, that is, in harmony with Scriptural principles. If someone practices sin and will not repent, he will be excluded from the congregation​—disfellowshipped.​—1 Corinthians 5:9-13.
Why Some Are Disfellowshipped
Though some thousands are disfellowshipped from the Christian congregation each year, it is only a small percentage of the nearly five million Witnesses in the world. Why should such a drastic step be taken against anyone in the Christian congregation? The nature of the wrongdoing is one of the determining factors. But a more important factor is whether the wrongdoer is genuinely repentant over the serious wrong committed. If he truly has been cut to the heart, has turned to Jehovah in heartfelt prayer, begging forgiveness for the sin committed against Him, and has sought the help of the responsible men in the congregation, he may be assisted to regain God’s favor and remain a part of the congregation.​—Proverbs 28:13; James 5:14, 15.
When a child who has a good, healthy relationship with his father does something that grieves the father, both should be quick to restore that precious relationship. Likewise, when we dedicate our lives to Jehovah, we enter into a most precious relationship with him. Hence, when we do something that grieves him, we should act quickly in seeking to restore that relationship with our Heavenly Father.
Happily, some who were in a disfellowshipped state have taken to heart the illustration of the prodigal son. Jehovah is there likened to a loving Father ready to receive a repentant sinner back if that one turns around and seeks God’s forgiveness. (Luke 15:11-24) Genuine, heartfelt repentance and a turning away from what is bad has been a way to return to Jehovah’s favor and the Christian congregation. Some repentant wrongdoers who have felt crushed under the burden of their guilt have been moved to repent and take steps to return to the loving environment of the Christian congregation. Thus they have come to appreciate Jehovah’s words at Isaiah 57:15.
To keep individuals from returning to Jehovah’s loving care, Satan would like to pretend that there is no forgiveness for sins that have been committed. But the ransom sacrifice of Christ Jesus is adequate to cover the sins of any who repent​—yes, even “the whole world’s” inherited sinfulness. (1 John 2:1, 2) The one sin that is not covered by the ransom is sin against God’s holy spirit, which amounts to deliberate rebellion against the operation of God’s spirit, such as the gross sins of Judas Iscariot and many scribes and Pharisees.​—Matthew 12:24, 31, 32; 23:13, 33; John 17:12.
Upholding Jehovah’s Righteousness
Since the remnant of spiritual Israelites were restored to Jehovah’s favor in 1919, they have become more and more elevated from the surrounding world. This is not because of any goodness on their part but because of their willing submission to Jehovah’s laws and standards. As a result, millions of Christ’s “other sheep” have been drawn into association with spiritual Israel as loyal companions. (John 10:16) These people bring glory and honor to Jehovah in a world that is far removed from God’s righteous standards. It is as the South African magazine Personality once observed: “Jehovah’s Witnesses seem to be bursting with good qualities and to be almost free from the bad.”
To maintain this elevated position in an ungodly world, each individual member of the Christian congregation needs to live a clean, upright life before Jehovah. In the Bible, Jehovah’s heavenly organization is pictured by clean things. It is seen as a beautiful woman arrayed with the sun and having the moon under her feet. (Revelation 12:1) The New Jerusalem is described as a holy city, beautiful in appearance. (Revelation 21:2) The faithful members of the bride of Christ are given “bright, clean, fine linen.” (Revelation 19:8) Those of the great crowd are seen “dressed in white robes.” (Revelation 7:9) People inclined toward righteousness are drawn to a clean organization. By contrast, Satan’s organization is unclean. His religious system is pictured as a harlot, and those outside the holy city are described as dirty, unclean.​—Revelation 17:1; 22:15.
Everlasting life is promised to righteous ones. The congregated people upholding Jehovah’s righteousness have the prospect of surviving the end of this wicked system. “The one listening to me . . . will reside in security and be undisturbed from dread of calamity,” God promises at Proverbs 1:33.
How exhilarating it will be when the Greater Solomon, Christ Jesus, rules over that new world in righteousness, in the fear of Jehovah! (2 Peter 3:13) It will be as the light of morning when the sun shines forth, a morning without clouds. All earth’s inhabitants will dwell in security, each one sitting under his own vine and fig tree, as it were. Righteous human society will beautify the earth and occupy its rightful place in the universe to the everlasting praise of our God, Jehovah.​—Micah 4:3, 4; see also Isaiah 65:17-19, 25.
[Picture Credit Line on page 26]
Garo Nalbandian

