“I Am Precious to Jehovah!”
IN THESE “critical times hard to deal with,” many faithful servants of Jehovah endure a constant battle with feelings of worthlessness. (2 Timothy 3:1) This is not surprising, for one of Satan’s “crafty acts” is to make us feel that we are unloved, even by our Creator! (Ephesians 6:11, footnote) Appropriately, the April 1, 1995, issue of The Watchtower contained two articles for congregation study entitled “You Are Precious in God’s Eyes!” and “Incite to Love and Fine Works​—How?” These articles were designed to remind us that Jehovah treasures our efforts. Following are some comments of appreciation that were received:
“Never in my 27 years as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses has a magazine so affected me. I couldn’t help but cry​—these articles brought me such relief. I now feel so loved by Jehovah. It is as if a huge burden is removed from my shoulders.”​—C. H.
“I went over this magazine four times in one day. I enjoyed the way the article said that you were taught a lie if you believe you are of no worth. I’m going to use this article for shepherding and door-to-door preaching.”​—M. P.
“Satan has done an excellent job of making even those who love Jehovah feel worthless and unlovable. To be reminded by the ‘faithful slave’ class that Jehovah loves us deeply and that he appreciates all the small things we do for him is one of the most encouraging things I have read. For many years I have had the feelings you spoke of in these articles. I never felt worthy of Jehovah’s love, so I tried to do more and more in his service as a way of earning that love. But I was motivated by guilt and shame. So no matter how many hours I spent in the ministry, or how many people I helped, I felt it was not enough. I saw only the lack in me. Now when I serve Jehovah out of love, I imagine he is smiling and that he is proud of me. This makes my love for him swell even more and makes me want to do more. Now I experience tremendous joy from my service to Jehovah.”​—R. M.
“These are absolutely the finest, most upbuilding, yes, outstanding articles to touch our hearts that I have ever read! I have been reading The Watchtower for 55 years, and there have been many landmark issues. But this issue surpasses anything we have ever had to allay our misgivings, apprehensions, and fears that we are ‘worthless’ and ‘unloved’ and can never do enough to ‘earn’ Jehovah’s love. This Watchtower contains the kind of spiritual help our brothers desperately need. It is my intention to use these articles over and over again when shepherding.”​—F. K.
“For those of us who struggle with low self-esteem, or even with feelings of self-loathing, it can be so difficult to gather our strength to continue in the truth. This article reflected such a depth of compassion and understanding, it was like an application of soothing, healing balm, right to the heart. How comforting to read such words in The Watchtower and to know without a doubt that Jehovah does understand! Thank you for reminding us that Jehovah doesn’t try to motivate his people through guilt, shame, or fear. Even though my contribution to the preaching work has been severely limited recently by financial troubles and health problems in our family, I am still finding fulfillment in what I am able to do. I find I am much happier in service when I try to let love be my compelling force.”​—D. M.
“I have just finished reading ‘You Are Precious in God’s Eyes!’ Every paragraph brought tears to my eyes. I came from a family that showed little love. I was belittled, teased, and laughed at. So, early in life I felt worthless. I still carry entrenched feelings from my past that beat me down when I experience calamity. When I stopped serving as a congregation elder, I felt like a failure as usual​—to God, my family, and my brothers in the congregation. These feelings don’t go away overnight, but this timely article has helped me regain a measure of balance. It has brightened my outlook.”​—D. L.
“Thank you for the article ‘You Are Precious in God’s Eyes!’ I deal with intense self-hatred and deep feelings of worthlessness, which have their roots in childhood abuse. It is definitely appropriate to view this distorted thinking as a crafty act of Satan himself. It can even crush one’s will to live. I truly must work every day to resist the lie that I am unlovable. This article means more to me than you could possibly know.”​—C. F.
“Today the brothers especially respond to the thought that Jehovah appreciates deeds motivated by love rather than by compulsion or pressure. A consideration of Jehovah’s warm and affectionate personality, his interest in his people as individuals, and the loving manner in which he extends himself is refreshing and motivating. In view of this, as soon as we received the article ‘You Are Precious in God’s Eyes!’ many expressed appreciation. It seems to be opening the way for many to develop a more personal relationship with Jehovah. My wife and I wish to express appreciation for the tone and sensitivity expressed in recent Watchtower magazines. We are working to apply many of these points as we visit the congregations.”​—From a traveling overseer.
“I have been a faithful reader for nearly 30 years, but I have never read anything so inspiring, so uplifting. The powerful, skillfully applied scriptures have helped me to root out the lies concealed in my own feelings, allowing me to draw closer to Jehovah. For many years I served Jehovah out of guilt. I had only a cerebral understanding of the ransom and God’s love. Thank you for such insightful and thoughtful articles. I hope to read many more like them.”​—M. S.
“In all my 29 years of being in the truth, I cannot remember when an article has caused in me such a reaction of gratefulness and deep emotion. Though I was reared with great love and by a caring family, I have never felt worthy of being alive, let alone worthy of serving Jehovah. After this article, I got down on my knees, and with deep sobbing I thanked Jehovah. I will cherish this article forever. I will look at myself differently because now I have the understanding that I am precious to Jehovah.”​—D. B.

