Vol. XX. DECEMBER 15, 1899. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 



Higher Criticism Enthroned— The 

Bible Debased 275 

Dr. DeCosta's Letter to Bishop 

Potter 276 

Evolution Among the Baptists 279 

The Methodists also Distracted 279 

The Year 1900 a Papal Jubilee 279 

Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society's 

Report for 1899 281 

"The True Light Which Lighteth 

Every Man" 283 

"Bless the Lord, O My Soul" 285 

Interesting Letters 286 

Kind Words for Millennial Dawn, 

Vol. V., At-one-ment 287 

Items: Extra Copies of Nov. 1st and 

Dec. lstlssues-Z.W.T. Visits 274 

page 274 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
continually. 



EXTRA COPIES OF NOV. 1ST AND DEC. 1ST ISSUES. 

We have a good supply of extra copies of these issues, and 
shall be pleased to receive lists of addresses of persons likely to 
become interested. We will mail copies to them free; or if our 
readers would prefer to hand them out personally, we will supply 
a number of them to any subscriber who requests them. 

DO YOU DESIRE ZION'S WATCH TOWER VISITS 
-DURING 1900?- 

If so, please respond at once, either enclosing the subscription 
price, or write a postal card requesting its continuance on 
credit— or requesting it free, as per our terms above, if you are 
one of the Lord's Poor. 

ATTENTION TO THIS BEFORE THE EXPIRATION OF YOUR YEAR SAVES 



US MUCH TROUBLE AND SOME EXPENSE. 

Remember that we are desirous of retaining your name upon 
the lists so long as you live and are interested in the writings 
(whether a paying or a free subscriber); but we have no better 
means of knowing of your continued life and interest than by 
your renewal of your subscription. 

WILL WE ACCEPT THREE MONTHS OR SIX MONTHS 
TRIAL SUBSCRIPTIONS? 

We certainly will not refuse them! We are very anxious 
that as nearly as possible the WATCH TOWER subscription lists 
shall represent all who are in sympathy with the harvest message, 
even tho some of them be not as yet fully ready to commit 
themselves unreservedly as fully endorsing our teachings. Urge 
any of this class that are too poor to pay to accept our offer above 
and have its visits regularly, free. But they must make application 
for themselves if able to write. 



R2545 : page 275 

HIGHER CRITICISM ENTHRONED-THE BIBLE DEBASED. 



SO PRONOUNCED is the acceptance of Evolution 
and Higher Criticism in the Episcopal 
Church that the Rev. Benj. F. DeCosta, D.D., has felt 
that he can best serve God and the cause of truth by 
separating himself from the denomination. As heretofore 
set forth in this journal, it is only a question of 
time until all men and women of character and true 
Christian principle will be forced to take similar steps 
out of all denominations,— from the pews as well as 
from the pulpits. We are in the "harvest" time of this 
age, and divine providence is permitting conditions 
which will demonstrate who are "wheat" and who are 
"tares." Such a separation must take place before the 
great symbolic burning day for "tares" can come, and 
before the "wheat" can be glorified as God's Kingdom 
in power. 

"Babylon is fallen, is fallen; come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and that ye 
receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:24.) But there 
is a wide difference between leaving "Babylon" and 
leaving the Lord's Church or Kingdom. All along it 
has been true that "the Lord knoweth them that are 
his:" he knew every consecrated one even tho surrounded 
by the unconsecrated ten or twenty times more numerous. 
Now the Lord will demonstrate what he already 
knows by separating the wheat from the tares. 
However, from the divine standpoint none have ever 
been recognized as the Kingdom class except the faithful 



little flock— the fully consecrated "wheat." And 
this is shown by our Lord's word when again, referring 
to the separation work of this harvest period, he declares 
that "he will gather out of his Kingdom all things that 
offend and them which do iniquity."— Matt. 13:41. 

Evidently, then, it is one thing to gather out of 
Babylon his people, and quite another thing to gather 
out of his Kingdom the offenders: yet both expressions 
cover the same events. The "wheat" have always been 
the heirs of the Kingdom— the "tares" have never been 
such, tho both have grown side by side throughout this 
Gospel age. In the past the "tares" have at least nominally 
professed to be "wheat"— professed faith in our 
Lord's Word and in his redemptive work. But now, under 
divine providence, they are being led of their error 
to repudiate the "wheat" altogether— as "non-critical, 
old fogies." 

They have abandoned both the Book and the Blood 
—not in word, but actually, logically. It is to all a test 
of standing, of holding to the anchorage of faith or of 
being blown by the winds of worldly wisdom, called 
"higher criticism," far, far away from our Savior and 
his inspired Word. 

Really, then, the "tares" leave the "wheat," by 
utterly abandoning the faith once delivered to the saints. 
Thus God gathers them out of or away from his Kingdom 
class. But, since the latter are a minority, they 
must leave the meeting-houses to the majority, who 
thus carry them with them "out of his Kingdom," to 
be places of musical and literary entertainment instead 
of places for worship and for hearing the Word of the 
Lord and for renewal of vows. 

The minority must leave the organizations of Babylon 
also— in order to be faithful to their Lord and his 
Word and to "show forth the praises of him who hath 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light." 
This at first seems a trial— until we learn the difference 
between human organizations and the divine organization, 
and that the former never were instituted nor authorized 
by our Lord or his apostles; and that none of 
them ever were connected with any such human organizations; 
and that to leave the human organizations is 

R2545 : page 276 

merely to leave a "tare" institution of the long ago and 
has no bearing whatever on the real organization of which 
we still remain members, with our names written in 
heaven— in the Lamb's Book of Life.— Heb. 12:23; 
Rev. 13:8. 

DOCTOR DE COSTA'S LETTER TO BISHOP POTTER. 



Doctor DeCosta, in withdrawing from a church 



where he found the friends of the Savior and the Bible 
in a hopeless minority, wrote a letter to the Bishop of 
his diocese, setting forth some of his reasons: and very 
properly he made public the contents of the letter;— 
otherwise his reasons for his action might have been 
misunderstood by some of his friends and misrepresented 
by some not his friends. And a similar privilege and 
duty presents itself to all who withdraw from any division 
of Babylon.* 

We give liberal extracts from Dr. DeCosta's letter, 
believing that it will be of general interest to God's 
people, and well knowing that not only the religious, 
but also the secular press will be loth to give it much 
notice. The truth, let us remember, never has been 
popular with the world, and the "tare" influence, direct 
and indirect, is generally sufficient to either exclude 
such like matter or to ridicule it as "superstitious and 
cranky." The extracts follow:— 

"New York, Oct. 7th, 1899. 
The Rt. Rev. HENRY CODMAN POTTER, D.D., LL.D., 

Bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church, Diocese 
of New York:— 

"DEAR SIR:— I hereby respectfully resign the office 
of Presbyter. 

"It is proper for me to give some reason for this 
course, which, at the end of long years of service, is 
adopted deliberately and in the fear of God. I must 
now, however, confine myself to a few points. In what 
I have to say at this time I desire to speak with entire 
plainness, as well as with kindness and respect; while, 
to avoid any possible misapprehension, I would add 
that I do not resign on account of any personal 
grievance. 

"I cannot reconcile my convictions with the present 
condition of the Episcopal Church, which, contrary 
to its own principles, has been drawn into the adoption 
of a policy of toleration toward a school of theology 
and Biblical criticism which in my judgment is hostile 
to revealed truth. 

"Further permit me to say respectfully that I do 
not find that you have been 'ready with all faithful diligence 
to banish and drive away from the church all erroneous 
and strange doctrines contrary to God's Word;' 
while much less have you seemed inclined 'both privately 
and openly to call upon and encourage others to 
do the same.' 

"On the contrary, I think the testimony proves 
that you have discouraged and baffled men inclined to 
take such action. I do not, however, undertake to impugn 
your motives or charge upon you the 'lamentable 
ignorance' and deliberate 'malice' which some time 
since in the public press you attributed to men by no 
means your inferiors either in learning or charity. I 
desire, nevertheless, to indicate that, as I view the subject, 
whatever may have been your own views, you have 
acted with and defended those who have struck at the 



Scriptures of the Old and New Testament as the plenarily 
inspired and infallible Word of God. 

DOUBT SPREADING RAPIDLY. 

"The progress of doubt during the last few years 
is most notable. If Newman had lived in our day, he 
would hardly have been able to write that beautiful 
eulogy of the Bible in which he says of the Englishman 
that 'It is the representative of his best moments,' and 
that 'all that there has been about him of soft, and 
gentle, and pure, and penitent, and good, speaks to him 
forever out of his English Bible. It is his sacred thing 
which doubt has never seen and controversy never 
soiled.' Even in Episcopal seminaries the inerrancy 
of Holy Scripture is boldly and systematically denied. 

"You, right reverend sir, have entered the field at 
a crucial hour, plainly declaring that the system of denial 
or negation embodied in the 'higher criticism' forms 
an allowable method of interpretation, and that the acceptance 
of the methods and its conclusions does not 
disqualify candidates for the ministry. You have therefore 
deliberately received into the denomination, and 
you have approved as proper teachers for the people, 
men who declare that the Scriptures are errant and do 
not form an infallible guide, but abound in myths, fables, 
scientific and historical errors. 

"The long catalogue of errors credited by so-called 
'higher criticism' to Holy Scripture may or may not in 
your estimation appear as trifles. That, however, has 
nothing to do with the present issue, but the system 
that you vouch for as within the liberty of clergymen 
leaves, in my judgment, no sufficient authority for the 
Christian religion. We are plainly told that 'The prevalent 
dogmatic theories of the inspiration and infallibility 
of the Bible have been undermined in the entire 
range of Biblical study, and it is a question in many 
minds whether they can ever be so reconstructed as to 
give satisfaction to Christian scholars.' 

"The worst is that the church approves your course. 
Future candidates may openly deride the story of Pentecost 
as the world has understood it from the time of 
the apostles. 



*We have prepared what we term Withdrawal Letters for 
the use of our friends. They are printed in typewriter type, 
and in kind but clear and forceful language explain some of the 
reasons moving to the withdrawal. You merely need to sign, 
date and mail these to the pastor and all members of the sect 
you have been bound to, and at once you are free. We supply 
these free, accompanied by missionary envelopes and tracts- 
enough to supply every member of the congregation one. Order 
a sample one first and see if it will suit you— then send for required 
quantity. These "Withdrawal Letters" should be sent 



out as soon as possible after you decide on regaining the liberty 

wherewith Christ hath made free his people. Every day or 

month or year that passes before sending them is a distinct disadvantage 

to you and to the truth: both are sure to be misrepresented 

by an informal withdrawal. You joined not the minister, 

but the congregation,— not secretly, but publicly; and your 

withdrawal should be after the same manner. 

R2546 : page 277 

"The former belief in the Bible is no longer required. 
Candidates of the school to which I refer will 
indeed continue to sign papers, agreeing to accept the 
Scriptures as the Word of God, but such subscriptions 
practically will prove little better than perjury. 

"The phrase 'Word of God' is now a phrase only; 
its meaning has been juggled away. 

'"Higher criticism' has struck every diocese in the 
land, and from all the States in the Union there is coming 
a wild, ungovernable flood of opinion and sentiment 
that renders your position still more significant. You 
do not stand alone. You are upborne by the power of 
unconsecrated wealth. Your Convention, which has 
just closed its session, is with you, having overwhelmingly 
vindicated your laisses faire Standing Committee 
by indorsing its dark act. Your examiners give unqualified 
support. Thus far the case is diocesan; but 
venerable and saintly men like the Bishop of Minnesota, 
men of superior judgment and influence, applaud the 
'wisdom and good sense' displayed in this phase of your 
administration, while the criminal silence of other 
Bishops speaks louder than words. 

"The press, being creedless, is, for the most part, 
with you, and hails you as the exponent of incoming 
'liberal thought.' A leading editorial, in a prominent 
daily, describing present society as one that 'has outlived 
the faith of dogma,' claims that your position is 
'invincible.' Humanly speaking, it is indeed secure. 
The masses of Episcopalians are with you. 

"I can understand why the Bishop of Western 
Texas is obliged to admit:— 'We know that the young 
men are not in the churches and the laboring classes 
are entirely alienated.' The president of your Standing 
Committee has just reported to Convention that the 
youth of the denomination 'deny any obligation to go 
to church. They go if they please, but if not, it makes 
no difference.' 

"Indeed, what have they to go for? To listen to 
the reading of what preachers pronounce myths and 
fables. Substantially, the battle for the Bible has been 
fought. The case is lost, and now you can present no 
inducements for either youth or age to go to church. 
By a town meeting process the Bible has been declared 
'literature.' 

"This new relation of your denomination to the 
Bible changes the relation of the denomination to other 



religious bodies, and never again can Episcopalians approach 
the Presbyterians calling to union on the basis 
of a common Bible. 

"Unbelief is in the air. Indeed, I must here call 
attention to the fact, as yet little noticed, that the worst 
of the prevailing scepticism does not appear in print, 
nor even in public addresses. In private not a few of 
both clergy and laity openly repudiate the authority of 
Bible and creed, using no concealment. 

"One very prominent rector, who stands high in 
the ranks of your supporters, speaks of the New Testament 
as a bundle of left over documents. Another has 
declared that the first three chapters of St. Matthew 
form simply a beautiful legend; while another ridicules 
even the Apostles' Creed. Important positions are held 
by men of this class, who remain in the pulpit to win 
present bread or accomplish ulterior ends. 

THE ONLY WAY. 

"Evils have been pointed out privately to the 
bishops, and the pessimistic reply of one, 'Things will 
never be any better in your day or mine,' may be accepted 
as the expression of nearly all. Letters in my 
possession from some of your associates in office form 
instructive reading. For myself, recognizing the situation 
as I do, there is but one course; and, therefore, 
whatever other men, whom personally I esteem, may 
do, and however they may regard their obligations, 
mine seem clear. 

"While no action on your part could lead me to go 
out, I recognize a condition that no one man, or any 
possible combination of men, can now successfully 
meet. The Episcopalian scheme, based on private judgment, 
is not only far overshadowed by doubt that will 
characterize the incoming twentieth century, but it is 
possessed by the unbelieving spirit. The storm is already 
here, but the Protestant Episcopal body has no 
anchors. The future is clear. Your people are hastening 
to accomplish their evolution. Few will be misled 
by the pompous diction of that bishop who in his last 
charge foretells great victories. Fewer still, allow me 
to say with all kindness, will be persuaded by your own 
phraseology, where you speak of 'the Book' as 'incomparable 
and precious,' since it is commonly believed that 
many churchmen would not now disdain such language 
if applied to the works of Shakespeare and Homer. 

"One can very well anticipate the reply of men 
who, with assumed indignation, deny that they refuse the 
Bible as the Word of God, but discerning persons know 
the value of phrases out of which the erstwhile faith, 
robustness and honesty have departed. 

A REMARKABLE DISCOVERY. 

"You charge that 'a modern fetichism which has 



dishonored the Bible by claiming to be its elect guardian 
has shut it up these many years within the iron 
walls of a dreary literalism, robbing it thus alike of 
interest and of power.' You have furnished a remarkable 
discovery. All along the people have regarded the 
Bible as a free book. It has stood, the pride and glory 
of the nations, accredited with the uplifting of society 
and the advance of civilization and modern thought. 
No language has been found too superb in describing its 
work of emancipation and purification. 

"Now, however, you assure us that we have been 
mistaken, that all the while the Bible has been shut up 
within iron walls, robbed of interest and power. Do 
you, right reverend sir, suppose that the people of the 
land, who have organized Bible societies and carried 
them on at a large cost for many years, are sufficiently 
ignorant of the history and influence of the Bible to 
accept tamely this charge? Your language is astonishing! 
I deeply deplore the necessity which exists for saying 
this, yet you are winning laurels among infidels far 
and wide. 

"The particular kind of usefulness that your criticism 
may aspire to is indicated by the language of one 
of your own friends, the Bishop of Washington, who 
declares that, 'under the influence of the "higher criticism" 
thousands have lost their faith in the Old Testament 
as the inspired Word of God;' while 'the faith of 
multitudes is so shaken that even Sunday school children 

R2546 : page 278 

speak of the Scriptures with an irreverent freedom 
that would have amazed the preceding generation.' 

"One may, therefore, safely dismiss your statement 
where you speak of what 'a higher scholarship has done 
for us in our generation for the advancement of godliness 
and good learning throughout the Christian world.' It 
is, on the contrary, driving people away from the religion 
of Christ. 

"Furthermore, it might be remembered with profit 
that Christianity was never designed to entertain any 
comparative religions, and the system you applaud can 
only degrade the Episcopal denomination to a plan 
where the maintenance of the simplest elements of 
Christianity will prove impossible. As for your own 
diocese, the central and most important, when its actual 
state is known, it will be seen that it is rapidly approaching 
the condition of the bloodless heart. Spiritually 
your strongest corporation is failing. The appearance 
of prosperity, as the statistics prove, is unreal. As 
things are tending, far sighted friends say that if the 
Cathedral is ever finished it will prove the sarcophagus 
of Episcopalianism, the coffin of its creed. It is to be 
devoutly hoped that the policy with which you are 
identified may yet be paralyzed. 

"For myself I cannot bow to the guidance of the 



'distinguished critics' whom you have set forth as teachers 
and examples for the faculties in Episcopal seminaries, 
masters in Israel— who now, side by side with 
the professional infidel, stand forth to lecture on the 
'Mistakes of Moses.' My sense of right would not support 
me in any such course. I retire from the field, 
convinced that I am no longer called to struggle with 
an overwhelming and rapidly increasing force. I cannot 
accept the revolution or drift with the tide. Your 
school is indeed benevolent, and quite willing to tolerate 
catholic faith, bestowing upon it from time to time 
nothing more severe than ignoble terms. But for myself 
I ask no favors. I will not remain where doubt 
commands a premium, and the belief in an infallible 
Bible enjoys simply the immunity granted to a fallible 
Koran." —From The New York Herald. 



DR. DE COSTA'S PARADOXICAL POSITION. 



At first it would appear paradoxical, if not absurd, 
that the gentleman who poses as a defender of the Bible 
in the language quoted foregoing, should conclude 
that the same honesty which led him to protest against 
the Protestant Episcopal communion as deserters of the 
Bible, led him into the Roman Catholic Church as the 
communion of the Bible's friends with whom alone he 
could find fellowship. Yet this is the Doctor's position: 
and in harmony with it he was received into the Roman 
Catholic Church on Sunday, Dec. 4. He has since published 
his reasons for the step, from which we extract 
as follows:— 

"I do not, however, propose to offer any apology 
for entering the Catholic Church. Standing in the midst 
of modern religious systems, toppling to their fall like 
columns in the temple of Karnak, no defense need be 
offered for accepting a firm and unshaken Catholic faith. 
...The Church of Rome stands before the English 
speaking people and Protestants everywhere as the 

R2547 : page 278 

unique and solitary defender of the Bible in its integrity 
and entirety." 

Dr. De Costa denies that the authorities of the 
Catholic Church are unfavorable to the circulation and 
use of the Bible, saying that it is the duty and privilege 
of Catholic scholars to study the Bible thoroughly in 
the original tongues. The gentleman must consider the 
Latin the original tongue, for surely it is it that is chiefly, 
almost exclusively, studied by Romanist priests,— 
or rather compiled and arranged extracts from the Latin 
New Testament and not the book itself. 



The Doctor concludes thus:— 

"On the Protestant theory there is no visible 
Church, the only body being a mystical body in the 
air. On this theory Christianity has failed; the empire 
that triumphed over the Roman empire has perished. 
This is simply pessimism resumed. Reformation, religionism, 
therefore offers no moral or intellectual outlook 
for coming generations, and leaves the world forced at 
last to choose between rationalism and the Catholic 
Church. I believe in the Holy Catholic Church and 
the life everlasting." 

Poor Doctor, he must have our sympathy, if we 
give him credit for candor and love for God's Word; 
and we believe there are many in his position. He sees 
inconsistencies on both sides of the question and has 
jumped from one horn of his dilemma to the other, instead 
of escaping from both. Thus:— 

(1) Dr. De Costa has forced himself to forget that 
for centuries Papacy has been the implacable foe of the 
Bible; that she has officially through her popes (claimed 
to be infallible) cursed the Bible Societies and denounced 
their work as of the devil; that she has caused Bibles 
circulated among the people to be gathered and publicly 
burned— "auto da fe." 

He cannot be ignorant of the fact— and hence he 
must merely close his eyes to it, and try to forget— that 
Papacy's advocacy of the Bible and permission of the 
people to have it and to read it is but a recent move 
(within the last ten years), and that only in the United 
States, and hedged about with certain restrictions governed 
by the priests and from translations containing 
Roman Catholic comments as footnotes. The Doctor 
utterly ignores the fact that Papacy has not really 
changed— boasts that she never changes,— and hence is 
no more the friend of the Bible than she was during 
the "dark ages," but merely appears to advocate the 
Bible so as to disarm suspicion and to gain the good 
will of the most enlightened nation in the world. He 
forces himself to forget that the portions of "Christendom" 
where the Bible is free and in the vernacular of 
the people are the most enlightened and the most Protestant 
—The United States, Great Britain, Norway, 

R2547 : page 279 

Sweden, Germany, Switzerland: and that the dark places 
of superstition and cruelty are the places where Papacy 
has persistently hindered the circulation of the Bible- 
Spain, Portugal, Italy, Southern Ireland, and as far as 
possible France and Austro-Hungary, Mexico and the 
South American countries. Well does Papacy know 
that the Bible— "the sword of the spirit," the Word of 
God, is her greatest foe: and she will never be its supporter 
and defender, except as a pretense,— even as Satan 
would pose as an angel of light instead of a prince 
of darkness to accomplish his purposes. 



(2) Having blinded himself on the above point 
the Doctor seeks to account for the Reformation movement 
as not being to secure a free Bible as the true light 
upon the Church's pathway. On the other hand he declares 
it was a mistaken effort to repudiate the visible 
church and to recognize it only as a spiritual body. 

Would to God the Doctor told the truth in this 
statement! Would to God all Protestants (and Romanists 
too) recognized the Scriptural teaching that the 
Church of Christ is not an earthly organization with 
names upon sectarian rolls of membership, but instead 
is a heavenly union and communion "whose names are 
written in heaven"— "in the Lamb's Book of Life." 
(Heb. 12:23; Rev. 13:8.) But alas! the Doctor is as 
much mistaken in this as in his other proposition, for 
Protestants as well as Romanists have earthly organizations 
and honor these as the true Church, and do not 
see that they are "Babylonish"— confused mixtures in 
which "wheat" and "tares" commingle— the "tares" 
predominating and consequently ruling. 

Erring on both these points, Dr. De Costa has gone 
from bad to worse— from one bad "tare" bundle to 
another containing still less "wheat." Oh, how many 
of God's people are confused, bewildered, and ensnared 
thus and otherwise! Only the meek, the humble, will 
go earnestly to God and be taught of him and be led 
out of all human entanglements and bondages into the 
liberty wherewith the Son of God makes free his sheep. 

EVOLUTION AMONG THE BAPTISTS. 



In evidence that the latest and worst form of Infidelity 
is permeating all denominations, all colleges and 
seminaries, note the following just clipped from the 
Rochester, N.Y., Post-Express:— 

"President A. H. Strong delivered last evening at 
the Rochester Theological Seminary an address on 'The 
Growth of Theological Thought During the Last Fifty 
Years.' Dr. Strong took advanced ground, accepting 
fully the theory of Evolution and approving the methods 
and general results of the higher criticism." 

The Rochester Baptist Seminary is the principal 
one of that denomination in the United States and furnishes 
its most prominent ministers. 

THE METHODISTS ALSO DISTRACTED. 



The Boston Morning Journal of Dec. 8th announced 
as the leading news of its first page— 

"NINE STUDENTS QUIT BOSTON UNIVERSITY." 



It then quotes the statement of one of the students, 
Schenk by name, as follows:— 

"Coming from the West to Boston University School 
of Theology a year ago, I was shocked to find the most 
rabid rationalism being taught as Old Testament exegesis, 
under cover of a leading Methodist school. Coming 
to Messianic prophecy, only half a truth was taught. 
Further on Jesus Christ was no authority on Old Testament 
Scripture. The miraculous conception was set 
aside and the atoning blood made non-essential." 

The worst of the matter is yet to be told, namely, 
that Prof. Mitchell is heartily endorsed by the other 
professors of the institution and by nearly all the students 
of the seminary— the soon-to-be preachers of 
Methodism; for the President of the institution says 
that the dissenters are only "eight or nine out of an 
aggregate of 178 students." 

It seems, too, that the seceders appealed to the 
Board of Bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church, 
but got no redress but on the contrary; as a result 
the students who protested against the decimation of 
the Book and the rejection of the precious blood were 
notified that they must be quiet on the subject. Thereupon 
they nobly withdrew. 



So the leaven of error is rapidly permeating every 
branch of the nominal church, and the tests are coming 
to each individual Christian to prove him either 
"wheat" or "tare." The "wheat," today as of old, 
will be counted "fools for Christ's sake" by the worldly-wise. 
-1 Cor. 4:10. 



R2547 : page 279 

THE YEAR 1900 A PAPAL JUBILEE. 



POPE LEO XIII. has issued a decree, or "bull," 
designating the last year of the century a Jubilee 
year, a holy year, in which all his faithful are 
called upon to confess their sins, make many pilgrimages 
and prayers, and thus obtain forgiveness and indulgences 
—release from purgatorial sufferings justly 
merited and now in store for them. The bull has been 
translated into English and published broadcast, and 
we quote a portion of it, as follows:— 
"In opening the treasures of indulgences, whereof 

R2547 : page 280 

it is the dispenser, the Church invites the whole of 



Christendom to the hope of pardon.... 

"Raising our eyes to God, with his help and with 
the approbation of the cardinals, we order a universal 
Jubilee, to commence in this sacred city of Rome with 
the first vespers of Christmas, 1899, and to cease on 
the same day in 1900. 

"During the Jubilee Year we concede full indulgence 
and pardon of sins to all Christians truly repentant, 
who confess their sins and partake of communion, 
and who will visit the basilicas of St. Peter's, St. Paul's, 
St. John's, or that of Sta. Maria Maggiore, in Rome, at 
least once a day during twenty days, if having domicile 
in Rome, or, for pilgrims, during ten days. All ought 
to pray for the exaltation of the Church, for the extirpation 
of heresies, for the concord of Catholic princes, 
and for the salvation of Christian peoples. 

"Those who through sickness or other legitimate 
causes cannot visit the Roman basilicas, if they confess 
and communicate, may also benefit in the indulgence. 

"To Rome we invite you, with love, sons of the 
Church throughout the world." 



This pronunciamento of papal power in heaven and 
hell, on earth and in purgatory, is extremely mild and 
unassuming when compared to those of Leo's predecessors.* 
The statement is milder to suit the changed 

R2548 : page 280 

conditions of papal influence and general enlightenment; 
but the same thought, the same error underlies— 
that the power to forgive sins has been lodged by the 
Almighty in the hands of the pope and his conferees. 
If it were true, what an awful responsibility it would 
place upon these men! What if they had forgotten or 
neglected to appoint this Jubilee? And then, again,— if 
such confessions, prayers, pilgrimages, etc., can affect 
such blessings and releases from sufferings, why are not 
Jubilee years more frequent— every year? Think for 
a moment of the loss, the terrible loss, sustained by the 
pope's faithful who have died, and will die, before the 
time he and the cardinals have set! 

We notice with pleasure that, while "the extirpation 
of heresies" is mentioned, the injunction is to pray 
for this, and not as in olden times to labor for it by extirpating 
heretics as vermin. Let us continually thank 
God for the breaking up of the solidarity of Antichrist 
by the Great Reformation of the sixteenth century. 
The more it breaks up, and the smaller the fragments, 
the better for the truth and the true children of God,— 
the true Church "whose names are written in heaven." 
(Heb. 12:23.) Not the true "wheat," but the imitation, 
the "tares," need to be bound in bundles, by sectarian 
creeds and obligations of human device and imposition. 



And altho it is clearly pointed out in the Scriptures 
that a federative union of the various sects of Christendom 
will soon occur; and tho we know that this will 
mean a great increase of opposition, hatred and persecution 
of all who will not "join" nor be "bound" in 
the bundles, but who stand fast in the liberty wherewith 
Christ has made them free, still we may sing,— 
"I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; 
Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me!" 
—knowing that ere long all the "wheat" will be garnered 
and shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of the 
Father with their Lord;— to bless all the families of the 
earth. -Matt. 13:30,43. 

Now, not to disparage the pope's efforts (which we 
will presume to be sincere and honestly intended to be 
a means of grace to his people), but by way of showing 
forth the error underlying the whole theory on which 
the pope's efforts are based, we will make a pronouncement: 
one which every true child of God as an "ambassador" 
and member of the "royal priesthood" is 
privileged to make daily, or so often as opportunity offers, 
namely,— 

IN THE NAME OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, 
THE GREAT SHEPHERD (BISHOP) OF THE SHEEP, 
PONTIFEX MAXIMUS, VICAR OF GOD 
AND PRINCE OF 
THE KINGS OF THE EARTH, 

—I declare that whosoever cometh unto the Father by 
him is acceptable; because by him whosoever believeth 
in him as his Savior and Shepherd is justified freely from 
all things,— from which the Law could never justify or 
deliver him: 

—I therefore declare unto all who thus renounce sin 
and lay hold of the Deliverer with the arms of their 
faith, that without waiting for Christmas day, 1899, or 
any other date, and without pilgrimages to Rome or 
Allegheny or elsewhere, and without visiting cathedrals 
or other holy places, or having the prayers of popes, 
cardinals, bishops, underpriests or laymen, and even 
without prayers of their own, they may have this grace 
—even as it is written, "Being justified by faith [not 
prayers nor works], we have peace with God through 
our Lord Jesus Christ [not through other mediators]." 
-Rom. 5:1. 

—Moreover, by the authority of the same Great Potentate 
we declare unto you the efficacy of his Calvary-sacrifice 
not only thus to cleanse from sins that are past, 
but also to keep you reckonedly cleansed and pure in 
God's sight, so long as you abide by faith in Christ. 
For his blood cleanseth us from all sin— continually 
covering our unwilful imperfections; as it is written,— 
"My strength is made perfect in weakness," and "my 
grace is sufficient for thee." 



Verily, the god of this world (Satan) has not only 
blinded the heathen (2 Cor. 4:4), but he is quite 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 9. 

R2548 : page 281 

considerably blinding two thirds of Christendom represented 
in the Roman and Greek Catholic communions, 
as evidenced by such proclamations as that of the pope 
and by the continual practice of their priests. 

Nor do we find the Protestant element of Christendom 
fully enlightened and clear on this point of there 
being no necessity for the intervention or mediation of 
men or prayers between the sinner and his Savior. The 
great majority of Protestants consider prayers and intercessions 
essential— as evidenced by the various "revival" 
methods— mourners' benches, kneeling at the 
altar, rising for prayers, inquiry rooms, etc.— all so 
contrary to the simplicity of the Scriptural arrangement, 
which is,— Preach the message of God's grace in Christ, 
and whosoever believingly accepts it is thereby justified 
and at peace with God: and his prayers that should follow 
such belief and acceptance would be thanksgivings 
for divine favors received and pledges of his own future 
faithfulness to the Light, the Truth, the Way. 

"I am the Light of the world: he that followeth 
me [Jesus] shall not walk in darkness but shall have 
the light of life. "-John 8:12. 

Very evidently the reason for so much darkness is 
that, under Satan's misleading, those who see the true 
light to some extent get to following Popes, Councils, 
Presbyteries, Conferences and Confessions of men, instead 
of following the Lord who is the True Light. We 
should esteem very highly for their work's sake all who 
have been or may be used of the Lord as finger posts to 
point us to the Light, the Way, the Truth, but no more 
—we are not to follow them, except as we discern clearly 
from the Word that they are closely following Christ. 
He is to be our Pattern and our only Light. 



Meantime in an endeavor to "make a fair show in 
the flesh" it is the proposition of the pope and his coadjutors 
to open during that Jubilee year one of the greatest 
cathedrals in the world in the greatest metropolis of 
the world— Westminster Cathedral, London. It is said 
to have already cost over ten millions of dollars: and 
that millions more are being collected in various parts 
of the world where "heretics," whom they condemn to 
hell torments unceasing, are by taxes, etc., feeding the 



Romanist poor in the almshouses of Christendom. 
Thanks be to God for the light and better day coming 
for the poor, deceived, "groaning creation" and for the 
blessed opportunities of eternal life which that Millennial 
Day will bring to them. 



R2548 : page 281 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

-REPORT FOR THE YEAR, DEC. 1ST, '98, TO DEC. 1ST, '99. 

VERY PROPERLY all who are truly the Lord's 

people feel a deep interest not only in the Truth 

itself but also in all pertaining to it and its propagation; 

—not only in their own vicinities but also in its world-wide 

field and mission. And what is thus generally 

true seems to be intensified in all such after they have 

become acquainted with the "harvest" message— the 

light of the last days of this age,— the light of the parousia; 

—the bright shining of the present one— the epiphania 

—parousia. 

We are conscious therefore that many eyes will look 
for and carefully scan this report of the work accomplished 
in the year just ended,— especially all who have 
had a share in it, great or small, "every man according 
to his several ability" (Matt. 25:15), whether as a contributor 
to the funds which propel the work or an 
assistant in the labor of circulating the truth, or both. 
All such we know will be rejoiced in heart, refreshed 
for fresh endeavors for the new year as they read what 
we have to present. Rejoice, for it is your work, our 
work, the Lord's work. And as we realize how comparatively 
few there are whose eyes of understanding 
are opened that they can see the light, and when we 
remember too, that (as our Lord foretold) among them 
there are not many great or wise or rich in this world's 
riches and wisdom, we must say that the showing is 
"marvelous in our sight." 

(1) To begin with, we always reckon the truest 
progress of the cause to be indicated by the WATCH 
TOWER'S subscription list; for however interest may be 
awakened, by tracts, booklets and DAWNS, it is rarely 
fixed and riveted except through the regular visits of 
our semi-monthly pastoral. You will be pleased then 
to know that the WATCH TOWER list grew considerably 
during last year: and that the evidences point to a still 
larger increase during the year now beginning. And as 
each reader is interested in and praying for such results, 
each will proportionately lend a hand to the answering 
of his own prayers, by doing what he can to increase 
the circulation. Are there not friends to whom you 
have loaned and given tracts and books and whose 
interest is partially awakened? Why not go to such 



with a sample copy of the TOWER and ask them to look 
it over and consider the advisability of having its visits 
regularly? 

We offer no "premiums" to those who thus labor 
for this journal. Oh no; our friends need no such inducements, 
for they render this service with gladness 
and willingness of heart— "as unto the Lord" and on 
behalf of his brethren. But we will gladly furnish you 

R2548 : page 282 

sample copies free. And furthermore to assist you we 

will arrange a "special offer" thus: Anyone who is 

already a WATCH TOWER reader may send in new subscriptions 

for the year (one dollar each) and to each 

R2549 : page 282 

we will send one volume of the DAWN series free— whichever 
volume may be designated in your order;— but all 
such orders should be designated "Special offer" that 
we may understand that they are in compliance herewith. 

Furthermore: some of the brethren have intimated 
that they would like to send the WATCH TOWER for a 
while to their friends, with a view to awaking their 
interest in its teachings and have asked whether or not 
we will receive six months subscriptions under such 
circumstances. Assuredly we will and we will do more 
than that: we will share with you in the service by 
sending four six months trial subscriptions for ONE DOLLAR, 
eight for TWO DOLLARS, twenty for FIVE DOLLARS, 
forty for TEN DOLLARS. But we will accept only new 
subscriptions and none for longer than six months on 
these terms. Not that we are unwilling to treat old 
friends as well as new ones, but that our regular terms 
(page 2) are amply reasonable— those who cannot afford 
to pay one dollar a year for the WATCH TOWER cannot 
afford to pay anything, and such are as welcome to it as 
to the air they breathe, if they will apply for it on terms 
stated. 

(2) THE COLPORTEUR WORK has prospered during 
the past year as will be noticed by the Secretary's report 
following. The number of DAWNS put into the hands 
of the people exceeded the number circulated the previous 
year by fifty per cent; and the number of booklets 
over one hundred per cent. 

This increase is due in great measure to the financial 
prosperity which permits people to purchase books, 
and thus has permitted colporteurs who had been 
driven from the service by the "hard times" to reenter 
this fruitful quarter of the "harvest" field: besides the 
Lord has raised up new laborers willing, yea anxious, to 
spend and be spent in serving to others the meat in due 
season which has so blessed and strengthened their own 
hearts. It doubtless is true that tho money is more 
plentiful by reason of the "good times," the time to 



read the literature is curtailed thereby: nevertheless, the 
truth-hungry will find time for it; and if it costs some 
self-denial the blessing will be the greater. Others will 
find plenty of time in the not distant future when another 
financial collapse will carry labor to the lowest plane it 
has occupied for fifty years. Remember continually 
in your prayers the dear brethren and sisters of the 
Colporteur service. 

(3) THE PILGRIM SERVICE. During the year this 
branch of the service has been increased and its field 
widened— hundreds of meetings being held from Canada 

to Georgia and Texas, and from Massachusetts to California 
and Oregon. Many letters testify to good accomplished 
through this department of the work. We 
are planning for its still more effective operation during 
the coming year, as the Lord seems to be opening up 
ways and means. To him let our praise and thanks 
ascend: let us remember in our prayers the dear brethren 
serving as "Pilgrims." 

(4) THE TRACT DISTRIBUTION. This department 
has shared in the general prosperity, as you will see by 
the report of the Secretary following. It is the largest 
showing we have ever been able to present. It speaks 
volumes for the loving zeal of the Lord's people in 

the distribution of these tracts as well as in the providing 
of the funds for their publication. We publish no 
names: it is not necessary, for we are unitedly laboring 
for the Lord's approval and final "Well done!" 

(5) THE VOLUNTEER SERVICE. A year ago we 
called for volunteers to undertake the distribution of 

the booklet, The Bible vs. the Evolution Theory, to church 

attendants in every city and town on Sundays at respectful 

distance from church edifices. Responses were 

prompt— many true soldiers of the cross accepted the 

offer as the God-given opportunity, for which they had 

often prayed— opportunities to do and to serve, and opportunities, 

if need be, to suffer joyfully for the truth's 

sake. These, it is needless to say, besides the blessing 

they carried to others, received a great blessing in their 

own hearts, and are the stronger, and the closer to the 

Lord in consequence. Let us not judge some who discontinued 

as soon as they found some of the cross and 

its reproaches attached to this warfare for the truth— 

this endeavor to preach the gospel to those dear brethren 

who are shut off from other means of hearing the 

good tidings of great joy: let us even think very charitably 

of those who not only did not go out to the battle 

themselves, but who sought to discourage others from 

enlistment. Let us remember the noble Apostle Peter 

who sought to hinder our Lord from his sacrifice and 

thus became his "adversary," but who subsequently 

became one of his most faithful and zealous soldiers; 

and let us hope and pray that each true soldier of the 

cross may become bold to serve the truth according to 

the convictions of his own conscience, and brave and willing 

in some manner to endure the cross, that in due 



time we all may rejoice together as crown wearers in 
our Captain's Kingdom. 

(6) THE CORRESPONDENCE feature of the harvest 
has grown gradually to vast proportions; and we believe 
it is used of the Lord to the blessing of his flock. During 
the year just ended we received 31,956 letters and 
postal cards and sent out 23,676, or a total in and out 

of over a thousand per week during the year,— some 
brief, others lengthy. What a wonderful privilege to 
be thus in close touch with the household of faith, the 

R2549 : page 283 

"brethren" and other truth-seekers! We esteem it a 
great privilege to lend a helping hand to all in this way 
and welcome all your letters. But remembering the 
numbers, please condense your queries and separate 
them from orders in your letters. And do not be offended, 
if we refer you briefly to some back TOWER 
or to some page of the DAWN series for reply. 

(7) THE FINANCIAL end of the work,-has prospered 
amazingly, too,— for us "not many rich." The 
Treasurer's report shows nearly fifteen thousand dollars 
handed in by the Lord's people for use in his service- 
without one penny of it being begged or even asked. The 
most we ever do is to inform the friends of the cause 

that there is a Fund to which such as desire may contribute 
little or much as their holy spirits prompt them 
and their circumstances will permit. We do not even 
blow a trumpet for them nor herald their names— the 
matter is left between each soul and its Lord and each 
is encouraged to use his own best judgment in serving 
the Lord's cause and to look to him for the rewards of 
faithfulness and self-denial. 

True, fifteen thousand dollars is not much money- 
it is less than the salary of some ministers of the gospel 
in the nominal church, not to mention many in worldly 
positions who receive salaries or have incomes of as 
much or more. It is as nothing compared to the vast 
sums donated by the various denominations, by gift 
and bequest, to home and foreign missionary work, to 
their Bible Societies and Tract Societies. Yet this little 
under the Lord's blessing is accomplishing much in the 
keeping up of meetings through Pilgrims and in circulating 
nearly sixty-five millions of pages of literature 
throughout the length and breadth of the civilized world. 
It reminds us of the widow's cruse of oil and remnant 
of meal.— 1 Kings 17:9-16. 

(8) THE FOREIGN WORK is constantly growing. 
Brother Weber is still the representative of the French 
work, laboring in Switzerland. Brother Winter looks 
out for the interests of the Truth in Denmark, while 
Brothers Lundborg and Nelson do the same in Sweden. 
Sister Giesecke is the Society's representative in Germany. 
The latter has just sent in report which shows 

246 letters received and 263 letters sent out, and a free 



circulation of reading matter representing 258,664 tract 
pages. The work in Great Britain we do not reckon as 
foreign, because of close connection and one tongue, but 
it is prospering, too, and our stock of books and tracts 
in Brother Hart's care is larger than ever, made necessary 
by increased demands. 

All of these "brethren" need our love and sympathy 
and prayers. Let us remember all the interests of 
Zion when we approach the throne of the heavenly 
grace. And finally, dear brethren, pray for us of the 
home office, who occupy not only a place of interest in 
your hearts, but a place of prominence for the great 
Adversary's attacks. Pray that we may have more and 
more of the Master's blessed spirit— the spirit of wisdom 
and of might, the spirit of patience and of meekness, 
the spirit of zeal and of a sound mind, the spirit of love 
and devotion to the Lord, his truth and his "brethren." 
And as you thus pray, you will be drawn nearer to us 
and to the Lord and to the same spirit which worketh 
all in all. Very truly, 

Your brother and servant in the Anointed, 
C. T. RUSSELL, President. 

TREASURER'S ACCOUNT, DEC. 1ST, '98, TO DEC. 1ST, '99. 



Receipts— Cash, "Good Hopes" $11,303.32 

" from other sources 3,467.20 



Amount $14,770.52 



Expenditures— Pilgrim Account $2,612.01 

Publishing tracts and 
postage, etc., on same 1 1,286.97 



Amount $13,898.98 

Cash balance for 1900 871.54 



$14,770.52 



SECRETARY'S ACCOUNT, DEC. 1ST, '98, TO DEC. 1ST, '99. 



Copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN circulated 
during the year, 95,354 

Copies of various booklets circulated 
during the year, 43,361 



Copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER supplied 
gratis to the Lord's poor and sent 
as samples, 156,536 

R2550 : page 283 



Copies of tracts and booklets sent out 
during the year, 2,566,073 

This, represented as usual when referring 

to tracts, aggregated tract pages, 64,650,204 

E. C. HENNINGES, Sec'y & Treas. 



R2550 : page 283 

"THE TRUE LIGHT WHICH LIGHTETH EVERY MAN." 

--DEC. 24.-ISA. 9:2-7.- 

"Unto you is born this day, in the city of David, 
a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."— Luke 2:11. 

CHRISTMAS-TIDE always brings some lesson associated 

with our Savior and the great salvation, 

the gift of God, provided through him. This year 

the chosen lesson is most excellent and beautiful. Appropriately, 

the first verse of the chapter is omitted: 

in Leeser's Translation it constitutes the 

last verse of chapter 8. 

Our lesson had no local and immediate application 
at the time of its delivery: it is strictly prophetical, as 
are indeed the preceding fifteen verses. We cannot even 
apply the lesson to the people and time of the first advent: 
its scope is far beyond the Jewish nation, and can 
only be applied to the worldwide blessings which follow 
the second coming of Christ and the establishment of 
his glorious Kingdom in power and great glory. Nevertheless, 
there is just a bare connection with the past 
in the expression, "Unto us a child is born"— thus indicating 
the humble beginning and earliest manifestation 

R2550 : page 284 

of the great light, the Sun of Righteousness, which 
has not yet arisen, but whose day-star is now shining 
in the hearts of the faithful. -2 Pet. 1:19. 

The two divisions of the first verse of the lesson in 
poetic form merely repeat the same thought with variations. 
The people that walk in darkness who are to see 
the great light are practically all mankind, for "gross 
darkness covers the people"— the exception, the very 
small minority, the Church, as our Lord declared, is 
"not of the world." (John 17:16.) This broad thought 
is emphasized by the next statement, for the whole 
world surely is "the land of the shadow of death:" 
"The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain 
together" under the sentence or curse of death which, 
with its accompaniments of pain and sorrow, casts a 
deep shadow in every heart and in every household. 

Surely, the whole world needs this great light— the 



light of the knowledge of the glory of God, as it shines 
in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord— the very light 
which the Apostle declares the world cannot now discern, 
because the eyes of their understanding are darkened 
by the misrepresentations and deceptions perpetrated 
by the god of this world, the prince of darkness. 
-2 Cor. 4:4; Rev. 20:3. 

The fact that this is expressed in the past tense 
does not signify that this light has already shined, even 
as the statement, "Unto us a child is born," did not 
signify the birth of Christ at a time prior to Isaiah's 
prophecy. It is merely a usual form of prophetic statement: 
the standpoint is taken away off in the future, 
and from that future standpoint the thing to be accomplished 
is stated as tho already done. 

Here, then, we have a prophetic assurance of the 
great light of the knowledge of God coming to all mankind: 
and this, be it noted, is in fullest agreement with 
the testimony of John 1:9, that Christ "is the true light 
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world." 
The fact that every man born into the world has not 
yet been enlightened by this great light, so far from 
disparaging the statement, gives us assurance that the 
time is coming when to him every knee shall bow and 
every tongue confess, and all shall know the Lord, from 
the least to the greatest, and knowing him have full responsibility 
or trial for everlasting life or everlasting 
death. 

Verses 3-5 intimate the process by which the great 
change shall come, and the world be prepared for the 
shining of the great light— the Sun of Righteousness 
with healing in his beams. Scholars are divided in their 
opinions respecting a proper translation of the first sentence 
of the third verse. The majority seem to favor 
the translation given by the Revised Version, "Thou hast 
increased the nation, thou hast increased her joy." 
Leeser's Translation renders it, "Thou hast multiplied 
the nation, made great her joy." In harmony with the 
context we must interpret this nation to be the world of 
mankind under the new administration of the Millennial 
Kingdom; for the kingdoms of this world will then 
become the kingdoms of our Lord, God's Anointed, 
and many nations shall go and say, "Come ye, and let 
us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of 
the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, 
and we will walk in his paths."— Rev. 11:15; Isa. 2:3. 

Thus, instead of the Lord's empire being a typical 
one over a little nation of Israelites, as in the day of 
Isaiah's prophecy, it will be the antitypical one in 
which Immanuel shall be King over all the earth, and 
his name great to the ends of the earth. 

It is the joy of this great people that is described: 
it will not merely be a quiet joy of satisfaction, but an 
hilarious joy, as of men who are in the midst of plenty, 
in a harvest season; and as men rejoicing when dividing 
the fruits of victory. But what will be the cause 



of the rejoicing? The answer is given. Because from 
off their shoulder the great burden has been removed: 
the burden of sin and its curse will have been removed, 
and the rod of the oppressor, Satan, will be broken, 
and he himself then will be a captive, no longer permitted 
to oppress and deceive and blind mankind.— 
Rev. 20:2. 

An illustration of the process of the deliverance is given: 
"As in the days of Median." The suggestion obviously is 
that as Israel was delivered in the day of Midian by Gideon 
and his little band, armed with trumpets and pitchers 
with lights in them,— by the blowing of the trumpets, the 
breaking of the pitchers and the shining out of the 
lights— discomfiting the Midianites, so that they slew 
one another with a great slaughter, so likewise will be 
the deliverance by which the Lord will bring in the new 
dispensation. (Judges 7:19-25.) Our Lord Jesus is the 
antitypical Gideon, and his "little flock," the Church 
of this Gospel age, the "elect," are the antitype of 
Gideon's little army. And it will be through the intervention 
of these (on the other side of the vail) that the 
hosts of sin and the present enginery of evil will be 
utterly discomfited and work its self-destruction through 
anarchy, etc., in the great time of trouble rapidly drawing 
near. 

This great time of trouble is briefly yet graphically 
described in the fifth verse as being more severe, more 
intense, than all preceding troubles, for it is declared 
that all such victories are expected to be with tumult 
and bloody garments, but this shall be with a more furious 
destruction, best likened to a consuming of fuel 
in the fire. And it will be noticed that the fury of the 
final conflict of this age, which shall transfer the rule 
to our Prince Immanuel, is everywhere likened to a 
fire— throughout the prophecies and in our Lord's parables 

R2550 : page 285 

—evidently because of the intensity of the trouble 
and its destructiveness. 

Then comes (vss. 6 and 7) the explanation from 
the Lord's side of how all these things are of his provision 
and supervision— beginning with the birth of our 
Lord as the babe born in Bethlehem; next presenting 
him as God's Son, given on our behalf,— his sacrifice 
beginning at Jordan and culminating at Calvary. 
"Wherefore," as the Apostle says, because of his obedience 
unto death, "him hath God highly exalted and 
given him a name above every [other] name,"— honor, 
dominion and power above all others, next to his own. 

The change of dispensation will be ushered in because 
the Father's "times of restitution of all things" 
(Acts 3:19-21) will have come,— the time for Christ to 
receive the honor, glory and dominion promised him, 
with which he shall fulfil all the gracious things predicted 
by God through the prophets: hence the declaration 



is that then "the government shall be upon his 

shoulder"— the mantle of authority shall rest upon him. 

And when he shall thus assume the control of earth's 

affairs, his character of love and justice, his wisdom, 

and the all-power in heaven and in earth given unto 

him, insure all the faithful that his reign will be a time 

of blessing, of peace and of joy to all who love righteousness 

and truth; and equally a time of burning destruction 

against all who shall sin wilfully after having 

been brought to a knowledge of the truth.— Heb. 12:26. 

His names, his titles, representing the gracious 
things of which he is the representative, are brought to 
our attention: to all the world of mankind he will then 
be (and the Church, his body, with him) "Wonderful" 
—Great— beyond the power of human comprehension, 
as he is indeed the express image of the Father's person. 
He will be the "Counselor," whose instructions 
in righteousness will be satisfactory and respected by all 
the world of mankind seeking a return to divine favor 
and full restitution. And it shall come to pass that 
whosoever will not hear that Teacher, that Counselor, 
shall be cut off from among the people. (Acts 3:23.) 
He shall be called "Mighty God," or Mighty Mighty 
One, for indeed in him shall rest all the power and 
authority of the All-mighty One, Jehovah. He shall 

R2551 : page 285 

be called the "Father Everlasting," because in truth he 
shall be a Father unto the race, a Life-Giver to all who 
will accept life under the terms of the New Covenant, 
sealed with his own precious blood. Adam, the original 
father of humanity, through his sin and under its sentence, 
failed to give lasting life to his race, and death 
destroyed all his offspring; but the restitution life which 
our Lord will give, to as many as will receive it upon 
his terms, will be an everlasting life, and hence he, as 
the Giver of this life to all, will be an Everlasting Father. 
He shall be called the "Prince of Peace," for, altho his 
empire will be established by a smiting of the nations 
with a rod of iron, and breaking them in pieces as a 
potter's vessel, in the greatest time of trouble the world 
has ever known, nevertheless, every blow will be struck 
in the interest of peace, and so his entire reign will 
further the ends of righteousness and peace, even tho 
to the very end thereof there shall from time to time be 
destructions of the wicked.— Isa. 65:20; Rev. 20:9,14,15. 

Leeser's Translation reads thus:— "The Prince of 
Peace for promoting the increase of the government and 
for peace without end upon the throne of David and 
upon his kingdom, to establish it and to support it 
through justice and righteousness from henceforth and 
unto eternity: the zeal of the Lord of hosts will do 
this." 

In this last verse of the lesson the Millennial Kingdom 
is associated with the typical Kingdom of David. 



We are to remember, however, the statement that David 
sat upon the throne of the Kingdom of the Lord- 
he and his kingdom were typical. The name, David, 
signifies "beloved," and our Lord Jesus himself was 
proclaimed as the real David— "This is my Beloved Son, 
in whom I am well pleased." God hath appointed him 
heir of all things, and he is David's Lord, as David 
himself testified. -Heb. 1:2; Matt. 22:41-45. 

We fear that there are many Christians who have 
lost faith, not only in the prophetic promises, but in 
our Lord's and the apostles' exposition of them, and 
that such frequently pray merely with a lip service, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it 
is done in heaven." But so much the more as we discern 
such blindness on every hand, such lack of faith, let 
us, the eyes of whose understandings have been opened 
by the Lord's mercy, be the more faithful, the more 
circumspect, and the more confident, remembering, in 
the words of this lesson, that an abundant fulfilment is 
assured, for "The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will perform 
all this." 

REVIEW OF 1899. -DEC. 31. 



Golden Text.— "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his 
benefits. "-Psa. 103:2. 

The end of one year and the beginning of another 
is a most favorable occasion for circumspection and 
retrospection. 

We trust that as each reader reviews the year just 
closing he will be able to repeat our Golden Text appreciatively, 
—with the spirit and with the understanding 
also. One of the least expensive offerings we can 
present to the Lord our God, and yet one which he will 
appreciate very highly, is thanksgiving— for mercies 
past and present. The ungrateful are disdained among 
men, and we may well suppose are far from pleasing in 
the sight of the Almighty. While every creature throughout 
the world might find some cause for thankfulness 
and gratitude and praise, how much more should we 
who have received so abundantly of the riches of divine 

R2551 : page 286 

grace in the knowledge of his truth— the plan of the 
ages. We may well apply to ourselves on this occasion 
the words of our dear Redeemer, "Blessed are your 
eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear; for 
verily I say unto you, that many prophets and many 
righteous persons have desired to see the things which 
ye see and have not seen them, and to hear the things 
which ye hear, and have not heard them." 
We said that thanksgivings were cheap offerings; 



but whoever presents to the Lord real thanksgiving with 
lips of praise will follow his lip service with something 
more substantial; and this is intimated in our Golden 
Text by the words, "O my soul!"— the appeal is not 
merely to the lips, but to the entire being. And so we 
find it with ourselves and others today: whoever is truly 
thankful to the Lord and offers him praise, remembering 
his benefits, will seek to render substantial 
thanks also in deeds that will be acceptable and pleasing 
to the Lord. 

While prayers, adorations and praises are the most 
direct offerings of "incense" to the Lord, nevertheless, 
he has so arranged matters that we cannot offer these 
sincerely and acceptably except as we have his spirit: 
and if we have his spirit, we will at the same time that 
we offer this incense on the Golden Altar be offering also 
upon the brazen altar in the "Court" good works— "doing 
good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially 
to the household of faith."— Gal. 6:10. 

The close of the year is an excellent time also for 
the making of new resolutions for the year to come, and 
on the present occasion there is an added force from 
the fact that the year before us will be the last one of 
the century. Let us, beloved brethren, make plenty 
of good resolves respecting what we shall be willing to 
be, to do, to suffer, in fellowship with our Lord; that 
we may by his grace make of it the best year thus far 
of our lives— the year of largest hopes, of largest endeavors, 
and by the Lord's grace of largest successes in 
self-sacrifice, in overcoming the world and its spirit, in 
vanquishing self and the desires of the flesh, in resisting 
the Adversary, and in glorifying our Lord and blessing 
his people. 



page 286 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Enclosed please find 
$1.00, renewal subscription for ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
year 1900. The Spiritual food becomes more necessary 
and more enjoyable as time rolls on. 

I find in DAWN VOL. V. a grand spiritual feast, 
filling my heart with praise and love to our Heavenly 
Father, the giver of all good. I am thankful to have 
you Scripturally prove (effectually silencing subtle 
arguments of the adversary) the human perfection of 
our precious, sinless Redeemer, coming as he did in 
the line of David through Nathan— not Solomon's ancestral 
line. 

Brother Russell, this has been a very profitable 
year to mother and me, continuing to enter into 
the joys of our Lord; every experience, every trial has 
contained valuable instruction much to our advancement 



spiritually. We are daily learning that the advantage 
of the Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace 
and joy in the holy spirit. 

I do not write often to the Bible House as I am 
quite busy, but in spirit I am ever with you and all the 
dear "harvest" workers. I am sure we are all rejoicing 
because we are one year nearer our eternal home. 

My husband is now in Pittsburg; he has a position 
there. The Lord willing, mother and I will join 
him in the spring. What a blessed privilege that 
would be if God should permit us to again assemble 
with the saints that meet from time to time in the Bible 
House. And yet it seems with every blessing there is 

a trial;— there are dear friends in from whom 

it will be hard to separate. 

Kind greeting to yourself and all the Church at 
Allegheny. MRS. A. E. POWER,-Missouri. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Accept my heartfelt 
thanks for yours of Oct. 11th. The advice and admonitions 
it contained have proved blessings to me. I 
know that God is filling your heart with kindness and 
your mind with wisdom and all good, and often thank 
him in prayer for it. I often wish I could say something 
that would give you joy. I have many opportunities 
to converse with clergymen and other "professionally" 
religious people, and when I see the great 
darkness in which they are, and how firmly they are 
tied in it, my heart is filled with gratefulness to God, 
and to you as his earthly instrument, for the light 
which he has given me. 

You may well believe that I am glad Brother Nelson 
is coming over to help me. It is needed help, I 
assure you. I am so inexperienced and a "child" as 
yet. I am filled with a sense of my own smallness 
when I consider the amount of work that ought to be 
done. My heart is open for him and I am anxiously 
awaiting him,— hope he will come soon. 

Please send me 800 copies Vol. I. and 100 each of 
II. and III., in all 1,000 copies, and as many tracts as 
you see fit. I would suggest about 3,000 of each in the 
Swedish language. 

I am traveling again, but I do not spend all my 
time thus. I am acting on your suggestions in your 
letter. I try to be as practical as possible. I visit 
every house in the towns I go to. But I have also 
tried to follow the advice you gave in an earlier letter, 
namely, to get into communication with as many as 
possible of the leaders in the Salvation Army and other 
religious bodies, and to seek out such as appear to be 
unprejudiced and free among God's children. All this 
I have tried to do. My mode of traveling is cheap, 
I have a strong body, and can stand considerable hard 
usage, for instance, traveling by freight steamers, 
where the only accommodations are the bare deck, or 
on freight trains, always the cheapest way. The time 



spent in transit I use to speak to people and to study 
the Word and DAWNS, and am at the same time resting 
from the rather wearying walking connected with colporteuring 
I take the addresses of all to whom I sell. 

I cannot find words to express how grateful I am 
for all your kindness to me, in giving advice, etc. My 
highest desire is to please my Savior in all things. 
He fills my whole heart. Praise be to his name! 

That God may constantly bless you and keep you 
is my constant prayer. Your brother in Christ, 

AUGUST LUNDBORG.-Sweden. 



R2551 : page 287 
KIND WORDS FOR MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. V. 



The New Bedford (Mass.) Standard says:— 

"Charles T. Russell, editor of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and 
author of several volumes of theological writings, five of which 
are included in his MILLENNIAL DAWN series, has issued a new 
volume of Bible study, The At-one-ment Between God and Man. 
Mr. Russell clings close to the Bible, as he interprets it, and endeavors 
to offset the theory of the evolutionists that, as no fall 
occurred, no redemption and atonement are necessary, by 
teaching the cross of Christ." 

The Jacksonville (Fla.) Times Union Citizen says:— 

"In this neat volume of five hundred pages we have a most 
reverent treatment of profound subjects, respecting which many 
Christians have wondered and prayed, in a clear and lucid style 
which even a child may understand. The author's loyalty to 
the Bible is pronounced and inspiring, and we do not wonder 
that some have denominated his books Bible Keys. In the volume 
under review the author examines his subjects from both 
the human and the divine standpoints— the necessity for atonement 
on man's part, and why it is demanded on God's part, and 
then what are its grand possibilities for all the race of Adam— 
'Whosoever will.' The writer's scope embraces the doctrine of 
the divine trinity." 

The Worcester (Mass.) Evening Post says:— 

"Among the most notable of the recent works on religious 
subjects is a publication from the press of the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society of Allegheny, Pa., The At-one-ment Between 
God and Man. The book is one that treats of theological subjects 
in an entirely new and decidedly attractive manner. It 
advances no new dogmas nor seeks to combat old ones in any 
but a spirit of truth seeking. It makes plain in a particularly 
clear and helpful light many things that have heretofore puzzled 
students of the Bible and Biblical lore. It teaches the universal 
fatherhood of God and teems with the expression of his loving 
kindness for the creatures he has made. At the same time it is 



a text book of theological science and dissects its truths and 
principles in a logical and reasonable, yet reverent manner. 

"No single chapter of any recent book is more notable than 
the section of this work which deals with the ever-confusing 
mystery of the divine trinity. It must be said that a more convincing 
explanation of this axiomatic doctrine of theology has 
never yet presented itself, yet it is strictly along the lines of 
orthodox thought. The general effect of the book on the average 
reader who seeks for light on the subjects that to him have 
dark meaning, is most gratifying. It quickens faith and makes 
strong hopes that are dear to every serious and thinking mind. 

R2552 : page 287 

The tone of the book is reverent and wholesome, and it seems 
destined to bring happiness to many a doubt-laden heart." 

The Grand Rapids (Mich.) Herald says:— 

"Pastor Russell's new book, The At-one-ment Between God 
and Man, is of the sort that awakens Christians to do some thinking 
along theological lines. It is one of those 'epoch-making 
books' destined to influence thought not merely for the hour of 
their perusal, but for life— and for centuries. The book will 
make its author foes as well as friends, for there are people ready 
to fight for their dogmas, however unscriptural and unreasonable. 
However, many thinking Christian people, who hold to 
the Bible as the inspired Word of God and who have all their 
lives been troubled in their endeavors to harmonize it with their 
consciences and with facts, will surely welcome this volume as 
'a helping hand,' and praise God for the light it sheds on many 
subjects hitherto dark to all except theologians and possibly to 
many of them also. One thing is certain, and that is that every 
lover of the Bible must admire the author's loyalty to the Scriptures 
and his reverential style of dealing with church dogmas, 
which he rejects as being contrary to the divine Word, character 
and plan." 

The New Haven (Conn.) Courier Journal says:— 

"The reverential spirit of the work, its earnestness, its 
clearness of statement, impress the reader. It is a strong, forcible 
and logical setting forth of the doctrine of atonement for sin 
through Christ, the Mediator, and of the orthodox Christian 
belief in general regarding the great foundation of the Christian 
faith and scope of salvation. It is a work that appeals to all on 
a subject of such paramount importance." 

The Pittsburg Times says:— 

"The title explains the object of the book. The author, as 
is usual with him, fortifies his opinions and assertions by a close 
adherence to the Scriptures. He writes with great enthusiasm 
and with an apparent sense of strong conviction, and the book 
will be of considerable aid to those who find occasion to study 
the points treated." 

The Syracuse (N.Y.) Herald says:— 
"Mr. Russell is an able as well as an exceedingly voluminous 



writer on religious questions. The present bulky volume is 
the fifth of a series of books under the general title of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. It discusses the fall of man, the penalty or curse 
upon him, his redemption and the terms of his 'At-one-ment.' It 
undertakes to explain the perplexing doctrine of the trinity and 
to render it simple and reasonable. The author is loyal to the 
Scriptures, but not always to church dogmas, which he deals with 
according to their agreement with the divine Word. All Bible-students 
will find matter for thought in Mr. Russell's writings." 

The Indianapolis (Ind.) Sentinel says:— 

"This book is sublimely comprehensive, and unquestionably 
its treatment will be pronounced a masterly one by many Bible 
students. 'The fear of the Lord is the only fear in evidence in 
this volume; but altho 'traditions of men' are treated fearlessly, 
they are kindly handled, and even partisan sticklers for exploded 
errors must concede the author's Christian spirit and courtesy, 
while all must admit his honesty, and his fidelity to the 
Scriptures. If human creeds suffer, it is in the interest of the 
Bible, which the author accepts as his only creed, in the interest 
also of love and justice and Christian common sense— all important 
considerations as against nonsense of the 'dark ages,' 
often mislabeled 'orthodoxy.' 

"After reading this book and comparing its numerous Bible 
citations, intelligent Christians will often say to themselves: 
Where have I been? What have I been thinking of? What 
poor use have I made of my Bible and my reason for years that 
I did not see the beauty, harmony and reasonableness of the 
divine Word! But the author lays no claim to superior ability 
or inspiration, merely claiming that God has a 'due time' for 
everything, and that now is God's due time for shedding light 
upon his Word in the interest of all his faithful people, and his 
aspiration is to be a humble servant of the Lord's flock, dispensing 
to them the 'meat in due season.'" 

The St. Louis Christian Advocate says:— 

"Concerning this volume, a recent reviewer has said: 'Pastor 
Russell's new book, The At-one-ment Between God and Man, is 
remarkable in fact, if not in its title. It is sure to make a stir 
among the dry bones of fossilized orthodoxy, as well as amongst 
the higher critics. Not that it is agnostic— for it is decidedly 
Biblical; nor that it is bitter and drastic and cutting toward those 
theories of the dark ages which have barnacled the good ship 
Zion— for it handles them gently, courteously, tho thoroughly. 
Its strength lies in the gentle persistence with which the writer 
uses his Biblical dynamics.'" 

The New York Merchants' Review says:— 

"A NOTABLE WORK. -A hell of fire and brimstone has no 
place in the belief of some intelligent Christians, man's folly 
and wickedness providing hell enough on earth, according to 
their views of the matter, but Pastor Charles T. Russell, in The 
At-one-ment Between God and Man, of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series, 
presents many arguments to show that hell, sheol or hades, 
has no existence at all as a place of punishment, the word in its 
different forms meaning simply the sleep which the human race 



passes into, to be awakened from at Christ's second coming. 

"His arguments are based upon copious texts from Scripture, 
as also is his attempt to prove that the orthodox view of the 
holy trinity has no foundation in the Bible. The Scriptures, and 
nothing but the Scriptures, are the guide of the author in his 
search for the truth in the various problems examined by him 
in his interesting book, and naturally he opposes 'Evolution.'" 

The St. Albans (Vt.) Daily Messenger says:— 

"This volume, like all others from this writer, differs from 
other theological writings in several particulars. (1) It is simple 
in style, easily understood by any Christian— making abstruse 
subjects plain to even the wayfaring man if he be of the class 
addressed by the author— the justified in Christ. (2) It entirely 
ignores all creeds and theories of men and appeals solely to the 
Scriptures and treats their testimony as inspired, authoritative, 
decisive— citing as well as quoting them freely. (3) It is logical 
as well as Scriptural, and whoever reads without prejudice is 
sure to be convinced. (4) Those who read and accept the presentations 
of this volume will not only know what they believe, 
but why they believe it; and will 'be ready to give a reason for 
the hope that is in them'— which cannot be said even of clergymen 
respecting the dogmas of the several denominations." 


