From Our Readers
Safe Driving
You are certainly to be commended on the “Safe Driving” articles. (January 8, 1988) As a person who has been vitally interested in driving safety for many years, I thought the sections entitled “Is Your Vehicle Roadworthy?” “Read the Road,” and “Tips From the Experts” were particularly well presented and helpful. Your readers might be interested in this driving tip I learned from my father-in-law, which has helped me down through the years. He told me that every time you get in a vehicle, remember that you will be driving four cars: yours, the car ahead, the car behind, and the car you cannot see.
S. J. D., United States
I was very pleased to read your articles on “Safe Driving.” However, the fact that the articles were addressed only to young persons made them somewhat distorted. Owing to failing vision and hearing and to a slowing down in their reactions, elderly ones are often a great danger to other road users. I realize just how convenient it is to nip down to the shops using the car. But I know several elderly people whose driving habits are very risky. For that reason I would have welcomed a few tactful reminders directed toward the elderly regarding responsible driving today.
E. D., Federal Republic of Germany
We thought that the material provided good counsel for drivers of all ages, but likely the counsel against excessive speed and aggression made it appear to be primarily for the young. A “New York Times” article dealing with the problem of elderly drivers stated: “Unlike younger drivers, whose traffic violations often involve speeding or reckless behavior, older drivers tend to get into accidents when they fail to yield the right of way or obey traffic signs and signals, often as a result of failing vision or inattention.” Being able to drive is a great convenience, especially for the elderly, but we want them always to arrive home safe.​—ED.
Criticizing Other Religions
I have been a faithful reader of Awake! for several years now, and I think you are on the right track. However, I am shocked by your constant criticism of other religions, for it sometimes amounts to backbiting and abusive speech, even bordering on slander. To say the least, it is unkind and diverts you from the mission you claim to fulfill, which I believe is to proclaim the good news.
B. P., France
We have a kind and loving interest in people of all religions, but when their religious beliefs and practices are false and merit God’s disapproval, it is showing love to bring this to their attention by exposing falsehood. Jesus clearly showed up the error of the religious practices of the scribes and Pharisees of his day, saying that their religion was in vain. (Matthew 15:1-14; 23:2-32) It is God’s Word that exposes and condemns wrong religious practices carried out in his name. We follow in Jesus’ footsteps by drawing attention to what God’s Word says, which can be to the everlasting benefit of those who will hear.​—ED.

