Announcements
● Literature offer for December: New World Translation with any older 192-page book, for a contribution of $3.50, $4.00 or $4.50, depending on which Bible is offered. See “Looking Ahead to the December Campaign With the Bible.” (km 9/84 p. 3) The brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! may be offered for a contribution of 30¢, especially to those with reading difficulties or where there are children. January and February: One-year subscription for The Watchtower for a contribution of $4.00. Six-month subscriptions are $2.00 each. Awake! subscription may be obtained on same basis. Both subscriptions may be offered for a contribution of $8.00. When subscription offer is refused we will offer The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! or Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century with one magazine for a contribution of 50¢, or a brochure and The Watchtower and Awake! for 70¢. March and April: Any one of the following pocket-size books for a contribution of $1.00: Choosing, Commentary on James, Evolution, Good News, Holy Spirit, Life Does Have a Purpose or This Life. (With the exception of the Evolution book, these publications may be ordered from the Society.) If congregation runs out of these books, any other older, pocket-size book may be offered. Do not use Kingdom Come, Survival, Truth or United in Worship books. Concentrate on placing one of the first seven books mentioned as long as these are available.
● The presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit congregation’s accounts on December 1, or as soon as possible thereafter.
● Bound Volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! for 1984: Publishers and pioneers, please order your 1984 bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! through your congregation. Congregations should begin collecting requests for these volumes now. Then, on January 1, 1985, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society, using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). Order only the number of volumes for which you have requests. In addition to English, the volumes will be available in Dutch, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese and Spanish at $5.00 each. There is no pioneer rate. Payment should not accompany the congregation order sent to the Society. (See 1984 Cost List, paragraph 23.) Until the volumes are available and shipped they will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Please announce to the congregation when the volumes are received so that all who ordered can obtain their copies.
● It is suggested that all congregations display the new yeartext by January 1, 1985.
● The following publications are now available in grade-two English Braille:
Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1985. FREE upon request.
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever (1 volume) may be requested on a loan basis or purchased for $1.00.
Survival Into a New Earth (4 volumes) may be requested on a loan basis or purchased for $5.00.
“Daily Texts and Comments” from the 1985 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses (4 volumes) $5.00 to purchase.
● The following publication is now available in grade-one Braille, French and Spanish:
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever (1 volume) may be requested on a loan basis or purchased for $1.00.
To obtain Braille publications, please send a separate order, including the remittance for items purchased, and the name and address of the person who will use the Braille publications. Mark your order: ATTENTION: BRAILLE DESK.

