Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 2
Song 108
15 min: Local announcements. Review some of the features of the 1984 edition of the New World Translation. Show how marginal references can be used to locate scriptures quickly on a subject being discussed. (Example: Referring to Matthew 6:10, point out marginal references on the words “kingdom,” “will” and “earth.” Show how these provide sufficient information for a well-rounded discussion on the Kingdom.) Explain how an interested person could use this feature to learn more about God’s Word. Comment briefly on the contents of the appendix. (Note to congregations having supplies of the 1971 and 1981 editions of the New World Translation: All copies of these older editions should be distributed before the 1984 edition is offered in field service. Congregations having an excess supply should try to transfer some of their stock to neighboring congregations. See km 9/84 p. 3.)
15 min: “What Does the Bible Mean to You?” Question-and-answer discussion. In considering paragraph 6, arrange for a capable publisher to demonstrate the current Topic for Conversation and the Bible offer. Conclude with comments recommending an increased effort to start home Bible studies during December.
15 min: The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever. Review highlights of the new brochure. This publication presents a vast array of evidence proving that God’s name is Jehovah and that it should be honored by all. Point out brochure’s major features, emphasizing how it can be used to help interested ones realize the significance of the divine name and the need to learn more about the true God it identifies. Encourage all to read it and get acquainted with its contents in order to be prepared to use it in field service during January.
Song 59 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 9
Song 186
 5 min: Announcements in Our Kingdom Ministry applicable to congregation. Local announcements.
15 min: “Youths, ‘What You Sow You Reap.’” (w84 11/15 pp. 28-31; Also g84 11/8 pp. 16-18) Talk and discussion with two or three youths.
10 min: Arrange locally according to the needs of the congregation.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In a Way That Brings Personal Joy.” Enthusiastic discussion by service overseer. As time permits, invite audience to relate experiences that brought them joy. Review field service arrangements for the week.
Song 16 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 16
Song 156
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
15 min: “Are Kingdom Interests First in Your Life?” Talk by elder. Interview auxiliary pioneer or regular pioneer who took up full-time service instead of other pursuits. Or, relate a local experience of one who has put Kingdom interests first.
10 min: “Society Kingdom Hall Fund Progress Report.” Question-and-answer discussion.
10 min: Holiday Witnessing. Announce arrangements for service. Consider special problems arising at this time of year in your territory and how to respond to householders’ remarks such as: “I’m busy,” “I’m going shopping,” “I’m preparing a meal,” “Merry Christmas” and “Happy New Year.” Stress need for Christian reasonableness and discernment. Encourage all to take advantage of opportunities to witness during holiday season.
Song 172 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 23
Song 191
10 min: Theocratic News and local announcements.
12 min: “Benefit Fully From the Theocratic Ministry School.” Talk by school overseer. Include encouraging comments that will motivate all eligible ones to enroll, take their assignments seriously, and endeavor to benefit fully from the weekly program. Refer to pages 72-74 of Our Ministry book.
13 min: “Your Life, Your Integrity and the Card.” Talk by elder on article appearing in the December 1, 1984, Watchtower. New cards will be made available shortly. Emphasize how important it is for all to carry their MEDICAL ALERT card and to have it available in case of an emergency.
10 min: January Offer. Review literature offer for January: Watchtower or Awake! subscription. When subscription offer is refused, we will offer one of the brochures, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! or Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century, with one magazine for a contribution of 50¢. Or, a brochure and the two magazines may be offered for 70¢. Recommend that both subscriptions be offered where interest is shown. Give some suggestions for talking points in the brochures, especially using the illustrations. Mention some of the outstanding articles in the current magazines that will be used in service this week.
Song 160 and concluding prayer.

