Presenting the Good News​—In a Way That Brings Personal Joy
1 Jehovah’s people have good reason to be joyful. We have a real hope for the future. As Isaiah 65:17, 18 assures, Jehovah is “creating new heavens and a new earth” and then adds: “Exult, you people, and be joyful forever in what I am creating. For here I am creating Jerusalem a cause for joyfulness and her people a cause for exultation.”
2 We should find our greatest joy in sharing our marvelous hope with others. Do you find that your joy in the ministry is limited? If so, remember that joy is a fruit of the spirit. It can be cultivated and increased through personal effort. Hard work can bring cause for joy and, in turn, great joy can cause us to work even harder. (Eccl. 2:10) Earnest effort can be rewarded with greater evidences of the spirit’s fruitage.​—2 Pet. 1:5-8; 1 Cor. 14:12.
3 The enthusiasm radiated by our brothers in their service confirms that what they are doing is bringing them great joy. How can we increase our share in that joy? One way is by learning how to find satisfaction in doing our assigned work despite the negative reaction of many of those to whom we preach. Jeremiah encountered much opposition, and the same was true of Jesus; they did not stop. Satan would like to discourage us by using the apathy, indifference or opposition of others. But, as Jesus explained, by continuing on faithfully despite opposition, we will find joy and happiness.​—Matt. 5:11, 12; Heb. 12:2.
4 Understanding that the end of this system is near and the time left to accomplish our work is short, we will be motivated to do what we can to share the truth with others. (Rev. 12:12, 17) If we truly have love for God and neighbor, we will find joy in our ministry because we know it pleases Jehovah and helps others find the way to life.
A GIFT FROM GOD
5 You might consider your service as though you were bringing a gift to your neighbors. This gift is the prospect of everlasting life. But for those who do not yet appreciate the value of the gift, perhaps you can make it more appealing by the manner in which you present it. Do you prepare your presentation well so that it will stimulate interest? If you speak in a pleasant and courteous manner, using well-chosen words that arouse interest, you may get a good response that will give you more joy.
6 Field service is a treasure Jehovah has given us. It permits us to demonstrate our faith. We should work to improve our ability to speak convincingly to others about our hope. If we always try to leave householders in a good frame of mind, it may make them more receptive when the next Witness calls, thus contributing to his joy.
7 Remember, too, that each householder has his own interests in life. If we express personal interest in him and in his family and show how the Bible will be helpful to him, we will often find a warm response and an open door for a return visit. The joy we find in such experiences can be shared with others for their encouragement. (Acts 15:3) And most important of all, think of the joy we bring to the One who sent us!​—Luke 15:7, 10.

