What Does the Bible Mean to You?
1 Among the millions of books written, one stands out as unique, different from all the rest. It is the Bible. It provides the oldest historical record, going back to the origin of the universe. It can be found in all parts of the earth and in more than 1,700 languages and dialects. It is the best known, most widely circulated, most quoted of all books.
2 How are its contents viewed around the world? Although largely unaware of what it contains, millions of professed Christians call it the Word of God. There are vocal critics who label much of it as myth. Others laud it as a remarkable historical record but reject its counsel as impractical for the nuclear age. To great masses of people not professing Christianity, the Bible is, at best, nothing more than the sayings of perceptive men who possessed above-average intelligence. In each case, the attitude of people toward the Bible has reflected their estimation of its value.
WHAT IT MEANS TO US
3 How do we view the Bible? We have “accepted it, not as the word of men, but, just as it truthfully is, as the word of God.” (1 Thess. 2:13) We know its contents represent divine wisdom that is “able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.” (Heb. 4:12) Applying its counsel will ‘equip us for every good work.’ (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) Its value cannot be measured in material riches. (Prov. 3:13-15) To us, it is a guide in all affairs of life. Truly, we ‘love it.’​—Ps. 119:97, 105.
HANDLING IT ARIGHT
4 Accepting it as the Word of God obligates us to handle it aright. (2 Tim. 2:15) This means that while making a wholehearted effort to live in harmony with its counsel, we should also do our best to help others appreciate God’s Word and use it as their guide. We feel obliged to use every means we have to make the Bible readily available and better understood.
5 How grateful we are for the revised and updated 1984 edition of the New World Translation. It contains thousands of marginal references that confirm the interlocking harmony of all 66 Bible books. It will surely prove to be an invaluable aid to student and teacher alike. During December, after first placing all the 1971 and 1981 edition Bibles on hand, we will start distribution in the field of the regular-size 1984 edition. We will offer this new Bible along with a 192-page book, for a contribution of $4.50.
6 As individuals, do we feel a responsibility to handle the Bible aright? If so, we will try to share fully in the distribution planned for December. Even though the Bible is widely circulated, it is still one of the least understood books. It is written in such a way that its real meaning cannot be known without help and divine guidance. (Acts 8:30, 31, 35) After pointing out the refreshing Bible promise covered in the Topic for Conversation, you can explain to the householder why you have come to respect and treasure the Bible. Let him know how its teachings have brought you a solid hope for the future and a real purpose in living. These discussions may open opportunities to point out some of its wise counsel on everyday problems and may lead to a Bible study.
7 We should thank Jehovah every day for giving us the Bible. We are also grateful that the faithful and discreet slave has reproduced it, along with aids that provide clear insight into its meaning, in great quantity, and in language easily understood. Our appreciation is well expressed by the psalmist: “Your reminders are wonderful. That is why my soul has observed them.”​—Ps. 119:129.

