Announcements
AWAKENING THOSE WHO SLEEP—Eph. 5:14, NW.
There is great need for all persons to be awake to the sign of the times. Bible prophecies are being fulfilled by events occurring in the earth during this generation. The mission of the Awake! magazine is to present information in the light of God’s Word that will provoke and stimulate thought on current affairs. With courage Awake! slices into the thick darkness of falsehood and misinformation that covers a great many subjects affecting the destiny of millions of people. It follows the precept that the truth is beneficial to all, and it endeavors to present the truth so that those who sleep under the burden of old-world propaganda may be awakened to the seriousness of these times. During October Jehovah’s witnesses everywhere will offer Awake! from house to house on a subscription basis of $1 a year (24 issues), with three booklets free. Why not subscribe?
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY ANNUAL MEETING
Yearly, on October 1, the annual meeting of the members of the Pennsylvania Corporation, Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, is held in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. This year October 1 falls on Thursday, on which day the meeting will be held at ten o’clock forenoon at Carnegie Library Building, Lecture Hall, 4400 Forbes Street, Pittsburgh 13, Pennsylvania. As usual a letter is going to each of the members of the corporation, notifying them of the meeting and sending them proxy forms. We would like to have all the proxies returned by the 20th of September, and each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not. Those who are members of the corporation should expect to receive a letter of notice and should be certain that the Secretary’s Office has the proper address to which to mail the notice of the annual meeting.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 18: Flight to Safety with the New World Society, ¶1-15.
Week of October 25: Flight to Safety with the New World Society, ¶16-28; also, Posthaste “to the Mountains!” ¶1, 2.
Week of November 1: Posthaste “to the Mountains!” ¶3-18.

