Announcements
LOYALTY TO THE ORGANIZATION OF GOD—Josh. 23:8, Mo.
Jehovah is the Great Sovereign of the universe and, more strictly than any human government, requires loyalty to his organization on the part of his servants. This means loyalty to God’s Word as his statement of operating principles. Those to whom Jehovah entrusts his kingdom interests today are servants who have demonstrated their loyalty to him under test, having the same strict conformity to his law as was demonstrated by Christ. Loyalty to God is a continuing, steady course—past, present and future. Said Joshua, “Be loyal to the Eternal your God as you have been up till now.” This means working in harmony with the organization of God, serving at unity under it, recognizing that Jehovah’s blessing is realized with the organization. During the month of November Jehovah’s loyal servants will present to the public the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures and a bound book, on a contribution of $2. (Or, the Hebrew Scriptures, Vol. I, if persons have the Greek Scriptures)
“NEW HEAVENS AND A NEW EARTH”
At Yankee Stadium, in New York city, a 384-page book bearing the above title was released to the public on July 25, 1953. This Bible study aid heralds the creation by Jehovah God of a completely new world. It foretells the near-at-hand end of this present system of things, furnishing Scriptural proof. Also included is a consideration of what good-will persons must now do in order to gain life in God’s new world, a world that will never end but will endure forever as a paradise home for righteous humankind. You could not read better news than the information that is contained in this book. A six-page chart of outstanding historical dates, along with subject and scripture indexes, adds to the value of the book. The volume has a dark-blue binding, embossed with gold-leaf title. Write today and ask for a copy of “New Heavens and a New Earth”, enclosing a remittance of only 50 cents a copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 22: Filling the House with Glory, ¶1-21.
Week of November 29: Filling the House with Glory, ¶22-43.

