VOL. XVIII. AUGUST 15, 1897. No. 16. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 238 

Views from the Watch Tower 239 

Zeal the Measure of Love 240 

"Wash One Another's Feet" 242 

The Sum of All Graces is Love 244 

Gifts in the Early Church 245 

Fruits of the Spirit More Desirable 245 

Faith, Hope and Love Abide 

Forever 248 

The Gospel Preached at Ephesus 250 

page 238 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 



requesting the paper. 



R2208 : page 238 

A SYNAGOGUE AND JEWS AT ATHENS. 



By an oversight (which however involved no principle or doctrine) 
we recently made the statement that there was no synagogue at Athens, 
and that no Jews resided there at the time of Paul's visit, whereas Acts 17:17 
plainly states to the contrary. This furnishes first class evidence 
of the truthfulness of our claim that the WATCH TOWER is not infallible, 
but liable to Editorial as well as typographical errors. Our readers 
will therefore do well to keep a sharp look-out: and while we are 
always very careful as respects doctrinal statements, it is our desire to 
be correct also in respect to even the comparatively unimportant features 
of the divine Word; and this slip will make us the more careful. 



page 238 

"What Say the Scriptures About Hell?" is the title of a pamphlet in 
which every text of Scripture containing the word hell is cited and examined 
in the light of Scripture and reason, together with other Scriptures 
and parables supposed to teach eternal torment. Price 10 cents; 
50 cents per doz.; $4.00 per hundred. 



R2199 : page 239 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



TWO thousand carrier-pigeons collected from various 
parts of Germany by the German government, 
sent to Dover, England, and there set free to see 
how many of them could be relied on to return quickly 
to their homes, is but a trifling incident of itself; 
but it has created a great commotion in England. It 
is interpreted to indicate that the German Emperor is 
considering the possibilities of a war with Great Britain; 
and desires to know how he could keep in communication 
with his army after it had landed on British soil, 
supposing that the telegraph cables would be destroyed 
or under British control. The matter was taken up in 
Parliament, but it was decided that the affront was of 
so peculiar a character that no notice could be taken 
officially by the Government. 

In our opinion it is one of Emperor William's strategic 
bluffs, by which he is pleased frequently to startle 



the world, and keep himself in notice as a central figure 
—the arbiter of peace or war. It is an offset to the 
"Jubilee" show by Britain of a war fleet greater than 
that of all other European nations combined. It perhaps 
merely suggests,— "Britishers, when thinking of 
your naval strength, remember that others have greater 
army-strength." 

But it nevertheless indicates the love of the grandson 
Emperor for his grandmother Queen; and indicates 
that the present-day inclination to peace on the part of 
the so-called Christian nations and rulers, springs not 
generally from any change of hearts or renewal of right 
spirits within the rulers or the masses, but from changed 
conditions which make results extra hazardous, as 
well as very expensive. 

Theoretically both grandson and grandmother 
reign "by the grace of God;" i.e., they claim to hold 
power not from the peoples whom they govern, but as 
rulers divinely commissioned and set over the people, 
as representatives of the Kingdom of Heaven: and similarly 
all the kings and emperors of Europe claim. 
Yet, in the light of these false claims, how absurd are 
propositions of war like the above, and all the unholy 
wars the accounts of which cover the pages of "Christendom's" 
history. 



An English journal, The Morning Star, is responsible 
for the report that Queen Victoria recently said 
to a minister of the Church of England,— "I am looking 
for the coming of our Lord, and I do not think it 
impossible that I may not have to surrender my crown 

R2200 : page 239 

till I shall lay it down at his feet." 

It is pleasant to be assured that one of the potentates 
of earth is looking for the Heavenly King and 
his Kingdom of righteousness, even tho her words imply 
that she sees the subject comparatively obscurely. 
Only his special "friends" know that the Great King 
is already present, is assuming his great power and is 
about to use it as a rod of iron in dashing to pieces the 
human systems of church and state which falsely, and 
often ignorantly, call themselves by his name,— Christian 
governments and churches. Only these realize 
that the judgment of these man-made systems is now 
in progress. Only these have been served by the Master 
through his instrumentalities with the "meat in due 
season" for the household of faith. (Luke 12:37.) Only 
these know how to interpret the growing confusion 
and darkness coming upon the nominal churches, and 
the forboding "clouds" of trouble causing distress of 
nations with perplexity, and making men's hearts to 
fail them for fear in looking forward to the things coming 



R2200 : page 240 

upon the earth. Only these are able to see through 
these events to the blessings they presage, to the 
Church first, and to all the families of the earth later 
on. Only these therefore are able to lift up their heads 
and rejoice, knowing that their redemption draweth 
nigh. 



Many odes and poems were written in commemoration 
of the Queen's Jubilee; but one of the last, and 
less boastful than many, seems to meet with general 
appreciation. It is styled "Recessional," as indicating 
thoughts on the conclusion of the Jubilee, and has 
just been published. It is as follows:— 

JUBILEE RECESSIONAL. 



"God of our fathers, known of old- 
Lord of our far-flung battle-line— 
Beneath whose awful hand we hold 
Dominion over palm and pine- 
Lord God of Hosts be with us yet, 
Lest we forget— lest we forget! 

"The tumult and the shouting dies— 

The captains and the kings depart- 
Still stands thine ancient Sacrifice, 
An humble and a contrite heart. 
Lord God of Hosts be with us yet, 
Lest we forget— lest we forget! 

"Far-called our navies melt away— 

On dune and headland sinks the fire— 

Lo, all our pomp of yesterday 
Is one with Nineveh and Tyre! 

Judge of the nations, spare us yet, 

Lest we forget— lest we forget! 

"If, drunk with sight of power, we loose 

Wild tongues that have not Thee in awe- 
Such boasting as the Gentiles use 

Or lesser breeds without the Law- 
Lord God of Hosts be with us yet, 
Lest we forget— lest we forget! 

"For heathen heart that puts her trust 

In reeking tube and iron shard- 
All valiant dust that builds on dust, 

And guarding calls not Thee to guard— 
For frantic boast and foolish word. 



Thy mercy on Thy people, Lord! Amen. 
— Rudyard Kipling." 

JEWISH INVESTIGATION. 



"A curious movement is on foot among the Jews 
in one or two of the provinces of South Russia, which may 
result in an important religious revival. A number of 
pious Israelites are establishing associations for the 
reading and study of the Scriptures, both in the homes 
of the people and in their public assemblies. Much 
attention will be devoted to the prophetical books of 
the Old Testament, and to investigating the claims of 
Christians that Jesus of Nazareth has in his life and 
work and death been the fulfiller of many utterances 
of the prophets which have for so long been stumbling 
blocks to the Jews. It is further reported from Russia 
that a deeper religious feeling than has hitherto characterized 
them is noticed among the Karaim Jews of 
the Crimea. This sect of Israelites reject the Talmud 
as in any sense binding on them, their only sacred 
scriptures being the Old Testament. They are only 
found in the Crimea and in one or two isolated districts 
in Western Russia."— The Independent. 

This is a favorable indication. The Talmud stands 
between the Jew and God's Word just as the creeds 
and decrees of Synods and Councils stand between 
Christians and the Word. Nothing must be allowed to 
separate between us and the inspired Word if we would 
walk in the Light. Whatever "helps" really point 
us to the Bible as the only authority, and assist us in 
rightly dividing it, are profitable to us as servants and 
guides: but that which attempts to be to us instead of 
God's Word is a dangerous foe. 



R2200 : page 240 

ZEAL THE MEASURE OF LOVE. 



"There was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed five 

hundred pence, and the other fifty. And when they had nothing 

to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will 

love him most? Simon answered and said, I suppose 

that he to whom he forgave most. And Jesus said 

unto him, Thou hast rightly judged."— Luke 7:41-43. 

THE peculiar circumstances which drew forth the 
above colloquy will be very generally remembered. 
It was toward the close of our Lord's ministry, 
and a prominent Pharisee had invited him to dine 



with him and a company of friends; and while they reclined 

at dinner, after the custom of those times,— the 

table being spread in the centre and couches surrounding 

it on which the guests rested upon one elbow, while 

their feet extended out behind the couches— there came 

behind the Lord a woman, Mary Magdalene, widely 

known as a disreputable character; she was in deep 

contrition and was weeping, her tears falling copiously 

upon the Master's feet. She had with her an alabaster 

box of very expensive ointment, and as she prepared 

to anoint our Lord's feet with it she first wiped 

them with her hair. Such a scene probably never occurred 

before or since, and was well calculated to move 

even the hardest hearts. But, so far from entering 

into the real spirit of the situation, the Pharisees were 

of cynical mind and merely interpreted this as a proof 

that our Lord was not a prophet: arguing that, if he 

were, he would have known the character of the woman, 

R2200 : page 241 

for she "was a sinner." Our Lord, discerning their 
hearts, gave them a better explanation of the case in 
the language of our text. 

We are not to understand from our Lord's illustration 
that Mary was ten times as guilty before the 
divine law as was Simon, the Pharisee, but rather that 
in this illustration our Lord pictured the sentiments of 
the two sinners. Really "there is none righteous, no, 
not one;" "all have sinned and come short of the glory 
of God;" both Simon and Mary were under the Law 
of Moses, according to which he who was guilty of violating 
one feature of the Law had broken the Law as 
a whole; and had therefore failed of the reward promised 
to the one who would keep the whole, and had 
incurred the penalty pronounced for the violation of 
the whole,— death. Strictly speaking, then, both Simon 
and Mary owed the same amount— the lives of 
both were forfeited because of sin: and if either one of 
them were ever to obtain eternal life it could be only 
by the mercy of God, in the forgiveness of their sins. 
Strictly speaking, then, they each owed five hundred 
pence (were under sentence of death), and were alike 
unable to meet their indebtednesses. 

Our Lord put the illustration of ten to one, not 
as representing his view of the situation, but as illustrating 
the sentiments of Mary and Simon. Mary realized 
her unworthiness, and in this respect was like the 
publican mentioned in one of our Lord's previous illustrations, 
who smote upon his breast, saying, "God 
be merciful to me a sinner;"— she realized her sinful 
load and how much need she had of the Lord's mercy 
in its removal. But Simon was like the other character 
of our Lord's discourse, who thanked God that he 
was not like other men, but that if not entirely perfect 
in every particular he was at least very nearly perfect. 



Alas! those who are in this condition of mind are farther 
from the Lord than the truly humble and penitent who 
realize their need of a Savior, even tho as respects many 
moralities they may be humanly on a higher plane. 
So in this case, while the Savior was present and Simon 
might have had a great blessing, it was penitent Mary 
who really received it. She heard the Master's words, 
"Thy sins are forgiven," while Simon who appreciated 
his unworthiness but slightly got no forgiveness. 
Here we have an illustration of our Lord's statement 
at another time,— "The whole need not a physician, but 
the sick." In reality there are none whole, all are 
sick; but only those who realize their sickness apply to 
the physician for his remedies. 

Not only did our Lord justify his course in receiving 
the kind offices of penitent Mary, but, turning the 
argument, he administered a gentle but sharp reproof 
to Simon; he pointed out that he had neglected the 
common courtesies of that country and time. It was 
customary then to receive guests with a kiss, as it is 
now our custom to shake hands; it was customary then 
to provide water for the washing of the guest's feet, 
uncomfortable by reason of travel along the dusty roads 

R2201 : page 241 

of that time; in the case of an honored guest a servant 
would be sent to wash the feet. Furthermore, with 
special guests sometimes perfumed ointments for the 
hair and toilet were provided. Our Lord calls Simon's 
attention to the fact that these little courtesies had 
been ignored by him, but had been more than made up 
for by Mary; and that the secret of the difference of 
sentiment lay in the fact that Simon loved him little, 
and that Mary loved him much. 

It could not be that Simon had accidentally omitted 
these courtesies, for all Pharisees were punctilious on 
the subject of washings; nor need we suppose that it 
was an intentional slight put on our Lord. On the 
contrary, we may reasonably suppose that Simon, like 
Nicodemus, had a genuine interest in the Lord, and a 
surmise that he was a more than ordinary prophet. 
But both Simon and Nicodemus belonged to the respectable 
class, or higher caste, and came under the 
description of John (12:42,43), "Nevertheless, among 
the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because 
of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they 
should be put out of the synagogue: for they loved 
the praise of men more than the praise of God." 

Nicodemus came to the Lord by night to interview 
him, but Simon more shrewdly thought to get the opportunity 
of a conversation directly with the Lord by 
inviting him to dinner; but to prevent the thought that 
he had anything more than a general interest and curiosity 
respecting Christ, and thus to maintain the good 
opinion of his co-religionists, he treated the Lord and 



the disciples, who evidently were also guests, as persons 

of a lower caste; and as tho he thought that it was 

a sufficient honor to them to be his guests at all, he entertained 

them as inferiors; altho, probably, could he 

have done so without endangering his standing as a 

Pharisee, he would have enjoyed extending to the Lord 

every courtesy. 

How many who like Mary have realized their sins 
and have appreciated the divine mercy in the forgiveness 
of their sins have almost envied Mary her privilege 
of touching the feet of the blessed Master and, as 
he declared, "anointing them for his burial." With 
us, such opportunity might properly be appreciated 
still more highly, because of greater knowledge; for we 
have learned what Mary probably very imperfectly 
understood, that our Lord Jesus for our sakes left 
the glory which he had with the Father and humbled 
himself to human conditions in order that we through 
his poverty might be made rich. And not only so: 
Mary at this time had no knowledge of the extent to 

R2201 : page 242 

which the Master would go on her behalf and ours, to 
redeem us from sin and its sentence of death;— Calvary 
was then still in the future. 

What a comforting thought it should be to all who 
are of Mary's attitude of mind that it is still possible 
to wash and to anoint the Lord's feet. His own lips 
have declared that, whatever is done for the least one 
of his consecrated followers, is accepted by him as done 
unto himself. Ah! blessed thought; the Lord is still 
in the flesh, representatively; his faithful are to be esteemed 
"members of his body," as new creatures. And 
while these are still in the flesh, the sufferings of Christ 
in the flesh are still in progress, and will not be finished 
until the last member has been glorified.— Col. 1:24. 

Moreover, the Scriptural figure holds good: Christ 
is the Head of this body which is his Church, and 
which for eighteen hundred years has been in process 
of development; and now the last members of the body 
are here,— "The feet of him." As members of the 
feet class many are weary, discouraged, needing rest, 
refreshment and comfort, such as was bestowed upon 
the literal feet of the Master. 

Here comes in a test with respect to the symbolic 
feet of Christ, similar to that with respect to the natural 
feet which proved the great love of Mary and the 
slight of love of Simon. The members of the feet class 
are unpopular to-day as was the Master himself in his 
day, with a class corresponding to the scribes and Pharisees 
and doctors of the Law. Only those who love 
the Master much and appreciate greatly their own forgiveness 
will love his "feet members" in the present 
time to the extent that they would be willing to serve 
them and to fellowship them; while others like Nicodemus 



and Simon, altho well-meaning and considerably 

interested, will be ashamed of the gospel of the 

Nazarene in the present time, and ashamed of his feet, 

which published to Zion glad tidings, saying, "Thy 

God reigneth"— the Millennial age is dawning and 

the reign of Christ has already begun. (Isa. 52:7.) 

But those who are ashamed either of the gospel 

or of its servants are ashamed of the Master and of the 

Father; and such cannot be recognized as "overcomers" 

of the world, because instead they are overcome 

by the world and its spirit. Such shall not be accounted 

worthy to progress into the full knowledge and privileges 

of discipleship. 

How few there are who seem to have a large measure 
of the spirit of Mary Magdalene! How few are 
really very helpful to one another. How few pour 
upon one another the spikenard ointment of comforting 
words, helpful suggestions and encouragements. 
Those who are thus helpful will be found filled with a 
genuine love for the "head," for the "body" in general 
and even for the "feet." And the secret of their 
love as in Mary's case will be found to be a large appreciation 
of their own imperfections and of the Lord's 
mercy and grace toward them, in the forgiveness of 
their sins. The Apostle expresses the sentiments of 
these helpful and loving members of the body, who are 
the only ones who are making their calling and election 
sure, saying,— "For we thus judge, that if one 
died for all then were all dead; and that we who live 
should not henceforth live unto ourselves, but unto 
him who died for us and rose again." 



R2201 : page 242 

"WASH ONE ANOTHER'S FEET. 



IT WAS shortly after the incident related foregoing 
that our Lord, alone with the twelve disciples, 
took a basin of water and a towel and began to 
wash the disciples' feet. Strange indeed, this conduct 
seemed to them: not only their Master's words but also 
his actions were inexplicable riddles to them. He had 
acknowledged himself as the Son of God, the Messiah, 
their Lord and Master; and yet here he was, kneeling 
before them in the attitude of the humblest servant, 
washing their feet. Wondering and dumbfounded, but 
accustomed to obey the Master, no remark or protest 
was made until in turn he came to Peter. But Peter, 
as humble as he was bold, refused to allow the Master 
to perform the menial service, until assured that the 
explanation of it would be given after the service had 
been performed, and that unless he was washed he 



could have no part with the Master, whereupon he desired 
that his head and his hands as well as his feet 
might be washed. 

Since literal feet-washing was frequent, the custom 
of that day, and almost indispensable to comfort, we 
may suppose that our Lord's example would be frequently 
followed in the early Church. But, we do not 
see in it any command that feet-washing should be performed 
simply as a ceremony— regardless of its usefulness 
and its convenience. 

Our Lord's words to Peter, "If I wash thee not 
thou hast no part with me," certainly imply that the 
washing was more than a mere ceremony— more also 
than a mere expression of humility, as we shall endeavor 
to show. Nevertheless, the principle should 
hold good in every time and in every clime: that whatever 
useful service can be rendered to a fellow-member 
of the body of Christ, however humble or menial, it 
should be performed, as unto the Lord. 

Having finished the service the Master explained 
its significance. He had set them an example (1) of 
humility, in being willing to perform the most menial 

R2201 : page 243 

service to those who were truly his; (2) the washing 
was an illustration of a great truth, namely, that altho 
already cleansed by the Lord— justified freely from all 
things, through faith in him— yet that there were certain 
defilements which would attach to each of them 
so long as they would be in the world, from contact 
with its evils and besetments. While the general washing 
(justification) would stand good for all time, yet 
they would need continually (figuratively) to wash one 
another's feet— with the "washing of water by the 
word." (Eph. 5:26.) This would signify that they 
should have a mutual watch-care over one another's 
welfare; to keep each other clean, holy, pure, and to 
assist one another in overcoming the trials and temptations 
and besetments of this present evil world;— arising 
from the three sources of temptation, "the world, 
the flesh and the devil." 

This cleansing work which is to be done for one 
another is in harmony with the injunction, "Keep yourselves 
in the love of God." They could not get each 
other into the love of God: that could be attained only 
in the one way; through the original cleansing of the 
precious blood, through faith; and no one can thus 
cleanse us or help us into divine favor, except the Redeemer 
himself. But he having cleansed us and brought 
us into divine favor, has commissioned us that we 
should help one another to "abide in his love" and to 
keep ourselves unspotted from the world. The merit, 
the way and the privilege are all of God through Christ. 
The agencies used in applying these to one another are 
ourselves. "Ye ought also to wash one another's feet;" 



to help keep each other separate from the world, and 
clean through the Word he has spoken unto us,— by 
"the washing of water by the Word;" "building one 
another up in the most holy faith." 

This again reminds us of the Scriptural statement, 
in reference to the Church perfected and glorified,— 
"His wife hath made herself ready." (Rev. 19:7.) 
While the entire arrangement for her wedding robes, 
the washing of regeneration (justification) and the 
water for her feet-washing, are all provided for the 

R2202 : page 243 

bride through the agency of the Bridegroom, and she 
is thus made ready, yet the use of these means, the 
putting on of her adornment, the embroidering of her 
robes and the arrangement of the jewels presented to 
her through the spirit, is left for herself to do; each 
member of the body co-operating unto the edification 
of the whole body in love.— 1 Thes. 5:11; Rom. 14:19. 

It would doubtless be pleasing in the sight of the 
Master, our Head, that we should have a disposition 
to help and to reform the world in general, and to wash 
the vilest of the vile from all their sin; but however 
praiseworthy such a disposition might be, we are to 
remember that this is not the command which he has 
placed before us in our text. His injunction here is 
not to do general washing of all the unclean, but to do 
special washing for those whom he already has cleansed, 
justified, through faith. It is in respect to the fellow-members 
of his body that he has given this charge; 
and we emphasize it here, because this fact seems to be 
very generally overlooked by Christian people, who give 
their time rather to the outward cleansing, the moral 
and social uplifting, of those whose hearts have never 
been washed by the Master, and correspondingly neglect 
one another, his "feet." Yet, as already seen, preceding, 
tho it is a great honor to render such a service to one 
another, the privilege will be properly appreciated and 
much used only by the truly humble who have much 
love for the Master. 

But, it requires peculiar qualifications to enable us 
to help each other in this respect; before we can help 
others to remove the motes out of their eyes, and to 
cleanse their way of life, in all its little particulars, so 
that every thought as well as every word and act shall 
be brought into subjection to the divine will, it is necessary 
that we have experiences along the same lines 
ourselves. We must endeavor to get rid of the motes 
and beams that would obstruct our own vision. We 
must cultivate purity in our own lives,— in our deeds, 
words and thoughts. Only as we cultivate the various 
graces of the spirit,— meekness, patience, gentleness, 
brotherly-kindness, love, can we hope to be specially 
helpful to others in putting on these adornments of 
character and purities of life, and to get rid of defilements 



of the world, and the flesh. 

To this end it will be found helpful to remember 
the lesson of Mary in her service to the Lord's literal 
feet. Many who would reject well-meaning criticisms 
of conduct, resent well-meant efforts to wash their 
feet, as interferences with their private business, would 
be very amenable to the influences of the same person 
if he approached them with such evidences of true devotion 
and loving interest as would be symbolized by 
tears. It is the sympathetic ones who are most successful 
in helping the various members of the body of 
Christ out of the difficulties, besetments and defilements 
incident to the following of the Lord in this 
present time. Oh, let us study and strive and pray 
that we may be very successful in obeying the Master's 
words, "Ye also ought to wash one another's feet." 

It will also be a great help and comfort to the fellow 
members of the body, if in connection with these 
efforts to help one another in the cleansing of our ways, 
by taking heed unto the Word of the Lord, we will 
have with us also some of the precious ointment of 
sympathetic and, as far as possible, commendatory and 
encouraging words, and helpful assistance: for all the 
members of the feet class who are seeking to walk 
worthy of the Lord need the ointment of sympathy and 
encouragement, as offsets to the trials, difficulties and 
persecutions incident to the "narrow way," coming to 
them from the great Adversary and his blinded servants. 



R2202 : page 244 

THE SUM OF ALL GRACES IS LOVE. 

-AUG. 22.-1 COR. 15:1-13.- 

"And now abideth Faith, Hope, Love, these three; 
but the greatest of these is Love."— 1 Cor. 13:13. 

NEXT TO the Great Teacher's sermon on the 

mount, stands this discourse upon Love by 

the great Apostle Paul. Both discourses teach the 

same lesson; but they approach it from different standpoints. 

As pupils in the school of Christ, all the instructions 

of the divine Word and providences are intended 

to develop our hearts and influence our conduct 

in harmony with the lines of Love. This was the testimony 

of the Master when he said, "A new commandment 

I give unto you, that ye love one another." 

Similarly he declared that the entire law of God to men 

is fulfilled in Love— toward God and toward men: Thou 

shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with 

all thy mind, with all thy being, and with all thy 

strength; and thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. 

Since, then, "Love is the fulfiling of the law," and "the 



bond of perfectness," without which no other grace of 
character would be truly beautiful, we do not wonder 
to find the statement in Scripture that "God is Love;" 
and again, that "He that loveth not, knoweth not God." 

Our Lord declares, "This is life eternal, that they 
might know thee, the only true God"— the God who 
is Love. To know God in the sense here indicated 
means more than merely to know that there is a God; 
it means more than merely to know something of God's 
loving plan and character; it means to know God in the 
sense of personal acquaintance, and an appreciation of 
his character; and no one can have this knowledge except 
as he receives, partakes of, the spirit of God, the 
spirit of holiness, the spirit of Love. And this spirit 
of holiness and Love cannot be acquired instantly; it is 
a growth, and its development is the chief business and 
should be the chief concern of all who hope to know 
God in the complete sense which will be rewarded with 
life eternal. 

Hence, after Love's great provision of the Lamb 
of God, and the ransom of all mankind accomplished 
by him, all of its various steps for our deliverance from 
sin and death have been along the line of developing 
in us this character of Love, the character of God, 
which, according to the divine standard, alone will 
make us acceptable before the Father and bring to us 
his grace of everlasting life. Oh how important then, 
that we should be "taught of God" and develop this 
his character. "Learn of me," said our dear Redeemer; 
and well we may, for he is the express image of the 
Father's glorious character of Love. And "if any man 
have not the spirit of Christ [the Father's holy spirit, 
Love] he is none of his." 

To begin with, we are very poor material out of 
which to form likenesses of God's dear Son. (Rom. 8:29.) 
We were "children of wrath even as others"— 
the original likeness of God possessed by father Adam 
before he transgressed has been sadly lost in the six 
thousand years intervening: hence, instead of finding 
ourselves in the divine likeness of Love, we find that 
we were "born in sin, and shapen in iniquity" to such 
a degree that, instead of Love being the natural ruling 
principle in our characters, it is in many instances almost 
entirely obliterated; and what remains is largely 
contaminated with evil, self-love and sin-love and carnal-love; 
—perversions which are in direct antagonism 
with the wholly unselfish Love which is the essence of 
the divine character. 

The work of grace for the world, during the Millennial 
age, will be to make known to all mankind the 
gracious character of God, and his provision for the 
salvation of all; and to transform all who are willing 
from the depravity of sin to the perfection of character 
—Love: making mankind once more images of God. It 
will not only transform their wills, but it will also be 
accompanied by a physical transformation which will 



remove from them all the blemishes of sin, and all hereditary 
inclinations thereto, and leave them in the 
likeness of God, with a recollection of the undesirableness 
of sin and its evil consequences. 

The work of grace for the Church during this 
Gospel age is to transform our perverted characters and 
reestablish them in the divine character, Love. Whoever 
fails of attaining this fails of attaining the will of 
God concerning him; and must necessarily fail of winning 
the prize set before us in the gospel. 

But since our transformation of mind or will is not 
accompanied by a physical transformation or restitution, 
it follows that so long as we are in the flesh, we shall 
be obliged to contend against its inherited weaknesses 
and dispositions to selfishness and sin. But this sharp 
and continual conflict not only selects a special overcoming 
class, but serves to develop the desired character 
more quickly than will the more easy processes of 
the Millennial age. In consequence, while it will require 
nearly a thousand years for the world's perfecting, 
the perfecting of the saints in character may be 
accomplished in a few years, under the special, sharp 
discipline and the special course of instruction designed 
for the "little flock." But whether in few years or 
many years, and whether with little or much friction 
of adversity, the transformation and polishing of character 
must be accomplished. This love-likeness of our 
wills to the will of God is the end to be sought, if we 

R2202 : page 245 

would finish our course with joy, and with good hopes 
for the eternal glory. 

GIFTS IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 



In the early Church God indicated in a miraculous 
manner his acceptance of those who consecrated themselves 
as followers of Christ, by the bestowal of what 
were termed "gifts of the spirit." A particular account 

R2203 : page 245 

of these is given in the chapter preceding our lesson. 
(1 Cor. 12.) The Apostle indicates that some enjoyed 
several of these gifts, remarking concerning himself 
that he had more than any of them. Not unnaturally 
the recipients of these gifts, while feeling thankful for 
such a recognition from heaven, realized that some gifts 
were more valuable than others: and the Apostle confirms 
this view and urges that they seek to use the 
highest and noblest gifts where several were possessed. 
And perceiving that the Church was likely to consider 
that the possession of these gifts indicated such a measure 



of divine favor as would imply that they were overcomers 
and would ultimately gain the prize of their 
high calling, the Apostle took this opportunity, while 
discussing the gifts, to point out that their possession 
implied far less of divine favor than the recipients had 
supposed. To this end he points out in our lesson 
that these outward gifts of tongues, miracles, healings, 
etc., were necessarily and properly divided between 
the various members of the Church for their mutual 
welfare, and to draw them and hold them together, 
making them mutually dependent upon one another. 
This being the case, all could not have the same gifts; 
but as he points out, God has divided these and set or 
established the various members and gifts in the body 
as it hath pleased him. Yet, it is proper that all should 
recognize the difference in the gifts, and each covet or 
desire earnestly to have and to use in the divine service 
the best gifts that God has been pleased to entrust to 
his stewardship. And then, the Apostle adds, "Yet 
show I unto you a more excellent way." 

FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT MORE DESIRABLE. 



This more excellent way is that, instead of seeking 
and striving for the "gifts," which were solely at 
God's disposal, they should seek for another kind of 
"gifts," otherwise called "fruits" of the same spirit; 
namely, Faith, Hope and Love. These gifts are termed 
"fruits of the spirit," because, unlike the others, they 
grow gradually, and are not given miraculously. However 
humble a miraculous gift any member of the 
Church might have, there would be nothing to hinder 
him from growing the largest "fruits of the spirit" by 
careful attention to the cultivation of his heart. If the 
chief "gifts" were not open to all, the greater and 
more precious "fruits" were open to all; and to desire 
and cultivate these is much more excellent than to strive 
after miraculous gifts or talents which God has not 
been pleased of his own volition to bestow. 

Proceeding along this line, the Apostle calls attention 
to the fact that any one, or even all, of the miraculous 
"gifts" might be possessed, and yet the recipient 
be far from the condition of heart which would be fit 
for the Kingdom. The quality which is necessary, as 
a basis of character, which would make any service acceptable 
to God or cause it to be appreciated or esteemed 
by him, is Love. If Love be not the motive 
power, the greatest zeal and richest rhetoric and eloquence 
on behalf of God or on behalf of righteousness, 
would pass for nothing in God's estimation, and bring 
us no reward from him. If Love be lacking, great 
ability as an expounder of mysteries, and much study 
and knowledge would pass for nothing in God's esteem. 
Even a faith that could cure all manner of diseases, or, 



to use our Lord's illustration of the largest degree of 
faith of this kind, a mountain-moving faith (Matt. 21:21) 
would count for nothing, if, deep in our hearts as 
the basis therefor, God could not see Love,— for himself 
and for our fellow-creatures. Even the giving of 
all of one's possessions to feed the poor, as charity, 
would count for naught except the moving cause were 
Love. And even to be a martyr, and to be burned at 
the stake in the name of Christ, would pass for naught 
except in the recesses of the heart God could see that 
the moving consideration to the suffering was Love. 
Because, all of these things, the acquisition of knowledge, 
the dispensing of it with eloquence, the exercise 
of mountain moving faith, and the giving of all of one's 
goods to the poor, and his own martyrdom, might be 
done from selfish motives— to be seen of men, to be 
highly esteemed by men, for ostentation, for pride, or 
because of a combative disposition. For this cause the 
Apostle exhorted the Church to seek for this inestimable 
fruitage of the spirit,— Love; so that whatever 
gifts they might possess, either natural or miraculous, 
might be exercised in a manner that would be a blessing 
to their fellows and acceptable to God, and bring 
the users the great reward,— eternal life. 

What then is Love, this wonderful quality without 
which nothing is acceptable in the sight of God? The 
Apostle does not attempt to define Love, but contents 
himself in giving us a description of some of its manifestations. 
The fact is that Love, like life and light, 
is difficult to define; and our best endeavors to comprehend 
it are along the lines of its effects. Where 
Love is lacking results are more or less evil; where 
Love is present the results differ according to the degree 
of Love, and are proportionately good. A college 
professor, commenting upon the word Love, said,— 

"As you have seen a man of science take a beam 

R2203 : page 246 

of light and pass it through a crystal prism, as you have 
seen it come out on the other side of the prism broken 
up into its component colors— red, and blue, and yellow, 
and violet, and orange, and all the colors of the 
rainbow— so Paul passes this thing, Love, through the 
magnificent prism of his inspired intellect, and it comes 
out on the other side broken up into its elements. And 
in these few words we have what one might call the 
spectrum of Love, the analysis of Love. Will you observe 
what its elements are? Will you notice that they 
have common names; that they are features which we 
hear about every day, that they are things which can 
be practiced by every man in every place in life; and 
how by a multitude of small things and ordinary virtues, 
the supreme thing, the summum bonum, is made up? 

"The spectrum of Love has nine ingredients:— 

Patience— Love suffereth long.' 



Kindness— 'and is kind.' 

Generosity— 'Love envieth not.' 

Humility— 'Love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed 
up.' 

Courtesy— 'does not behave itself unseemly.' 

Unselfishness— 'seeketh not her own.' 

Good temper— 'is not easily provoked.' 

Guilelessness— 'thinketh no evil.' 

Sincerity— 'Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth 
in the truth.'" 

We cannot agree with the professor that these 
graces can be practiced by every man, in every place, 
every day. We must contend that these graces as a 
whole cannot belong to "the natural man." He may 
indeed put on some of the gentleness, some of the humility, 
some of the courtesy, some of the patience, 
some of the kindness; as men may attach grapes to 
thorn-bushes and figs to thistles; but with the natural 
man these graces are wholly put on, and not the outgrowth 
of the inward grace, the holy spirit, Love;— 
not an evidence of relationship to God. Where the 
imitator has not been begotten again, by the word and 
spirit of truth, his imitation of certain outward features 
of Love will not constitute him a son of God nor bring 
to him the rewards and blessings of sonship to which 
there is but one door,— Christ Jesus. 

In the Christian, an outward manifestation of patience, 
meekness, etc., is not sufficient either in God's 
sight or in his own sight. These graces of the spirit must 
be produced by the spirit of Love, filling and expanding 
within his own heart. But in civilized countries 
many of the graces of the spirit are recognized by the 
unregenerate, and are imitated as marks of good breeding: 
and in many cases they are successfully worn as 
a cloak or mask, covering hearts and sentiments quite 
antagonistic to the holy spirit of Love. 

The putting on of the outward forms of Love does 
however mitigate the evils and distress and friction incident 
to the fall, even in "the natural man," even 
when these graces are merely simulated with more or 
less of hypocrisy and deception as to the real selfishness 
of the uncircumcised heart. But trying times occasionally 
show how thin is the polished veneer of politeness 
and gentleness which covers selfish and stony 
hearts: for instance, the last reports from the recent 
holocaust at the Charity Bazaar in Paris, shows that the 
most polished and aristocratic young "gentle-men" of 
the most polite city and nation of earth displayed the 
ferocity of brute beasts when face to face with death, 
and that in their mad rush to escape the flames they 
knocked down and injured each other and even the first 
ladies of rank in France, to whom erstwhile they were 
overly polite. We cannot expect more of a love-veneered 
selfish heart— even the strong glue of chivalry 
will not hold the veneer under some such cases. And 
the time is not far distant when a still greater, more 



general and more terrible crisis will make manifest to 

the whole world that much of the politeness and gentleness 

of our day is only skin deep, and is not from 

the heart, the fruitage of the holy spirit of Love. In 

that great crisis, as the Scriptures show, every man's 

hand will be against his neighbor. In that Day of 

Vengeance the masks of formal politeness will be discarded, 

and the world for a short time will get such a 

glimpse of its own hideous selfishness as will help prepare 

it for Millennial lessons in Love and its graces, to 

be given them by the great Immanuel. 

The Scriptures inform us that in our fallen state 
Love is foreign to our natures, and must be introduced 
into them by the power of God; saying,— "Not that 
we first loved God but that he loved us and sent his 
Son to be a propitiation for our sins." And, learning 
of this, God's Love, and truly believing and appreciating 

R2204 : page 246 

it, "the Love of Christ constraineth us [to Love]." 
We are "begotten by the Word of truth,"— the message 
of God's Love toward us in the forgiveness of 
our sins, and his call to us to return to his favor 
and likeness, and his provision of the helps by the way 
that we might become copies of his dear Son. 

The measure of our appreciation of divine Love will 
be the measure of our zeal in conforming our characters 
to the divine pattern. A naturally rough, uncouth, depraved 
disposition may require a long time, after the 
grace of divine Love enters the heart, before that grace 
is manifest in all the words and thoughts and acts of 
the outward man. Others, on the contrary, of more 
gentle birth and cultured training, may without the 
grace of God within have many of the outward refinements. 
None but he that readeth the heart is competent 
therefore to judge as to who have and who have 
not received this grace, and of the degree of its development 
in their hearts: but each one may judge for 
himself, and each one begotten by this holy spirit, 
Love, should seek to let its light so shine out, through 
all the avenues of communication with his fellow-creatures, 

R2204 : page 247 

as to glorify our Father in heaven and "show 

forth the glories of him who called us out of darkness 

into his marvelous light." 

Perfect Love is patient with the weaknesses and 
imperfections of those who give any evidence of good 
intentions. More than this, it is patient even with 
those who are out of the way, and that oppose themselves 
to righteousness, realizing that the whole world 
is more or less under the influence of the great adversary 
who, as the Apostle declares, blinds the minds of 
the masses. This manifestation of Love was very 



prominent in our Lord Jesus: how patient was he with 
his opponents. Let us heed the Apostle's words:— 
"Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners 
against himself, lest ye be wearied [in well-doing 
and patience] and faint in your minds."— Heb. 12:3. 

Perfect Love is kind in its methods. It not only 
seeks to do good to others, but seeks to do it in the 
kindest possible manner. And who has not discovered 
that the manner and tone have much to do with every 
affair of life. In proportion as perfect Love is attained 
the effort of the heart will be to have every word and 
act, like the thought which prompts them, full of kindness. 
It is well to remember the motto of the old 
Quaker,— "I shall pass through this world but once. 
Any good thing, therefore, that I can do, or any kindness 
that I can show to any human being, let me do it 
now. Let me not defer it, nor neglect it, for I shall 
not pass this way again." 

Perfect Love is generous and has no place for envy, 
which, on the contrary, springs from a perverted nature 
—from selfishness. Love on the contrary rejoices 
with them that rejoice, in the prosperity of every good 
work and word, and in the advancement in Christian 
grace and in the divine service of all who are actuated 
by the divine spirit. 

Perfect Love is humble— "vaunteth not itself." It 
does not sound a trumpet before it. Its good deeds 
are not done to be seen of men, but would be done just 
the same if no one saw or knew but God only. It is 
neither boastful of its knowledge, nor of its graces, but 
in humility acknowledges that every good and perfect 
gift cometh from the Father; and it makes return for 
every mercy to him. Some one has truly said that— 
"Love saves a man from making a fool of himself by 
consequential conduct, and by thrusting himself into 
positions which betray his incompetence." 

Perfect Love is courteous— "doth not behave itself 
unseemly." Pride is the root out of which grows most 
of the unseemly conduct and boorishness so common 
to those who think themselves somebody, either intellectually 
or financially. Perfect Love on the contrary 
develops courteousness along with humility. A thoughtful 
man has said,— "Politeness has been defined as 
love in trifles. Courtesy is said to be love in little 
things. The one secret of politeness is to love. A 
gentleman is one who does things gently, with love." 

Perfect Love is unselfish— "seeketh not her own" 
interests, exclusively. Nothing in this signifies that 
one should neglect the duty of caring for and providing 
for those dependent upon him by ties of nature, 
that he may do good to others. In every sense, "Love 
begins at home." The proper thought, as we gather 
it, is that the men and women possessed of the spirit of 
perfect love, would not think exclusively of their own 
interests in any of the affairs of life. In bargaining 
they would have an interest also in the welfare of the 



one from whom they bought or to whom they sold. 
They would not wish to take advantage of a neighbor, 
but sympathetically and generously would wish to 
"live and let live." Put into exercise, this element of 
Love would have a great influence upon all the affairs 
of life, inside as well as outside the home and family. 

Perfect Love is good tempered— "not easily provoked" 
to anger. Among the evils abounding and 
very common to-day, is this one of ill-temper, fretfulness, 
bad humor, touchiness, quickness to take offence. 
Yet, to whatever extent this disposition is fostered, or 
willingly harbored, or not fought against, it becomes 
an evidence of a deficiency and imperfection of our development 
in the holy spirit of our Father, and of the 
deficiency of our likeness to our Lord Jesus, our 
Pattern. Very few of the evidences of a wrong spirit 
receive as much kindness and as many excuses for their 
continuance as does this one. But however natural 
depravity, and heredity, and nervous disorders, may 
tend toward this spirit of fretfulness, taciturnity, and 
touchiness, every heart filled with the Lord's spirit 
must oppose this disposition to evil in his flesh, and 
must wage a good warfare against it. It will not do 
to say, "It is my way;" for all the ways of the fallen 
nature are bad: it is the business of the new nature to 
overcome the old nature in this as well as other works 
of the flesh and the devil: and few show to our friends 
and households more than this the power of the grace 
of Love. This grace as it grows should make every 
child of God sweet tempered. 

Perfect Love is guileless— "thinketh no evil." It 
seeks to interpret the conduct of others charitably. If 
pure and good intentioned itself, it prefers, and so far 
as possible endeavors, to view the words and conduct 
of others from the same standpoint. It does not treasure 
up animosities and suspicions, nor manufacture a 
chain of circumstantial proofs of evil intentions out of 
trivial affairs. Some one has wisely remarked that 
"faults are thick where love is thin." Love makes all 
possible allowance for errors of judgment, rather than 
to impugn the motives of the heart. 

R2204 : page 248 

Perfect Love is sincere— "rejoiceth not in iniquity." 
It is grieved by evils wherever encountered, sympathizes 
with all who fall into evil, or who are beset by 
temptations. In this respect Love prompts to an opposite 
course of action from that of Balaam, who "loved 
the reward of iniquity." Balaam, it will be remembered, 
feared the Lord, and as his prophet could not 
think of doing otherwise than according to the strict 
letter of the Lord's injunction; but he did not have 
the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of Love; and hence, 
when a reward was offered him if he would curse Israel, 
he was willing (in order to secure the reward) to 



conform to the evil proposition in spirit, in intention, 
while outwardly refraining from saying aught except 
as the Lord indicated. So, there are some amongst 
Christians who have a respect for the letter of the divine 
word through fear, but who lack the holy spirit 
of Love, and who by reason of a perverted love for 
wealth, etc., are willing to engage in various practices 
which come as near to the injury of the Lord's cause 
as is possible, without openly opposing him. Some of 
these Balaams are in the ministry and for the sake of 
salary, and the maintenance of their positions, and the 
friendship of wealthy Balaks, are willing to preach doctrines 
which they do not believe (respecting eternal 
torment, etc.), and in various ways to cast stumbling 
blocks before spiritual Israel. (Num. 22:7; 31:16; 
Rev. 2: 14.) The Apostle mentions these Balaams as 
being specially represented by false teachers in the nominal 
Church.-See 2 Pet. 2:15; Jude 11; Rev. 2:14. 

Every one who is seeking to develop in his heart 
the holy spirit, perfect love, should guard carefully 
this point of sincerity of motive as well as uprightness 
of conduct. The least suggestion of rejoicing at the 
fall of any person or thing that in any degree represents 
righteousness and goodness, is to be deplored and 
overcome. Perfect Love rejoiceth not in iniquity under 
any circumstances or conditions, and would have 
no sympathy but only sorrow in the fall of another, 
even if it should mean his own advancement. 

Perfect Love "rejoiceth in the truth." However 
profitable error might be, Love could take no part in it, 
and could not desire the reward of evil. But it does 
take pleasure in the truth— truth upon every subject, 
and especially in the truth of divine revelation; however 
unpopular the truth may be; however much persecution 
its advocacy may involve; however much it 
may cause the loss of the friendship of this world and 
of those who are blinded by the god of this world. The 
spirit of Love has such an affinity for the truth that it 
rejoices to share loss, persecution, distress or whatever 
may come against the truth and its servants. In the 
Lord's estimate it is all the same whether we are 
ashamed of him or ashamed of his Word, and of all 
such he declares that he will be ashamed when he comes 
to be glorified in his saints. 

R2205 : page 248 

Perfect Love "beareth all things." It is both willing 
and able to endure for the cause of God— reproaches, 
reproofs, insults, losses, misrepresentations 
and even death. "This is the victory that overcometh 
the world, even your faith"— the very center and life 
of which faith is the holy spirit of Love to the Lord 
and to them that are his, and sympathetically for the 
world. Perfect Love can bear up under all circumstances 
and by God's grace bring us off "conquerors 



and more than conquerors" through him who loved us. 

Perfect Love "believeth all things." It is not suspicious, 
but on the contrary disposed to be trustful. It 
acts on the principle that it is better if necessary to be 
deceived a hundred times, than to go through life 
soured by a distrustful suspicious mind— far better than 
to wrongly accuse or suspicion even one person unjustly. 
This is the merciful disposition as applied to 
thoughts, and of it the Master said, "Blessed are the 
merciful, they shall obtain mercy." The unmerciful, 
evil-thinking mind is father to unmerciful conduct toward 
others. 

Perfect Love "hopeth all things." It is not easily 
discouraged. This is the secret of Love's perseverance; 
having learned of God, and having become a partaker 
of his spirit of holiness, it trusts in him and hopes undismayed 
for the fulfilment of his gracious Covenant, 
however dark the immediate surroundings. This hopeful 
element of Love is one of the striking features in 
the perseverance of the saints, enabling them to endure 
hardness as good soldiers. Its hopeful quality hinders 
it from being easily offended, or easily stopped in the 
work of the Lord. Where others would be discouraged 
and put to flight, the spirit of Love gives endurance, 
that we may war a good warfare, and please the Captain 
of our salvation. Love's hopefulness knows no 
despair, for its anchorage enters into that which is beyond 
the vail, and is firmly fastened to the Rock of 
Ages. 

FAITH, HOPE AND LOVE ABIDE FOREVER. 



Not only is Love the greatest of all the graces, 
and really, as we have seen, the sum of them all in 
combination and unification, but it is the most lasting 
grace: Love never faileth— will never cease; and he 
who has this character of Love will never fail, will 
never cease: It is for such that eternal life has been 
provided in the divine plan. 

Now bear in mind the Apostle's argument to the 
Corinthian friends: (1) that the gifts of miracles, 
tongues, etc., bestowed upon them by the spirit, were 
divided amongst them according to talent or divine 
wisdom, and were not the results of their own efforts; 

R2205 : page 249 

(2) that he is pointing out to them a grace much more 

excellent than those "gifts," something that God will 

be pleased to give to each one of them; a grace of more 

value than any of the "gifts"— of much more value 

than all of them together; a grace that might properly 

be termed a fruitage of the spirit,— Love. And the 

fact is that some possessed of few talents have proportionately 



less to contend against while seeking to cultivate 
the all-important Love. 

Having described this wonderful and necessary 
element of character in its perfection, the Apostle comes 
back and contrasts it with those "gifts" which they so 
highly appreciated and coveted, and shows that the 
chiefest of those "gifts" are inferior to Love. The 
gift of prophecy he declares will fail, will cease; because 
the necessity for prophecy would cease: the miraculous 
power of speaking with unknown tongues 
would cease for the same reason: the knowledge of 
mysteries and the ability to expound the deep things 
of God will gradually vanish away, as the perfect light 
gradually comes to all men; for when the full, clear 
light shall have come there will be nothing hidden, all 
shall be revealed, and all will be able to see; hence the 
gifts of ability to understand mysteries of the divine 
plan and to expound them to others, altho two of the 
greatest of the gifts, will ultimately vanish in the perfect 
light: but Love will never fail. It is the greatest 
thing in this world, and it will continue the greatest 
thing in the world to come; for God is Love; and all 
who would enjoy his favor and its reward, eternal life, 
must possess this, his holy character. 

Pausing, the Apostle remarks how little we all 
know in the present time; even those who have the 
largest amount of knowledge and who can expound the 
divine Word and its hidden mysteries, know only in 
part; they see only obscurely: and while the obscurity 
will gradually vanish into the perfect light as the Sun 
of Righteousness arises, yet we will only know in part 
until that time, when we shall be "changed;" when 
imperfection shall give place to perfection. 

Looking back to childhood we can see that as we 
have developed physically and grown in knowledge in 
earthly matters, and have changed our processes of 
thought and conduct and language correspondingly; 
so in spiritual matters we should realize that in the beginning 
of our Christian way we were but "babes;" 
and we should not be satisfied to remain such, but desire 
individually to grow up into Christ in all things. 
And what is true of each individually is true of the 
Church collectively. The period of the gifts of tongues 
and miracles was the period of infancy, childhood; as 
progress was made, under the leading of the holy 
spirit, certain of those features very necessary and well 
adapted to the childhood stage passed away, and instead 
came other experiences, methods and leadings in the 
truth. Hence, to-day the "tongues" are gone, the 
"prophesying" in the sense of foretelling future events 
is gone, the "miracles" are gone, etc., after having 
served their purposes well. But the Lord still continues 
to provide in the Church "knowledge," even tho it be 
but imperfect knowledge; he still continues to provide 
methods for evangelizing or spreading the news of the 
truth to the unbelieving; he still provides teachers and 



helps in the Church. But these are not usually provided 
miraculously, as at first, but naturally and by the 
addition of the Lord's blessing to natural qualifications. 
But all these will cease so far as the Church is concerned 
when her course is finished;— "when that which 
is perfect is come," she will have no further need of 
these imperfect helps. 

Three gifts of the spirit, of the kind developed as 
fruits, will survive; and these three are to be earnestly 
sought and diligently cultivated; they are Faith, Hope 
and Love: but the greatest, the chiefest, of these is 
Love. Faith and Hope, altho they are two of the most 
necessary qualities for the present time, in aiding us in 
making our calling and election sure, and two which 
will never cease to all eternity, will measurably lose 
their active operations, "when that which is perfect is 
come;" because in a large degree and in reference to 
many subjects, sight and knowledge will take the place 
of Faith and Hope. But Love will never fail, never 
fade, never grow dim. It will be as active and glorious 
and useful in the life to come as it is now. Indeed, 
the sum of the future perfect life will be Love. 



Let us, dear readers, with all our getting, get Love 
—not merely in word, but in deed and in truth; the 
Love whose roots are in the "new heart," begotten in 
us by our Heavenly Father's Love, exemplified in the 
words and deeds of our dear Redeemer. All else sought 
and gained will be but loss and dross unless with all we 
secure Love. 

The Editor has a proposal to make to every reader, 
which he believes will be helpful to all who cooperate. 
It is this:— 

(1) That during the remainder of this year each 

of us pray every morning, that the Lord will bless us 
in the cultivation of Love in thoughts and words and 
deeds throughout the day; and that every evening, 
when reviewing the events of the day at the throne of 
the heavenly grace, we remember to report to the Lord 
respecting our measure of success or failure. 

(2) That during the remainder of this year we 

read carefully and thoughtfully every Sunday morning, 

alternately, 1 Corinthians 13 and Matthew 5:1-16. 

That those who would like to read in unison may do so, 

we mention that the Editor will read Matt. 5:1-16 on 

August 22, 1 Cor. 13 on Aug. 29, and thus onward alternately. 

Note the results of your watching and 

praying; keep on the lookout for all encouraging evidences 

of growth in this fruitage of the holy spirit: 

and, when you write to us, if you please, mention your 

progress in willing to Love and in practicing it; we are 

specially glad to know of your growth both in grace 

and in knowledge. 



R2206 : page 250 

THE GOSPEL PREACHED AT EPHESUS. 

-AUGUST 29.-ACTS 19:21-34.- 

"Take heed, and beware of covetousness."— Luke 12:15. 

THIS lesson stands related to the history of Paul's 
evangelistic service amongst the Gentiles, connecting 
with our lesson dated August 1 ; and the intervening verses 
should be considered. Leaving Corinth, 
the Apostle made a short stop at the important city of 
Ephesus, parting there with Aquila and Priscilla who 
accompanied him that far. He proceeded to Jerusalem 
that he might be in time for the feast of the Passover, 
purposing no doubt a visit with the Church there, 
amongst whom were several of the apostles and James 
our Lord's brother. The account of the visit to Jerusalem 
is briefly summed up by Luke in the statement 
that Paul "saluted the Church." (Acts 18:22.) Apparently, 
the reception accorded the great Apostle was 
a rather cool one, the believers there having not yet 
learned so thoroughly as had Paul that but a "remnant" 
would be gathered from the Jews, and the remainder 
of the elect Church be selected from the Gentiles. 
Cannon Farrar makes a remark on this visit by 
Paul to Jerusalem which is well worth repeating; he 
says,— 

"Had James and the circle of which he was the 
centre, only understood how vast for the future Christianity 
would be the issues of these perilous and toilsome 
journeys,. ..with what affection and admiration 
would they have welcomed him? So far from this, 
St. Luke hurries over the brief visit in three words 
that he 'saluted the Church;'. ..there is too much 
reason to fear that his reception was cold and ungracious; 
that even if James received him with courtesy, 
the Judaic Christians who surrounded 'the Lord's 
brother' would not; and even that a jealous dislike of 
that free position towards the Law, which he established 
amongst his Gentile converts, led to that determination 
upon the part of some of them to follow in 
his track and to undermine his influence, which, to the 
intense embitterment of his later days, was so fatefully 
successful. It must have been with a sad heart, with 
something even of indignation at this unsympathetic 
coldness, that St. Paul hurriedly terminated his visit. 
But none of these things moved him." 

Oh, how much some of the "brethren" missed it, 
when they failed to recognize the leading of the Lord's 
providence in connection with the work of the Apostle 
Paul. John-Mark, as we have already seen, and 
afterward his uncle Barnabas failed to see their great 



privilege in being co-workers together with that servant 
whom the Lord was pleased specially to use in the 
presentation of the gospel message at that time. And 
afterward we note how some "false apostles," not sent 
on any such errand, followed the Apostle into various 
cities where he by the Lord's grace had planted the 
truth and there sought, and to some extent succeeded, 
in overturning his work— "teaching the people that 
they should keep the Law of Moses," etc. But we are 
not to understand that they really did injury to the 
Lord's work; for the Lord himself is behind his own 
work. Their teachings served as sittings to draw off 
those who were not Israelites indeed, and who had not 
received the perfect Law of liberty through Christ. 
And they gave occasion for the writing of certain parts 
of Paul's epistles to counteract these errors, which have 
proven a blessing and a great help to the Lord's people 
for the eighteen centuries since. Thus does the Lord 
overrule the work of evil for good to those who love 
him and who are in the proper attitude of heart to be 
"taughtofGod."-See2Cor. 11:13; Gal. 2:4; 5:4. 

Returning to Ephesus the Apostle remained there 
for three years, finding it an excellent field from which 
the influence of the gospel would radiate through all 
Asia-Minor. Ephesus was one of the most important 
cities of that time, its population being chiefly Greeks. 
It was called "one of the eyes of Asia." It had a colosseum 
or place for public gatherings, capable of accommodating 
fifty thousand people, and one of its chief 
attractions was an immense and grand temple erected 
to the honor of the goddess Diana, and it was the centre 
of her cult, whose influence and numbers extended 
throughout all Asia-Minor. The temple was built of 
the purest marble: the historian says of it:— 

"It was 425 feet long and 220 broad; its columns of 
Parian marble were 60 feet high, and 36 of them were 
magnificently carved. The porticoes in front and rear 
consisted each of 32 columns; the entire number of columns, 
127, being given each one by a king. The hall 
was adorned with the most wonderful statuary and 
paintings." 

From this description we readily see that the character 
of the idolatry with which the Apostle had to contend 
was very widely different from that of the South 
Sea Islanders. Its majestic temples were not out of 
harmony with its priesthood and general features, all 
of which were evidently on an impressive scale, quite 
in harmony with its devotees,— intelligent and cultured 
people, as the Ephesians were. 

The account shows that in the interim of Paul's 
visit to Jerusalem the Lord prepared the way at Ephesus 
for the greater work of the three years' ministry 
which followed; for Apollos had in the meantime visited 
Ephesus,— mighty in the Scriptures as far as he understood 
them, but "knowing only the baptism of John" 
unto repentance, and faith in Christ as the Messiah. 



Apollos, apparently had not learned particularly respecting 
the new dispensation, and the gifts of the 
spirit by which it was being introduced. But Aquila 
and Priscilla, altho not themselves gifted so as to be 
able to speak in public, hearing of Apollos and his good 
work, sought him out, invited him to their home and 
there found quiet opportunity for imparting to him a 
clearer knowledge of the new dispensation: thus they 

R2206 : page 251 

became sharers in the fruits of his subsequent efficiency. 

When Paul arrived at Ephesus Apollos was gone, 
but some whom he had interested were soon found and 
instructed respecting the gifts of the holy spirit; then 
being baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus they received 
some of the gifts. The real baptism of consecration 
to the Lord Jesus as his servants, was no doubt 
part of the Apostle's explanation; but this was followed 
by instruction with reference to baptism in water, and 
these brethren, twelve in number, being of proper and 
teachable spirit, were not only willing but anxious to 
render obedience to every feature of the divine will; 
and having by their immersion in water publicly confessed 
Christ and themselves as his servants "dead with 
him," they were blessed with a share of the gifts, some 
of which were granted to every believer in that time; 
—as we have already seen in the lesson preceding. 

As usual, wherever the truth is preached there is 
a division; not merely a division as between those who 
respect God and his Word and those who deny the true 
God, but further than this, amongst those who acknowledge 
the true God and the Scriptures;— a division 
respecting Christ, and especially respecting the work 
of Christ, the value of the cross and the blessings which 
now and hereafter shall flow therefrom, to the blessing 
ultimately of all the families of the earth. The Apostle 
was not surprised at the division; he expected it. 
He doubtless remembered the Lord's words, "I am 
not come to send peace but a sword" and to cause division: 
it was better that the sincere followers of Christ 
should meet by themselves than that they should meet 
with others whose opposition to the truth would make 
continual disturbance, or else hinder their advancement 
into further knowledge and grace. It was for this reason 
that the Apostle secured, probably by hire, for use 
on certain occasions for meetings, the school-room of 
Tyrannus. 

Ephesus was a great city for magic, incantations, 
divinations, etc. The worship of Diana and the delusions 
connected therewith, "black art," etc., were 
(like all the heathen religious practices) devices of Satan 
and the fallen angels, whereby the people were 
made to believe in the power of Diana for good and 
evil, for health and sickness, for safety or accident. A 
vessel going to sea in order to have a prosperous journey 



it was thought must have on board a miniature 
"shrine of Diana." The individual who wished for 
luck repeated certain words or prayers to Diana and 
wore upon his breast a charm or amulet marked with 
her likeness or with a prayer to Diana (much after the 
manner that Roman Catholics wear upon their bosoms 
what are termed "scalpel," blessed with prayers to the 
Virgin Mary, with holy water, masses, etc.). As we 
have already seen,* the powers of darkness (Satan and 
the fallen angels) have liberty and ability to perform 
wonders of certain kinds under certain circumstances, 
just as Jannes and Jambres had power from the same 
source as recorded in Exodus 7:1 1. In consequence 
we are not surprised that the Lord greatly blessed the 
Apostle Paul in Ephesus with powers of the holy spirit 
which enabled him to more than meet the powers of 
darkness. The record is, "God wrought special miracles 
by the hand of Paul: so that from his body were 
brought handkerchiefs and aprons, and the diseases departed 
from them, and the evil spirits went out of 
them." This naturally attracted the attention of all 
classes to the gospel which Paul preached, and to the 
power of God which was with him— whose manifestation 
was so different from the power which was with 
the workers of magic and incantations. The attempt 
of certain vagabond Jews to do the same miracle of 
casting out demons, using the name of Paul, their failure 
and the fact that they were worsted, the demons 



*See "Spiritism— Demonism" in our issues June 15 to July 15. 

R2207 : page 251 

having no respect for them, helped to convince some 
respecting the gospel,— the very object intended by 
the Lord in the giving of "gifts." 

"Many that believed came, and confessed, and 
showed their evil deeds [acknowledging that their 
works of magic were evil and from an evil source]. 
Many of them also which used curious arts [magic] 
brought their books together, and burned them before 
all." And when we are informed that the value of 
those books was 50,000 pieces of silver, estimated to be 
$9,300 in our money— but if calculated in proportion to 
the rate of wages then and now, equivalent to a very 
much larger sum— it will be manifest that the work of 
grace was moving mightily in Ephesus. When the 
gospel so takes hold upon the lives of believers that 
they are willing not only to abandon evil ways, but to 
destroy the instruments of evil which previously had 
brought them gain, it proves that it is a genuine work 
and not a mere emotion. It is worthy of note also that 
these believers did not sell their books and merely go 
out of business of evil, but destroyed them, lest the 



work of evil should propagate itself further through 
this agency. "So mightily grew the Word of God and 
prevailed."— Acts 19:20. 

With this connection we are the better enabled to 
understand the opposition which now arose; and why 
those who were engaged in making small images of 
Diana, and miniature copies of the temple, and charms, 
and amulets, and "Ephesian spells" should become so 
excited and realize that their craft was endangered, not 
only in Ephesus but throughout all Asia-Minor. 

Having spent about three years in Ephesus, Paul's 
purpose of mind was to return again to Jerusalem after 
visiting the Churches of Berea, Thessalonica, Philippi 
and Corinth; and his courageous heart was meditating 
a visit to the City of Rome, the seat of empire, 
where the gospel would have an opportunity of reaching 
another intelligent class and be brought more particularly 
in contact with the governmental and military 
influences and perhaps be even more liable to provoke 
persecution than in his previous experiences; for Aquila 
and Priscilla had been expelled from Rome for being 
Jews: in harmony with this plan he sent two of his co-laborers 
before him into Macedonia. 

But the Lord saw best to permit the adversary to 
raise up a persecution about this time, and, of course, 
Paul would in a large measure be the centre of it. This 
persecution was on strictly business lines. The manufacturers 
and workmen engaged in the producing of 
the images, amulets, charms, etc., of Diana, were gotten 
together by one of their craft, Demetrius, who pointed 
out to them that the progress of Christianity meant the 
destruction of their various trades and that now was the 
time to put a stop to it and to reenkindle amongst the 
people a fervor of sentiment for Diana. The scheme 
worked well, and soon a furor was created: the less intelligent 

R2207 : page 252 

masses being easily aroused by the cry, "Great 
is Diana." 

It has been surmised that this riot occurred in 
May, the month of Diana's Festival, when usually 
there was the largest demand for the charms, amulets, 
etc., and that on this occasion business being less brisk 
than usual, the depression was laid to the charge of 
Christianity, whose influence was by this time considerable, 
and certainly every item of it in opposition to 
Diana. Ephesus was not only the shrine of Diana, 
but it was a great mercantile centre for Asia, as Corinth 
was for Greece, and the May Festival of Diana was 
accompanied by not only sacrifices in her temple and 
processions in her honor and prayers for her protection, 
but with these were associated wonderful displays 
in their theater or Colosseum,— gladiatorial combats, 
athletic feats, hippodrome races, etc. These drew people 
from far and near, and for a time, commercially, 



the city was a fair, and a large amount of business 
was done with the strangers. It was doubtless in order 
to have an opportunity of presenting the gospel to 
these multitudes from round about, that the Apostle 
delayed taking his journey into Macedonia until after 
the Feast of Diana. 

Paul being the prominent leader in the promulgation 
of Christianity was of course the central figure 
against whom the rioters moved. It is supposed that 
he still made his home with Aquila and Priscilla and 
that the mob made directly for their lodgings: apparently, 
however they missed getting Paul, and as the 
next best thing took Gaius and Aristarchus, two of his 
co-laborers. It is probable that it was at this time that 
Aquila and Priscilla, as Paul's faithful friends, risked 
their lives in his protection, as intimated by the Apostle's 
statement in his epistle to the Romans (16:4) 
where he says of them that they "laid down their 
necks" for his life. When the mob got Gaius and 
Aristarchus they took them to the Colosseum (theater), 
the general place of rendezvous for large gatherings. 
Here Paul, full of courage, purposed to attempt to 
speak to the mob in defense of the Christian cause, but 
the Ephesian converts would not permit him, knowing 
better than he the vicious and unreasoning spirit of the 
superstitious lower classes of Ephesus. 

When the mob got to the theater it was much confused, 
and of different opinions respecting the object 
of the gathering. Many of them evidently supposed 
that it was a tumult against the Jews,— a very likely 
mistake, since the Apostle and some of his co-laborers 
were Jews, and since the common people would probably 
only distinguish Christians as being a Jewish sect. 
Realizing this the Jews put forward Alexander. (Probably 
Alexander the copper-smith, mentioned by the 
Apostle in 2 Tim. 4:14, possibly a convert to Christianity 
who subsequently apostatized.— 1 Tim. 1:20.) 
Alexander was put forward by the Jews evidently for 
the purpose of explaining to the mob that the Christians 
were renegade Jews, and that the Jews proper 
would thoroughly approve of and support their persecution 
as disturbers of the general peace; that the 
Jews in general were a commercial people, interested, 
therefore, in the festivities of Diana, and the associated 
business prosperity. However, the Lord did not 
permit so insidious an attack, Alexander not being 
permitted to speak. 

The account here given is very brief, but is supplemented 
by the Apostle's own statement of the matter. 
(2 Cor. 1:8-10.) "Concerning our affliction which 
befell us in Asia, that we were weighed down exceedingly 
beyond our power, insomuch that we despaired 
even of life: Yea, we ourselves have had the answer of 
death within ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, 
but in God which raised the dead: who delivered 
us out of so great a death, and will deliver." 



It was probably the intention of the ringleaders 
of the mob to have a "spectacle" in the Colosseum, 
—to have the Apostle cast into the arena to be devoured 
by the wild beasts in the presence of the multitude. 
The Apostle refers seemingly to this persecution saying, 
"If I have fought with beasts at Ephesus" (1 Cor. 15:32) 
which would imply that if he did not have a 
combat of the kind intended for him, it came so near 
being such a conflict that it amounted to practically 
the same thing so far as his trials were concerned;— 
or it is barely possible that he referred to the Ephesian 
mob itself, as "beasts" seeking his life. 

Two important lessons to be drawn from this narrative 
are (1) that thorough conversion to the Lord 
means a thorough abandonment of evil, whatever the 
cost, the self-denial, financial or social. (2) That the 
love of money is the root of all evil and a frequent 
cause of opposition to the Lord's Word and plan. 

These principles, at work eighteen centuries ago, 
are still the same, and exercise similar influences to-day. 
And this is the very object of the truth during 
this Gospel age,— to be a test of our love for truth, for 
righteousness, for God. Sufficient evil is still permitted 
to test the Lord's people, to prove who are "overcomers." 
Those who are fully the Lord's are ready to lay 
down everything in his service— the service of righteousness. 
Just as the converts in Ephesus were willing 
to burn their once highly esteemed and commercially 
valuable books on magic, so to-day those who 
become the Lord's are ready to change their business 
if they find it inconsistent with righteousness and truth; 
and to lay down even life itself in the service of him 
who has called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light. 

And there is a class to-day, like Demetrius and 
his fellow craftsman, who, as the Scriptures express 
it, "look every one to his own quarter for gain." It 
will be noticed that the business of Demetrius and his 
associates might be considered a religious business, inasmuch 
as they were forwarders of the worship of 
Diana: and so it is with a certain class to-day who are 
financially identified with the worship of "the image 
of the beast." (Rev. 13:14-17.) These support various 
religious systems from which also they draw 
goodly compensation of honor, praise, titles, money 
and respect. These likewise often oppose the truth, 
and go as far as public sentiment and civil government 
will permit in opposing the truth and those who serve 
it, and in inciting opposition among the masses. Their 
reasons therefor are similar to those which influenced 
Demetrius and his companions; they realize that their 
"craft is in danger." It is for each individually to be 
on guard lest he be "led astray with the error of the 
wicked," and fall from his own steadfastness, and be 
found to fight against God either for financial interests 
or earthly ambition. 



page 253 
